Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. Good to see you, brother. It's crazy to have you here, man. And thank you so much for the guitar. That's the dopest shit that anybody's ever given. I'm man. I hope you like it. I'm sure I like it. I just can't play. And I would love to learn how to play, but I know my brain. And I can't get my brain another thing to do. You've got a lot. Well, the problem is I get obsessed with things. Me too. I'm sure you can't get as good as you got without getting obsessed. Are you like this? Like, I don't like doing things. I'm not good at it. I love doing things. I'm not good at it to get good at them. Right. But it's just it's not leisurely to me to play golf. Like, I can't enjoy it because I'm bad at it. Well, you'll enjoy it if you get good at it. But the problem is to get good at it. Then you got to get obsessed. And then you got to take less. And Jamie's got a fucking virtual reality thing in the back where he walks balls every day. He's obsessed. He's obsessed with recovering from hitting today. Sweating. Wow. Yeah. My drummers are really good at golfer. Golf is one of those things that if you get into that, man, that's your whole fucking day. Yeah. He goes out three or four days a week. How's it right? When I was living in Boston, I noticed that the comedians that really got into golf, their career kind of stalled. Because all they were just playing golf all day having fun drinking. And then they'd go to the club at night. But they were right now. And they knew jokes. They were in obsessing on their career. They kind of stalled out a little. When I still drank, I really liked golfing. And then I quit drinking. And I was like, I don't really like this. What did you quit drinking? Well, I quit a few times. But most recent time was like a year and a half ago. Were you quitting because it was you were just off the rails or like got to get your health in order? It was kind of a combo deal. Like when I met my wife, at that point, I thought that I could drink like a gentleman. And it just never really worked out that way. There was just something in me that just wanted to completely burn my life to the ground. Every time you drink, a real destructive quality. Ooh, that's not good. Yeah. Fortunately, I never had that. But that is a thing. I've seen that. What is that? I think a lot of it is repressed emotions. And that's where they find you when your brain is being off the bottle. Yeah. Yeah. They go, hey, Marcus. Yeah. Let's get those problems out. So this is me. It's like, you don't need anybody. Fuck everybody. That woman that marries you. She don't want her. I think sometimes people do that. They almost like save themselves from heartbreak. Sometimes you kind of like wreck it yourself. So it's like making fun of yourself before anyone else can. Right. It's like that thing. Yeah. Right. Like just assume it's going to go bad eventually. Let's get this fucking train on the tracks right now. Crack or break. Fuck. Yeah. Ah. That was kind of my approach for a while. I just, um, I don't know, man. I was just, I didn't want to feel anything. So that was all that was where it would always end up. And I remember even asking my wife like a couple of years ago, we opened up for the Avid brothers in Raleigh, North Carolina. And at that point, I had been sober for like six months. And I was like, I really think I can handle it. And then it got to like famous last word. I just, of jumbo white car. Like I started with a jumbo white car. And I just got completely hammered blacked out. Pissed my wife off so bad. Like I woke up and I was at our friends house still like on the floor. And she left in my bus and like my wallet, everything was on the bus. I had no identification. She was like, you can fucking figure it out, man. Wow. And the bus turnaround come got me. But, um, yeah, she doesn't play any games. So did you stop then? Yeah, I did. Also one night. Yeah, I had one night off the leash and I was like, that's good. And you know, there's just so kind of quality in me. It's like, I can't stop. You know, and maybe someday I'll find that. It's like, I got to get right in here, you know, and in here with myself before I can really consider that again. I quit drinking for about eight months just because I realized I just wasn't feeling good. I was doing it because of the club, I was at the club every night. And you know, it's like one night someone would say, hey, let's do shots. I'll do a shot. I want to be, you know, cordial hang out with everybody since a community. Let's all do it together. Come on boys. And then, you know, two drinks, three drinks. Go home, get up, feel like shit, work out. Do it again the next day, feel even shittier the next day. And it's like, damn, I got to take some time off. So I took about eight months off. I think I'm not exactly sure how much time I took off. And then I had like a drink with dinner one night and I said, it's not all right. And so since then, I've never gotten drunk. I've only had a drink or two. Yeah. You know, so I've managed it. But I was not an alcoholic. I was just realizing that all this fun was, it was messing up the rest of my time. I was like, what is there? There's an expression that when you're drinking, like, you're, you're taking a loan out on the good times that you could have had for some good times that you can have right now. And then you got to pay it back. Yeah. With, with interest. Yeah. Well, physical, the problem is physically for me. It just wasn't worth it. I just, I would be working out that jam going, why am I doing this? I keep feeling like shit. And every time I'm working on, I'm pushing through all this, you know, toxic shit that I poured down my throat the night before and my body's recovering from it. So I felt tired and drained. And then my brain wasn't working as well. You know, that was, that's what it was for me. It was like the anxiety and just like the, the dopamine depletion and just feeling just completely just like, and I'm somebody who was already struggling with like, that's why I drank in the first place. It's like my mental issues and just anxiety and depression and, and then it would just kind of hit me tenfold the next day. Um, it's always interesting to me with some, with anxiety, chooses a path in life like live performing. Yeah. Because like, is there anything that gives people anxiety? It's live performing. And you're really good at it. Well, that is crazy. It's like, you know, you're, you're picking this thing that you're really good at, but that gives a lot of people anxiety and you have anxiety to begin with. Yeah. I mean, it's like, there's something to that. It's like Dan Soder, I always quote him on this. He's like, you know, I go around each night like craving the approval of like thousands of people a night. Like you didn't think I was doing that because things went well growing up. Right. Like I'm fucked up. I need, I need all these people to tell me I'm doing a good job. But um, I think the idea is that eventually you channel that. And when you get yourself to get the idea, some people have this idea that if you ever get yourself together, somewhat, and often anybody ever gets totally together, be you, yourself together, somewhat. And then you don't, you don't do it for the approval of it. You do it for the love of the art of it, the thing. And bringing the thing to people and getting enjoyment out of having these people have a good time. Yeah. And I think you, I think that can be done. I think you can shift your focus from I just want these people's love to I want to give them love. I want everyone to have a good time. You know, I want to be up there just fucking having a good time. They're having a good time. We all have a good time together. I make their lives feel better for a brief moment. I feel better. Everybody's, everybody's better off. And that's the shit, man. That's what I crave. And I mean, that's why like we just did a run of Texas hockey talks, which that was, that was kind of the goal was just to get everybody in these sweaty rooms. Just for the purpose of just like enjoying music again, getting back to these sticky floors. Yeah. Well, you reached out to me because we were talking on the podcast about how rock and roll was kind of dead. And you said, they're fucking rock roll, they're dead. Come on. And I was like, all right, well, is anybody that could tell me that rock and roll is not dead. It's Marcus cake. Man. Yeah, I was, my boy, Ben Journey. And he told me he was like, you should text Joe. Cause I look, I'm going to have an listener. I was like, you think I should say something? He's like, yeah, fuck, tell me, rock and roll ain't dead. Man is here tonight. Green hole. Well, it's not dead, but it's different. And a lot of the rock that's out now that's doing really well is like a southern inspired rock, which is interesting. Because like a southern almost country like rock, like bluesy country rock, red clay strays, like that kind of, they're doing great. Yeah. It's like there's a lot of that out there. You know, like people, people are digging that kind of music. But there's just, you know, when I talk about like rock, I mean, like when I was in high school, it was all man, hailing, AC, DC, like that. There was so many big rock and roll bands, the stones, you know, there was just so much of that out there. And it's odd that there's not a lot of big bands like that anymore. I think it's coming back around. I gotta hope so. Yeah, it doesn't make sense to me because like the classic rock is still like we're in the green room and free bird comes on still everybody's going nuts. I mean, you know, I mean, there's classics, another southern rock and roll band, Leonard Skinner. But there's still like a love of that kind of music, but it's just, it's weird that it kind of, you know, just didn't, I don't know what happened. What's interesting how cyclical music industry can be. I feel like for the first time in the last 10 years, like since urban cowboy came out, I mean, for the last 10 years, I've been going to LA with a cowboy hat on and always get the same shit like, well, where do you want to park your horse? You know, like, what are you up to cowboy? People just talking shit. But now I go out there and everybody's got a cowboy hat on. Really? It's like chic. Yeah. That's interesting. It's like in Vogue, like a cowboy thing. And obviously not want to wear it cowboy hat. You know, it's just, I think rock and roll is kind of having a similar resurgence. God, I hope so. I hope so. You know, I mean, there's gotta be people out there that still love it. And I just don't, I mean, I just don't understand how there's no new big bands like that. Well, it's interesting. You know, I was actually, I was in the gym watching Led Zeppelin at Royal Capitol. Oh, wow. And I was like, this is a fucking jam band. They're jamming, you know? And I'm like, it just, like the Auburn Brothers band was a jam band. They had guidelines. And that's kind of how we do our show. Like we have songs that we're playing just to get to that, that improvisational section where we can just kind of, you know, work with the chemistry of the crowd and each other on stage. And it's just, it's interesting to me like the way things have become subdivided, you know, it's like, you know, jam band unless it's like widespread or like fish or like the dad or something like that. But like, Zeppelin was a fucking jam band. Yeah, in a lot of ways. Yeah. Especially when they're performing live. Yeah. Yeah. It's, what does that band that sounds like Zeppelin? Great, I mean, if we. Yeah, great. I mean, they're fucking great. They are good. It's weird. It's weird because they sound so much like Zeppelin. But they're really good. So like I give them pass. They get a pass from me. I mean, they're my boys. I really, I really like those dudes. We used to party together, but they live in Nashville. And they guitar player Jake. He's, he's just the sweetest guy. Like he gave me a housewarming gift. He's like really into pirate stuff. Pirates stuff. Yeah. He's really into piracy. And he gave me, he gave me a like a like a like a like a like a like a, like a, musket pistol. Oh, wow. What a pirate would have carried around. I got a real one. Yeah. So like from the olden days. Yeah. Oh shit, that's gotta be worth a lot of fucking money. Yeah. I mean, they're doing pretty well. Wow. What is a old musket pistol run? How much can you get one of them for? See if you're going to find something, Jamie. Yeah, an old musket pistol. You know, when the conquistador took over Mexico, that's, they had 12 of those. That's it. Twelve guns. Oh, musket pistols. Wow. Yeah. I looked that up on perplexity. I was diving deep into how the fuck Mexico became Spanish. Yeah. You know, like what happened? How did it like they lost like a hundred indigenous languages at least. Wow. It's kind of crazy. But here it is. What you can get one from 195 bucks? Modern reproduction. Oh, reproductions. What about a real one down here? And Tekwons. 17th century Barbie wars antique pirate flintlock pistol recently sold for $416. That's it. That seems crazy. That seems crazy. That's a, it's pretty good for a gift budget. I'd say it looks, I'll basically have any reproductions in what you just said there'd be in twelve back then. They might not be that many of them that exist. Hmm. I have to make reproductions. But if this is antique pirate era musketts and it's sold for four and sixteen bucks. I mean, from the 17th century, I get sucks. You get some out of it. But it's from the 1600s and it's sold for four and sixteen bucks. Can you see what those look like? We'll see if we can get one. We should get one and put it on the wall. Oh shit. Look at that one. Yeah, that's what it is. I think that's the one that sold for 400 bucks. That says $155. What? That's crazy. How are they so cheap? There's the ones with four or sixteen. God, that seems like they should be almost priceless. I mean, this is from the fucking 1600s and it's sold for 400 bucks. That one sold for $200 bucks. Wow. I'm just gonna pick them up. There's a store in Austin. I bet they've got a bunch. No way. Really? I went to the store. They've got a bunch of weird shit like this. They must. They would have to have them if they're only three in our bucks, I guess. I would say. And all kinds of armor and guns and cannons. What? What place is this? It's called like collectors. Yeah, look at that real quick. There's something weird about those dudes who want to recreate wars. Yeah. That's an odd thing. That's a very odd thing. Yeah. I mean, I've got the facial hair of a civil war in the way. Great actor, but that's about as close as I guess. I don't know all. Oh wow. That's in Austin? Yeah. No shit. Well, that was pretty fucking dope. Yeah. Crossroads in their one day to see what it was about. And they have a little musket pistols? Yeah. I wonder how do you know crossroads? Crossroads? Crossroads just a shitty gun. No. I'm on the fan. It was a pirate's crossroads. Yeah, I guess. It's kind of cool. But it's just, it is weird that we're really into like, old, like, you know, it's interesting you're holding something that's a piece of history. And what history is, is like, at the time, this was the shit. Like, at the time, this was like the coolest thing you can get. Like, 400 years ago, if you wanted to kill some money, this was the way to do it. You had to get one of these things, which is very odd. Yeah. This is very odd that, oh, look at all that stuff. I don't know if it was George Washington shit there, but they had, that sort of looks like it would be. George Washington swords? I don't know. We should get one of those for Shane. He's a big George Washington fan. There you go. There is a nice one. Look at that. That's crazy. Yeah. I mean, I don't even know that. That's a weird one. Look at the handle on that, fucker. It's from Middle East, Central Asia. It could be so good. Look, it's got like a dragon mouth on the back of it. That's pretty sweet. Wow. All right. We do eat one of those. All right. It's like a road trip, Jamie. We should probably do it before this episode comes out. Yeah, we need to go there and there today before this episode. Go there. We would fuck up their business. We'd go there. It's empty. All these darks have fucking armor over their house now. It's just people that are really into like the old wars and recreating old wars. I always, I would want to know like what's wrong with you, like what happened to you. Like, yeah. It's um, I grew up with a kid that was like that. That was obsessed with like everything Army Navy. Um, but his father was in the military, but he had never gone into the military. When they wouldn't accept him. Why? I don't know. I don't think he could ever pass the physical. It was a bigger dude. Oh, okay. His name was Maurice. As spring shifts into summer for a lot of people, that means traveling and planning and making sure you're in the right shape. Whatever you get up to though, make sure you're taking extra care of you with AG1. It's an easy way to support your energy, mood and immune health with over 75 vitamins, minerals and whole food sourced ingredients. It can even help support your gut health since it contains digestive enzymes and clinically back probiotics. AG1 is backed by four clinical trials and is NSF certified for sport. AG1 next gen has been put to the test in multiple gold standard clinical trials. It's quality that you can trust. Make sure you're ready for those travel plans with AG1. Visit drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. And for a limited time, get a bottle of vitamin D3 K2N and AG1 flavor sampler for free in your welcome kit with your first subscription. That's drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. They said that 77% of American kids can't pass the physical deal to the military. I believe it, man. Just based on my own experience, like I remember the presidential fitness test, like that's a bad memory of mine just hanging on the pull up bar in front of all my, my classmates and not being able to do one pull up, just hanging there. What is the presidential fitness test? It's something they did when I was a kid. It's like they wanted to make sure that you could do like 10 pushups or however many pull up or whatever. How many pull ups do you have to do for the presidential fitness test? There is different standard, but they literally, this was going on in class week, they just started it up again. Donald Trump had like rice in the shambo and the White House with a couple guys Gary Plair and I was like, oh, for, well, they had kids in there also. That's funny. It's funny because I'd go, Hey, why don't you do it? Let me see you do it. You should have broke. Twenty two pushups for a 10 year old. Twenty two pushups. That's a lot. Yeah, 45 curl ups. That's crazy. Six pull ups. That's a lot. What's a curl up with the other way? Biceps, hands, you know, pull up with your hands. 45. Yeah, come on. That's crazy. Wait a minute. I'm going to eight minute mile. Come on. Is that really? It says six pull ups or 45 curl ups, but curl ups aren't that much easier than pull ups. Are they? I remember when I was 10, they were what? But that's just being a 10 year old because your body, you're only like 60, you know, I don't know. Kids are light. Use lighter than I am. I was having it in most. I was going to say there are different standards. I remember kids. But bro, 45 is crazy. That seems, it seems excessive. That seems like a lot of reps. I don't even understand how that's possible, but that's the standard. I don't think I could do that. Actually, I think their others are sit ups. It's calling out a curl up because here it's because it's not. Oh, okay. Okay, okay, okay, okay. Sit ups. Okay. Oh, why are they calling it curl ups? Because I was like 45 chin ups. So it's like there's pull ups and chin ups, which ones a pull up, which ones a chin up pull up hands over. Okay. And then chin up is the same. Yeah, that's what I'm going to be. 45 of those would be bonkers. That's great. I can't do that. That's because like six pull ups I could do easy, but 45. But 45 sit ups is still hard. That's hard too. That's a lot. It's a standard. Huh. Not three kids there. That seems like a lot of kids wouldn't be there for 45 sit ups. What are they trying to do? What are they doing to us? Yeah, I would fail. Not two. So they couldn't draft me. These motherfuckers are talking about drafting people. I was listening to Tim Dylan show and you saying that, see if this is true, that Palantir thinks that we should reintroduce constryption, conscription that kids should start getting drafted again into military and they should have mandatory military experience for kids. I just don't understand why anybody would want to support that. That sounds crazy. Especially after this Iran war where everybody's like, why the fuck are we in Iran? And have you signed up for that? That sounds nuts. Is that real? Palantir is public call for the US to move away from an all volunteer military and toward some form of universal national service that many observers interpret as reintroducing a draft or conscription. Tim, we got into this manifesto that I didn't look into this yet. Why the fuck would a tech company be saying that we need to move towards a universal national military service? How about fuck you? How about fuck you, you go? Because you know, none of these tech dorks that are running these companies, they're not doing it. Like, what are you talking about? Yeah. They're on meat into the machine, running people's children into these unnecessary wars. Fuck you. It's scary. It's very scary. It's scary that they would like how about let's figure out a way to use your technology so there's no more wars. Wouldn't that be a better goal? Instead of getting kids to fucking learn how to go shoot people they don't know because someone tells you to and how many of these out of all the wars that we've been in since World War II? Is it zero that made sense? I think it's zero. I don't think there's one war that we've been in since World War II that makes any fucking sense at all. Sure. And they're like, I think the solution is we need more people to be forced into it. I mean, what would a draft look like in today's culture? I mean, like with inclusion, would it be like anybody at 18 years old, can you be drafted or do you think it would still be just able to buy a young man? That's a good question. You know, I'm for people doing whatever they want, but when it comes to combat, you're going to draft women, that would be fucking insane. That would be insane. So are you not going to be sexist? Are you going to, yeah, are you going to go inclusion and say, everybody has to do it? Well, then that'll be good for America because most people would say, get the fuck out of here. That's a chance in how we're doing that. Right. I just don't understand how people that aren't elected officials that essentially just run a tech company. Well, I think it's a good idea to call for national military service. I've heard other people say that too. I've heard like podcasters and weird tech people say it's a good idea. I don't know what the fuck they're thinking. I think they should have to go over there and experience war and then come back and see if you really think the same thing. Sure. I buy that. I mean, or at least go on like a USO tour or something. Go Jeffree Ross. I see what it's about. You know? Well, then you're just going to meet people that are happy to see you. You need to actually see combat. I just don't get why we're even listening to them. You make software doing that. Yeah, it's interesting that they don't even have the like why would they say that? It doesn't. No, it doesn't sound good. And it's also they make weird surveillance software that a lot of people like how much are you surveilling how much power do you have like Tim Dylan went pretty deep on and on the show, which is I can't recommend enough. If you not listen to Tim Dylan show, you're fucking up. It's the funniest fucking take on all the chaos that's going on in the world. I don't think there's anybody better right now. His his podcast is fucking phenomenal. It's my must listen to podcasts every week. Yep. It's so good. I just listened. But if you watch it, it's even more ridiculous. He was saying to this thing about them giving those epic to babies. Oh, it was so funny. It was so ridiculous. My dad did it was epic. And he said, man, you know, what you can eat through that. He's like, he's like, you just keep going on. I mean, you won't feel great. But you know, it curves your appetite, but you can get it down. Well, Tim talked about it because he did it. And he said, it didn't just stop his desire for food. It stopped his desire for everything, which I've heard. So there's some people to think there's some good in these GOP ones for addiction. Because it curbs whatever that is as well. So it can help people with all kinds of addiction, not just like food addictions, alcohol, but gambling, like weird stuff. I heard that. Yeah. I did. I actually I was doing it for a minute. And it was around the time that I was like, one of the times I was trying to quit drinking and I was working on a record and I was trying it out and they actually curved my desire for a drink. Yeah. What else did it do? Give me really bad stomach cramps. Yeah. And also, I mean, that was like before I really, I just, I don't know. At that time of my life, I just wasn't really concerned about what I put in my body. You know, I say that while I'm smoking a cigarette, but you know, but dude, you're just smoking natural spirits. I think those are safe and effective. Yeah. You know, additive free. Yeah. I just, I always wonder about these things when things come along to give people an easy fix. Like, okay, maybe it works or maybe there's some sort of side effect that's going to fuck you up for the rest of your life. And for some people there is. I mean, some people are experiencing all kinds of wild side effects. Stomach paralysis is one of them. Brian Simpson got pancreatitis from it. Really? Mm hmm. Yeah. He was sick and bad for like two weeks. It fucked him up. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the long term effects like you just have no idea. Because it's new. Mm hmm. Yeah. I've also heard that the problem is the dosage is too high. And what, you know, when you go into a doctor to give you a standard dosage and the way to do it, some people feel is to make a much smaller dose than what they're prescribing. And that that's what you need. You just need a little bit of a curb to it. Not like a complete cessation of all desire to eat. Right. And get into that high dosage really fast could probably be harmful or have some fucking discipline. How about try that out? How about try out don't eat as much. Same thing. Right. Except this way it's not going to kill your body or kill your stomach or make you go blind or what are the side effects? Because there's a lot of lawsuits. There's a shit ton of lawsuits that are coming down the pipe. Because I think people have gone blind. I think I might have made that up. Because there's a lot of lawsuits. There's a shit ton of lawsuits that are coming down the pipe because I think people have gone blind I think I might have made that up Chuck that But this it's a wild lawsuits. Yeah people are claiming bad side effects from this stuff which You know make sense. It's medication people vary biologically can cause permanent blindness In one eye. Oh, well, you know You got your other guy and then you got a six pack I stroke oh boy Wow, whoo Non-artritic interior ischemic optic neuropathy. I don't think I said that right sudden painless and often permanent blindness in one eye Wow, it's like a punk band. It does Side effects a cute pancreatitis. That's what Brian got gallbladder problems Gastro pericis stomach paralysis bowel obstructions and potential thyroid tumors mild GI issues are common these severe complications require immediate medical attention often Occurring more frequently at higher doses. Yeah, that's what they're saying though It's apparently when you're getting it from a pharmaceutical drug company. You're getting it that this is the argument for Compounding pharmacies apparently and then then there's a new one that's coming out. What is it called? Rituitide Reddit retituitide retituitide and this one is supposed to be better because it doesn't cause muscle loss and it doesn't cause bone density loss And it's supposed to be more effective Huh Investigation mole I mean, I don't know. I just typed in read-it-your-time But what is telling me isn't that a weird word? Investigational once weekly injectable triple agonist medication targeting GLP1 GIP and the glucogen receptors Developed by Eli Lilly showing unprecedented weight loss results of up to 24% in phase two trials They said this is gonna be a trillion dollar medication Or how some fucking discipline. Yeah, go to the gym eat better Healthy do what jelly roll did. Yeah, you know jelly rolls at the club last night. He's down 300 pounds. That's fucking nuts. He runs like five miles a day. He works out every day He looks fantastic. He looks like a different person. It's like I knew him when he was like 500 pounds Now I know him when he's in the twos. It's like he's a different human He looks different. I know it's still jelly roll, but it looks like a completely different man. It's nuts I remember when we did I was in the house band for Kill Tony at the Garden And jelly came out in New York, New York Yeah, I was there. That's gotta be a custom suit I'm like that's a big suit. Yeah, and then the next time I saw him he was like he is now and I mean how like what I did because like I have an appetite, you know Like what I do now like I I'm basically doing like a keto diet Because I like to eat a lot of whatever it is. Me too. So if it's like a big salad You know or whatever, but I'm down like 25 pounds doing that. Oh, that's nice. Yeah You doing this with the help of a nutritionist. He's doing it on your own. I'm still doing him on Yeah, yeah, you're laughing. Yeah. Well, I mean, you know, it's just I've tried a few different routes man. I've been I've been You know Husky since I was a kid and shopping in the Husky department. It came out, you know Is this uh, do you think it's a genetic thing? Do you think it's the way you ate as a child? What do you think? I think psychological a lot of it Um, it was like the only thing I had control of as a as a child is like food It was like and I scare city mindset as well. Yeah, just like the way that I You know think about food. It's just you know Probably not the healthiest so for me. It's just easier to say like I don't eat these things Because like if I eat bread or something like that, it just hurts my stomach now You know, and I just I can feel Like the difference when I don't eat it, you know, I just feel better. Oh, energy is 100 percent. Yeah. Yeah And once you get your body working on ketones too, the thing is you just your brain functions better That's one of the more interesting things. This is why people take things like Um, like ketone what is it ketone IQ? That's such great like you just down one of those little shots and it puts you into ketosis temporarily Oh really? Mm-hmm. Yeah, they're exogenous ketones. I think the guy who just invented those just died Um, he was also a guy that worked for ball co-labs. He developed the the clear that shit that Barry Bond took Okay, the steroids. This guy was a chemist. He was a scientist. I think someone Oh, I think Chris Bell Chris Bell or Mark, I think was Mark Bell just posted about it on his Instagram page that this guy just died This guy was like one of America's great chemists And he developed a lot of these things including exogenous ketones according to Mark but um That's one of the things that I noticed when I went into when I did the carnivore diet is that immediately My brain just started functioning better Which is what I try to eat most of the time like this morning I ate Sausage in eggs and sausage from an animal that I shot. I like to do that. I eat like a I had sable. This is the guy. So this is Mark's Instagram the greatest chemists of our time and possibly any other Patrick Arnold is dead Patrick Arnold is the guy who made the cream and the clear for the bonds and Maguire Uh, oh that bonds and Maguire bastard blasted home runs off of supposedly in addition to those incredible inventions he also Brought exogenous ketones to the market What happened to that guy? How did he die? That's an interesting picture to put up. Yeah, looks like I was all looking at Okay, he looks healthy. I want to know how he died. I wonder how old that picture was Organic chemists Interesting diode too. Oh, he he had all those Pro what are those pro hormones or whatever those things were that people were taken that weren't totally steroids But they were kind of steroid like How did he die? Does it say? Oh He died at 60 Hmm, maybe he's experimenting on himself Bunch just did put it in cause of death. I know it should come out You would think a guy who's working on like performance and fitness Does it say when you click on what happened? Oh to David on somebody else oh Patrick Arnold Huh, so it just doesn't say how he died. Nope. And it just happened Okay, so it hasn't been released yet Mmm Let me say made a lot of Royds You got to wonder The dude is like doing so much work in anabolic steroids work for bokko They were the ones that are making undetectable steroids, you know about that whole story This is back in the was it in the 90s Jamie? The mug wire around 2000 so They developed steroids that were undetectable So when they would test for steroids what they would do is they would take because when I guess the way it works is when they're doing a Steroid test they're looking for very specific molecules So they invent in a molecule that had like additional things attached to it where it wouldn't show up Probably butcher in that but Essentially they were undetectable steroids They one of them was called the clear and the guy who ran the lab was called bokko Laboratories there's guy Victor Conti who eventually went to jail for that and then when he I don't know why I get went to jail But he got out and then became an anti steroid Sort of activist and he was I don't want to say activist, but he was essentially he was rat and people out and Saying that this guy's probably doing steroids and this is how he's doing it and then a lot of Athletes were using his company to use steroid-free performance-enhancing supplements that were legal So he would show you what's legal and how to do it and you knew a lot about it because he did the illegal stuff too Interesting, you know I've gotten a couple steroids shots like before show like if my voice goes out Like what kind is it like a cortisone or I guess that's what it is So yeah one that they didn't shoot in your ass cheek. Hmm. What does that do like for your voice when your voice goes? Just brings you back Man, it's gotta be rough. What a fucking singer loses their voice Yeah, I mean People have asked me before like what my warm-up routine is and like I've never had one and I'm a cigarettes cigarettes it used to be shot a whiskey If I was really in dire straits, I would take like a handful of sugar-free gummy bears and Put boiling water on that really and then the gummy bears would like coat my throat Like honey ginger lemon. Yeah hot water and lemon is a really good one. There's something about that that It's like time off is what fucks my voice up more than anything time off Really oh so like your vocal cords get out of shape Interesting because it's hard to like keep them up, you know, right and unless you're like going to your garage and screaming for two hours And I you know that's crazy. I never thought about it like that like your vocal cords are essentially a muscle like any other and then develop over time And you get endurance That makes sense. Yeah, so like the pandemic was like the first time that a lot of us like had any extended amount of time off from the road And we all started noticing like or at least me like I came back like hurting a little bit. Oh That makes sense. I saw guns and roses in Athens, Greece and Axle rose, you know has that crazy singing style. Yeah, it's like a Like and that has to be fucking hell on your voice and you know The show was amazing, but his voice is not the same. It's just there's no way it can be I know Steven Tyler like he's back Is he yeah, so he quit for a while because he was like I can't sing and then he healed up and now he's back again I don't know exactly what he did, but I played with him back in January and like the boys Was back no shit. That's fucking great singing is that's off That's fucking great. I love to hear that. Mm-hmm I saw the stones a couple years ago and a circuit of the Americas and Mitch aggregate can still whale Yeah, he could still well that that was a great fucking show almost surreal Energy too, man so much energy. It's crazy. He has two trailer trucks that he brings with them that are just Jim equipment Wow Everywhere they go two big-ass trailer trucks just fill with Jim equipment. They say works out seven days a week That's awesome, and he's 180,000 years old He's still up there still and then Keith Richards opposite approach whiskey cocaine LSD No problems still there too. So it's like yeah, find something you love and stick with it. I know It's so funny like that makes me think like we went out with Willie a few times and Willie's got like like most artists. He's got like 18 tractor trailers back there But like I don't know if you've been to Willie Nelson show recently. It's like there's nothing on stage I'm like what's in all these fucking trucks. I never really got to the bottom of that, but they're like seven or eight truck drivers back all weed It must be all weed or something going. There's all grow lights and plants and Jim He's got that drink that they sell. Oh, yeah, he's got that weed drink Well, it's remedy. Yeah and Ron White brought some to the green room of the colony mothership and Someone was saying oh, you can't get it. That's not real. I'm like it's real as fuck dude. That stuff's very legit. It's real. Yeah It's very I don't know what the rules are the laws are I'm starting to become like a gray area. It should be I mean they just made it schedule three. Okay, so what that means is and I mean, unless it's a great step in the right direction. I'm very happy that the president did that it really should be regulated the same Way alcohol is it should be for adult use 21 and older. It shouldn't be Maybe I wonder what the issue well, I'm sure there's a bunch of issues, right? There's like lobbies that are trying to keep it illegal Like there's the alcohol lobby that doesn't want it legal because it cuts down on alcohol sales And I know they lobby to try to make sure those laws stay in place Unfortunately, yeah prison guard unions That lobby for it, which is fucked. All right, they want to keep their job And so the way they keep their job is to keep people locked up and the way they keep People locked up is keep laws that don't make sense like It's fucked up fucked up. That's a that's an evil fucking It's just doesn't make any sense if you can buy alcohol You should be like I'm not saying you should drink alcohol. You don't drink alcohol anymore Like I said, I took months off It's like you should have some self control and I know some people don't but get your shit together You should but other people are fine without alcohol. They go to the bar have a drink or two go home Got to dinner have a drink go at home Have a drink while they're watching TV and they're fine It should be a personal choice No adult should be able to tell you what you can and can't do and be able to lock you up in a fucking cage If you don't listen, that's nuts and in a free country in this country is it's free as it gets in this world There's no way we should be illegal. It should be Regulated and it should be only for people that are adults Or you know you have to be 21 to be able to buy it It's never stop kids from getting alcohol. They still get alcohol. It's not stopping kids right now from getting weed They can still get weed But if it was legal and regulated first of all, we'd get taxes from it And that would be huge for every state you'd get a ton of tax money that you're not getting right now And also you would keep people from getting locked up for their own personal choices Which is just insane Yeah, I mean not a lot of people get locked up for personal use these days as pretty rare But there's still there's just way too many laws Yeah, I mean it's interesting too like if you have like Like CBD flour Like technically that's illegal. Yeah, so like if you just put some of your cannabis in CBD container like Are there ways to like test that on the side of the road like if you get pulled and they surge your car Not on the side of the road, but they could confiscate it and then test that I think But there's weird things about like legalization of I was watching a YouTube video About what Texas's laws were and Texas's laws are the amount of THC by volume So the thing about that is If you get like gummies like a 10 milligram gummy will pass that by volume and beligal So are you saying that people can take 10 milligram THC gummies and that's legal because They'll fuck you up like a if you don't smoke weed a 10 milligram THC gummy. Well, how you going? Take two of those and who knows what's gonna happen? Yeah, I just watched this movie that a friend of mine was in this movie Lanny Wilson and we watched the movie and I don't want to spoil the movie for anybody, but it turns out that the girl like She went to jail because she was impaired while driving and she was impaired by weed gummies and I was like that's kind of okay Hmm well depends on how much you took Yeah, but if you take 200 milligrams you get behind a wheel. You're not even exactly sure what the road is a hundred milligrams is a lot Yeah, right, so that's pretty impaired that's a that's equivalent to like eight shots of whiskey and then getting in your truck Yeah, you're impaired. I guess you're right. I don't think you should drive on weed Definitely know that you should drive fucked up, but it's like the same like I don't advocate drinking and driving either But if you have like one drink and drive Like you're gonna feel like a little Relaxed and lubricated, but I don't know how much you'll be in it Also varies on who the person is the person is used to drinking all the time One drink is not gonna do a damn thing to them But for some people one drink will Make you drive stupid you'll do stupid things. Yeah, it's a it's all personal responsibility thing That's the bottom line about all of it and yeah, you shouldn't be out there drinking and driving You shouldn't be out there eating 500 milligram edibles and fucking driving in the car. No, no, so which I'm never one time my drummer had this like THC spray we ever fucked with that. Oh, yeah, we had that back in California like Breast spray yeah, and I was still drinking at the time and me and my wife were both just hammered and we were on this A fairy like the tour bus goes on to the fairy and the fairy carries you over from France to the UK and we were like sitting in the lounge area on the ferry a lounge area on the ferry rather And he had this spray it out of like it's not doing anything All right, yeah, my wife both kept just spraying it. No, no, I woke up in my bed just like in a cartoon completely removed from reality just and Yeah, it was it was a bad bad scene. I remember one time I took a they had these THC breath strips That they used to sell and the problem with these things and this is back in the pre legalization days of pre 2016 in California and so Each store you would get Weed at like they would have medical stores So you could go to a doctor and say hey doc I got a headache and you need medicine and they would write your prescription and then you can go and like There's always reasons to have it just like there's reasons to have tiling all do you get a headache? Yeah, well then you need it do you have a backache? Yeah, well then you need it so you could get it pretty easy and They had these breast strips and I took one and I got on a plane And I closed my eyes when I was lying to the plane and I was watching neon Like cartoon characters that are made out of neon light and they were having sex It was an orgy of car and I was just lying there with my eyes closed watching these cartoon neon characters fuck And they were fucking in like complete blackness like void So it was just the colors of their weird bodies just bang any other and then they would shift shapes and another one will pile on They were I was like this is crazy It was very psychedelic it was almost like but when I'd open my eyes the world was normal Yeah, it wasn't like I was the world was wiggling and and I was just sitting I didn't mean to do I was flying all the way in New York was a six hour flight by time at land that I had sobered up But I was like this is great like how much is in these fucking things Because they're not making them the same labs where they're making fucking tiling off Sure, you know, I mean it's some hippie That's on dude who's like pouring weed into a machine and can't remember whether I put weed in there because he's high as fuck He's so he adds double they're very inconsistent It's like the micro doses that I used to get in making Georgia I was like something he's stronger than other ones. He's like yeah Depending on the day my boy else like Yeah, he's gonna ride it for whatever it is. Well, that's why we need legalization regulation. That's the beautiful thing about whiskey You get a glass of whiskey you get a shot you know exactly what that shot's gonna do Shots of whiskey have been having the same impact on human beings for hundreds of fucking years You can quantify it. Yeah, and that's how it should be with all these things But the problem is when they're outlawed You know some of them are you know a glass of wine some of them are fucking moonshine like You need regulation and it's The idea that there's laws against people's personal choices Stupid man. There's plenty of laws that are good. Don't murder people. Don't rob don't rape. Don't do this. Don't do that That's great. Don't vandalize great great laws make sense better society laws on personal choices Especially things that you might enjoy like having a joint with your wife You know after dinner and just sitting there and watching Netflix together like the fucking Armed thugs can person to your house and take the joint away from you like who are we protecting who we serving who we protecting and serving with that That's dumb. Yeah, it's just bad for society and it creates This business Once a business is established the business of enforcement once that business is established that business doesn't want to go away Because now you have a bunch of people whose jobs depend on enforcing laws enforcing these things that don't make any sense And they want to protect that because that's their livelihood So now you got a quagmire now you're in a fucking terrible situation. There's no easy way out Other than ripping the band-aid off and making it legal you're also propping up the cartels That's the other problem would have being Completely illegal in this country Federally is like well guess what it's they're still a demand for it So legal companies that actually employ people and give the employees health care and you know have rules and regulations Now they're not Making it so they're not growing it so instead you have fucking cartels that are growing it in California on public land Because if you get caught it's just a misdemeanor because it's legal in California So literally I think it's more than 80% of all the The weed that sold in the United States that's illegal is grown in California on public lands by the cartel And they use toxic pesticides and herbicides They use all kinds of shit that you're not allowed to use in normal farming and You know the only reason why it exists is because we've made these stupid fucking laws So now that it's schedule three it's in the same category as like Tylenol with codine Which is not bad. It's better certainly better than schedule one which is ridiculous so now Hopefully once they do more testing and more studies They can get to a point where federally it's legal and regulated That would be the best case for everybody just in the same categories alcohol Get all that tax money from it and then don't make criminals out of American citizens It just want to make personal choices This episode is brought to you by on-X off-road Ever wonder how to reach these epic mountain legs? They're tucked away dispersed campsites With on-X off-road you'll find legal open trails around you and even better guided trails mapped by real off-roaders Each one includes photos terrain descriptions and difficulty ratings So you'll know if your vehicles capable before you go Unlike other apps on-X gives you turn-by-turn directions on the trail and their new dispersed camping layer Shows where you can legally set up can you also get private land boundaries public land overlays and the ability to download maps for offline Use so that you're never guessing even when you're off the grid. It's a powerful tool built for serious off-roaders Try on-X off-road for 50% off go to on X maps dot com slash Joe Rogan When did it uh, when did it get scheduled as Schedule one Well the whole schedule one thing This is this is what I talked about when I went to the White House Recently, which is hilarious thing to say for a retard like me Did I help get things scheduled? I mean when it all goes down in the history books? They they attach my name to this. It's gonna be really confusing. They're gonna be like fucking that guy What how what the fuck happened? So when in 1970 the Richard Nixon administration passed the controlled substances act and it made DMT Silasibin LSD all these different things. It made them schedule one So that the the ideas that there was no Bennett including Ibogame, which is crazy Which has means it has no medical benefit and? Harmful and addictive all these different qualities that they attached to it But the only reason they did that was to target the civil rights movement the civil rights movement in the anti war movement That's what they were doing. They didn't like the fact these people were causing trouble and then they were organizing You know marches and doing all these different things that were disrupting the government And there was also this movement where people like why are we living the way we're living like this was the 60s Like why are we doing what we're doing? Well, I don't want to be like my parents. They're not happy You know, I want to live a life that's like freer I want to be filled with love and joy and I want to you know Have a good time and follow the grateful dead around like so a lot of people in government Were very concerned with this new movement and if you go and like music is a great example I give you look at the music of the 1950s and then you look at the music of the 1960s like what the fuck happened Yeah, like if you look at the music of 2016 and the music of 2026 not much difference right right it's all great So but it's like it's not there's not some revolutionary crazy new change But you saw that from 1959 to 1969 there is a radical difference a radical difference 1950 you got like you go from buddy Holly To Jimmy Hendrix like okay. What the fuck happened something crazy must have happened and it's drugs It's like a dog drugs. It's like the stone ape theory And you know our modern society Exactly exactly and this terrified the administration and they were really worried that they were going to completely lose control of the country and so they passed this Control substances act and that happened in 1970 and from that time on we've been fucked, you know for 56 fucking years We've been under the grip of this stupid fucking law There was passed by the Nixon administration. They didn't make any sense Some of the drugs that they attitude aren't even psychoactive They just threw a bunch of stuff in there and they missed a bunch of potent ones. Yeah, they missed five methoxy DMT They missed five MEO DMT which is one of the most potent psychedelics if not the most potent Psychedelic you used to be able to buy that online Dude there was a company that you could order from and they would send you Of a fucking jug of it as big as this Now the amount that gets you blasted into the center of the universe and introduces you to God is like the It's like the size that goes on your pinky. Yeah, like your pinky nail like that amount you smoke that you'll see God And you could just buy a fucking jar of it online There was a company called the American Chemical Company American Chemical Company or American Chemical Corporation and you used to be able to just buy Five methoxy DMT and they would just send it to you like a jar of vitamins Wow, and then you could go to head shops and buy salvia. Oh, yeah So salvia is a fucking insanely potent psychedelic which by the way is also sage Like sage is the same family the same genus as salvia So like think about it sage meaning wise like like an old sage And meanwhile that is one of the most potent psychedelics in the world and so kids were going to head shops and buying Salvia I don't know if they've made that illegal now. They probably have right is salvia illegal now So are you should fear on Brian red bands podcast? Do you know the story? Okay Are you should fear went on Brian red bands podcast and took a giant hit of salvia and went under for like 10 minutes And when he came back he said that he had lived six months under the water with like with a Entire different community of human beings under the water had He had lived six months under the water with a entire different community of human beings under the water, had relationships, had a job, had a six-month experience and then came back in that 10 minutes. And he was so confused. He was so baffled. He's like, I had a life under there, I had a girlfriend, I had friends. He goes, I had all these experiences. Oh shit. Yeah. He's crazy. He's crazy. He's fun. He came back to my show in New York. He's the man. He is the man. But I mean that's how potent this fucking salvia stuff is. By the way, a lady had a very similar experience recently who went into a coma. So she was in a coma for an extended period of time. I want to say it was like a few months. And when she came out, she had a whole life that she said. She had triplets and she had, she was married all these different things. Here's a story. She asked for her triplets after waking up from a coma. Doctors say they never existed. When she woke from a coma, first thing she did was asked for her three daughters. Medical staff was stunned. The response shattered her entire world. Just like that, the children she had nursed, watched, grow, and deeply cared for over seven years were gone. So she was placed in a medically induced coma for three weeks. And what followed was a dream of a lifetime, quite literally. She was obviously not aware that she was in a coma. Instead, she slipped into a dream at a lifetime unfolded before her eyes. Talking to the out with the team recalled having extremely intense dreams and nightmares, she was not aware that she was in a coma at time. So this dream became her reality. So she became a mother. She said it felt so real. She felt the physical and emotional pain throughout the hallucination. I could feel so many things. When I dreamed about giving birth, I felt the stress. I also felt a lot of pain in this dream. I gave birth to triplets, who I named Mila Miles and my Lee, my lead died shortly after birth. I felt so awful. Overwhelmed sadness and guilt she recalled. She remembers the first skin to skin contact that she had with her babies. It was incredible. I felt an overwhelming wave of love she added. In her dream, she lived for seven years and watched her daughters grow up. Each had their own personalities. One was quite shy. The other was a bundle of energy. I remember walks, meals we shared, and bedtime stories. She loved them with all her heart. And then she woke up from the coma and was told that her children never existed. That's when they told me they didn't exist. I was in shock. I was so convinced that it was real. That the time I saw my parents again, I told them they were grandparents. Wow. It makes you like wonder, like what is reality? What is this thing that we're currently experiencing? And we're currently experiencing this thing. But what is this? Is this everything? Is this the whole thing? Or is this like one channel on an infinite radio? And just while we're on that channel, we think this is the radio. Right. Well, maybe when you go to sleep, maybe that's just as real as being awake. It's heavy thought. The idea that you just shut off every night is bananas. Yeah. We look forward to it. Oh, can't wait to just go away. Can't wait to not exist. And if you don't, like if I don't get enough sleep, I'm like whatever, whatever happens during the dream time, the sleep time, the recovery, I feel it. I've my waking life. Like I haven't done what I'm supposed to do by sleeping for an extended period of time. So this reality is compromised. This reality, I'm dumber, my memory sucks, I'm more tired. I don't have any energy. I can't wait to go to sleep. Can't wait to shut off so I could pay back the void. Pay back the void the time I owe into the dream land of bizarre dreams. Yeah. And just the symbolism of dreams too. I've been having a lot of crazy dreams lately. Like what? I dream about snakes a lot, which is a good, it's a good sign. Is it? Yeah, dreaming about snakes evidently just represents like shedding your skin, going into something new, you know, growing, or you're surrounded by people who want to get you. Or maybe that, which most folks can be true. You know, music business. Yeah. And last snakes, isn't it every business, though? Yeah. I mean, just the idea, like the business side is just so in contrast to like the artistic sensibility, you know, and artists is supposed to be not supposed to be, but just like psychological or makeup is more just like open and just more just like giving and wanting to share your craft with somebody and more emotional, you know. And then having to be like a shark and having big, like these snakes contracts. Yeah. It's the time of nine markets. Oh, March of Money, Marcus. It's only seven years. It's just seven years with an extension with options, sounds about savory. Don't worry about these song rides. Yeah. You'll have other songs in the future. Right. That will be even better. Oh, good. I bet on yourself, man. Do come on. He don't you want to pick out a fancy car. Have you ever seen light night with a devil? Yes. That, yeah, that's the talk show. Yeah. That is great, man. Who made that? That's a good question. That's a really good movie. We watched it on the bus one night. I was like, whoa, that was like 2019 or something. It was heavy. Yeah. This was 2024. Oh, it's an Australian movie. Jack Delroy, the host of a failing. It's in 1977. Jack Delroy, the host of a failing late night show, decides to fill a Halloween special. However, the broadcast takes a dark turn on leashing evil into the nation's living rooms. Yeah, that's a dope movie. It was really fun. It was good. It was fucking scary shit too. It was scary. Yeah. It was good. Bro, you know what's fucking scary as shit and really good that I just found out about, but from my daughter, there's a new show called, well, it's not even new. It's like four seasons. It's called from from. Yeah. It's on Apple TV. I don't know if it's an Apple show, but it's on Apple TV. It's with the dude from Lost, one of the dads from Lost. Harold. He's been in a lot of things. He's great. And the show is fucking terrifying. It's very original and very weird. So it came out in 2022. Interesting. He's in Premiere on epics. Oh, okay. What's it on now? Is it just on Apple TV? Epics. MGM Plus. Yeah. So it says in 2018 YouTube red. Remember we're talking about YouTube red. Can it at least on Paramount Plus? India. It's on Amazon Prime. I was on all over the place. Huh? MGM Plus is. So it appeared on epics. I don't even know what MGM Plus is. Maybe that's just the company that's the production company. So in 2026, they renewed the series for a fifth and final season. It's fucking good, man. It's good. And it's really scary. It's really scary and fucking creepy and horrific. It's about these people that are stuck in this town that doesn't make any sense. Like the town doesn't make any sense. And you can't get out of the town. And at nighttime, people come out of the woods with their not people. And they're like these monsters. And if you let them into your house, you can't let them in your house. But if you let them in your house, they'll butcher you in Terry apart. And people, they try to trick you in letting them into your house. Like I'm not doing it justice. It's, like it sounds stupid. But here's the pitch. But it's, it's really scary, man. It's really scary and really creepy to the point like I'm watching I get anxiety. And I don't like watching shit like that before I go to bed. Yeah. Because then I get like weird dreams and I start getting because it's like children are in trouble in it. I'm a father. And when I see children in trouble, I get fucking freak out. You know, this party, you do like the sheep dog and you know, just like, right. So it's, it's a good show though. My wife gets on to me. I like, it's like forensic files. I love it. You like that before you go to bed? I don't know why. That's crazy. It's my comfort. How people murdered people. Yeah. I remember that show on HBO, the autopsy show. That was like one of the first ones. Okay. Do you know that show? The autopsy one. It was this guy, Dr. Michael Badden. And what he was, it was a forensic scientist that would catch people that had murdered people and got away with it. They would exune bodies and find things. And it was all these different cases of where someone had gotten away with murder. But then they discovered how they did it. It was very, very interesting. Wow. Because people are fucking weird, man. Like, you know, a lot of like wives poisoning their husbands and like multiple husbands died of similar ways and nurses that poison their, the people under their care. Some fucked up people out there. Some fucked up people out there, man. And the crazy thing is they get away with it. That's the crazy thing is for every one that Michael Badden catches, how many of them get away with it? Yeah. Like what percentages of murders in America go unsolved? Let's put this into perplexity. Our AI sponsor and find out what the D, what do you think it is? What percentage of murders go unsolved in America? Oh, that's a good question. I mean, 50, 60%, whoa. But I don't know, I don't know how you would quantify it. I guess you'd find out well, someone gets murdered and they don't catch anybody. All right. Okay. Yeah. Wow. So you're saying there's a chance? Approximately 40 to 50% of murders in the United States go unsolved. It needs it roughly half a ball homicide cases. Do not result in arrest or resolution. So I was talking to somebody and someone who lives in their community got arrested because the wife went missing and they got the wife's DNA from this guy's chainsaw. They have no body. They have no evidence other than there's some DNA on his chainsaw. And you know, he's playing stupid. So he's in jail now. But everybody that knows him and like, like these, these friends of mine, they know the family. They knew him, they knew her. And he's just in jail. And they don't know if they have enough evidence to convict him. And so he's been in jail for a while now and they're trying to gather enough evidence for trial. But all they have is like DNA. I don't even know what that means. Like how much DNA? Like, did he clean the chainsaw and not do a good job? I don't know what that means. But like, she like out like trim and edges. Who knows? That's the thing. It's like you could use a chainsaw and accidentally scratch yourself. Like you don't have to cut yourself. It doesn't even have to be on. Like if you're, you know, taking a chain, I don't know why the wife would be taking a chainsaw out into the, I mean, some women are capable and they do it. But my wife, you know, she would accidentally scraped your arm with this chainsaw and they went over every blade with a swab. Probably could find your DNA and go, oh my God, you did it. I don't know. I don't know what happened. But apparently these people that I know believe that the husband chopped this lady up. Oh, really? Yeah. They think you did it. They're fighting a lot. And I remember when I was a kid, my sister used to, and like, chains actually got a really funny bit about how diabolical older sisters are. And just my sister used to say, I hope you go to jail for something you didn't do. Whoa. Hope you get wrong. Really convicted for something you're in jail forever. So terrible thing to say to somebody, what did you do to her to make her say that to you? Who fucking knows? That's a dark. I hope you go to jail for something you didn't do is so evil. Wow. We're very close now. Are you? Well, it was a kid. She was a kid. How old was she when she did that? When she said that? She's two years older than me. So she must have been like 9 or 10. Oh, but people say things. Good stuff. And 9 or 10. They're just being kids. Yeah. That's a diabolical mind though. Like that's how you want someone to suffer. You want someone to emotionally suffer for something they didn't do forever. I heard her and a neighbor boy. It was a vacant house across from mine. And they like locked me in the back fence. My sister was like, this is where you live now. Whoa. They were like, unless you break that window. And I was like, I don't want to break the window. And like, soon enough, like they said, well, we're not letting you out of this gate. And like, I probably could have waited it out, but I was like five or six. So I just said, all right. So I took a brick to the window and they're like, well, we're going to go tell on you now. I was like, wow. Really fucked up. What the fuck does she do now? My sister is actually, she's a badass man. She's, she drives for the department of transportation. Um, she's got her CDL. She's a house. Sounds like she has some devious thoughts in her mind. She's, yeah. Sounds like she should write books. I know. She's so smart. That sounds very creative. Yeah. You know, like she's manipulating a five year old breaking windows. She could tell on them. But as a seven year old. Yeah. No, she's, she's awesome. But uh, actually, I had a good friend. I told that story too. And she loved it so much. She got me a welcome mat from my house that said, this is where you live now. That's fucked up, man. Where did she learn that kind of behavior? Probably my mom. Oh, was your mom like that? My mom was pretty wild. Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah. I had an interest in upbringing. Most artists do, especially most interesting artists. I don't know a lot of interesting artists that say, like my childhood was perfect. It was amazing. It was so much love and everybody was really supportive and understanding. Yeah. We talked a lot about stuff and spoke about our feelings. Mostly. Yeah. No, in the dinner table. There's, there's always some sort of element of psychological torture involved. Or some kind of abandoned matter or some kind of, sometimes. Ditchy uncle, whatever it is. Yep. Something ignoring you. Yeah. Just not making your priority, making you not feel special or making you feel like you're a burden is something, something that causes you to like want exorbitant amounts of attention from strangers. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. But look, that's where the great stuff comes from, which is really wild. Like there's this concept that you cannot have good without evil. And I think there's something to that. I think it's just part of the human condition for whatever reason. You don't appreciate good unless you've experienced bad, which is why rich kids are fucked. You grow up rich with everything you've ever wanted. There's no struggle. It's so difficult for those people to ever be exceptional because they don't have the motivation. They don't have that. They haven't experienced the bad. Not in that way. Like I remember I went on a hunting trip with my friend, Steve Renell, Brian Cowan. We went to Alaska and it rained every day. It rained like six days and we were so good. And we came back to LA and it was sunny and I was driving my car and I had to call my friend Steve and I said, dude, I have never been happier. The sun hits my face. I'm so appreciative. I'm so, and I've never felt like this. Like it's always like this in LA. But it never meant anything to me. It was just another day in LA. Gotta go to work. But this one day I was like, just field with gratitude and I was so happy. The son of my face felt so good, warm. And I realized like, oh, you have to suffer in order to really appreciate the good. Like if it's just all good, you're not going to appreciate it. You don't, you need evil people so that you really appreciate the people that are beautiful and that you love. You need people that suck. So you appreciate people that are kind. You know, you need people that are mean. So you appreciate the ones that are nice. Yeah. Just people that are on the level. Just people that are like no agenda. Yeah. Just kind people. And it is that duality that kind of gives you perspective. That's what I meditate on every day is perspective. That's why I wonder about the music business. And then even the comedy business, I think kind of any business. I'm sure it's the same with the music, or whether a movie making business as well. It's like you almost need these rotten vampire that are run. You know what I mean? It's like to see you punk band. But so that like when you see fellow musicians that you love, like give them a hug, like embrace each other like no, we're cool. Like you know what I mean? It's like we're together now. It's all right. We're okay. It's trauma bonding. Yeah. We're away from the cons. We're away from the vampire cons. It's like a boy Charlie Crockett, you know. Charlie always says like you can do what they do, but they can't do what you do. Hmm. Charlie's great. He's a fucking music. Interesting dude too. Very interesting dude. Very interesting life. Like the life that the guy had and playing street music for so long and finally getting discovered. Very like again. But that's how you get a person like that. When you talked about his childhood, I fucked up. It wasn't crazy. He was basically just on his own from the time he was a teenager. Just running around, just sing it songs. Yep. You know? Like that's how you get a person like that. Yeah. You can't create a Charlie Crockett in a lab. No. Or a jelly roll. You don't create those in a lab. They gotta go to jail first. But it's like, I mean, jelly is like one of the most beautiful people I've ever met my life. He's one of the nicest, sweetest, kindest, warm affectionate people. Everybody hugs everybody, tells everybody he loves them and he means it. And because he's been through hell, you know? And that's how you make a person like that. Billy's in like a constant state of like when you run into somebody after they've had an ayahuasca experience. Mm-hmm. Yeah. He has this constant like gratitude. Yes. That I feel like kind of fades even with people who have like ayahuasca journeys or experiences. Yeah. You know? He's just, I don't know. There's something really pure to that. Yeah, he's maintained it, especially now that he's on this like health journey. I think that sometimes the momentum of life takes over and you kind of forget those beautiful moments. You're grounded in these moments where you realize like, God, I'm so lucky to have a beautiful family, a lot of love and friends that I love and people that do what I do for a living. God, I'm so lucky. And that feeling like sometimes it goes away because you're dealing with this and that and contracts and fucking then New York Times wrote a hit piece on you know, oh shit. And you forget, yes, you lose your perspective. But I almost feel like you need all those other shitty elements to just reinforce the good elements that there's this constant sort of mechanism that's going on where there's this constant process of pros and cons, of negatives and positives. And they're duking it out to see who writes in the more the negative comes out of you, the more it has this creative desire inside of you to excel with your music or or whatever it is that you do to just push past it. I mean, think about some of the great songs that people have written just about the struggles that they've gone through just even in the music business, you know, like Leonard Skinner working for MCA. You know, there's a lot of those songs like that. It's just like people just want to tell you what the fuck they've been through. Yeah. Less chic, freak out. What's that about? They weren't like, they weren't allowed to get into studio 54. They wouldn't let them in. And the song was originally written as fuck you, you know, that it, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, that, fuck you. Oh, really? Yeah. They went and said, it's freak out. Yeah. And then it ended up being major hit. Yeah. That was because they couldn't get into a club. Yeah. That's pretty crazy. Pretty crazy. Yeah. Yeah. But it is just about threading that needle of like wanting more for yourself, but for the right reasons. And that's something that I think about every day. It's just like having a virtuous reason to want more, you know, not just for the sake of having it or for hoarding wealth or anything like that. It's like I want to work to where I can get to a place where, you know, a wife and I can have our own bus and raise kids on the road, you know, but you can't do that unless you have a certain profit margin on the road. You know, so I'm always kind of trying to think of like virtuous causes to want more, because in reality, you know, I should be grateful for everything that I do have. But also, speaking of that, you know, and trying to meditate on the things that I'm grateful for every day. That's a good perspective. I think people get trapped in working towards a result instead of thinking about the process. Right. I try to be process oriented. I try to like think about whatever I'm doing. Just try to be better at it and do a better job at it. And I think the other stuff sort of takes care of itself. If you have the right people, and that's where the evil vampires come in, because they'll steal all that good will. Like if you leave the door open, like on that TV show, on from, let them in, they'll fucking tear your part. That's how you have. Yeah. Just, and it's hard because you don't want to become jaded. Right. You don't want to become like, I feel like I meet a lot of people out there who like they're open and they're kind, of, but they're not interested in making any new friends. Yeah. Right. It's like they have their circle. And on one hand, I kind of understand that. I get that, you know, but it's hard. You know, you got a maintain of a certain level of perspective not to become like angry. Yeah. Yeah. It's hard. And it's hard to know who you can let in your circle to. But you got to give people a stress test. You know what I mean? Yeah. It's almost like you have to give them a baggie and then have a fake cop. Correct. And say where'd you get? Marcus King gave it to me. Oh, got your bitch. I ran into this guy recently and basically what happened like, I was on Jam Cruise years ago. I was super fucked up and I was supposed to sit in with this band called Naughty Professor from New Orleans and they're like, that's a great name. They're so good. And they're just outrageously talented musicians. And I had gone out on an adventure that morning on a catamaran. I didn't know what the fuck a catamaran was. I didn't know if it was land air or sea vessel. Right. So we go out there, turns out it's a boat. And we go like snorkeling in the Cayman Island. And we're just like looking all the fish and I'm a girlfriend at the time. And a base player friend of mine from a back on lettuce is named Jesus. So out there with my girlfriend at the time and just name is Jesus. Yeah, not Jesus. Well, his name's Eric, but he goes by Jesus. Oh boy. Oh boy. How did Eric get in your circle? I don't think it's a messiah complex or anything. I think it's just a name that stuck. But they were tripping on acid and I was drunk on Rome and beer and just out there waiting. And like when we came out for air, the boat or we had drifted quite a ways from the boat. And like we couldn't get their attention. And like the waves started crashing and like a storm started rolling in. Oh, fog waves. And like, you know, I'm not the strongest swimmer. You know, but we were we were basically, you know, we were treading water out there for like 40 minutes. And like holy shit, dude. You know, we were we were gonna drown. And finally, the dude jumped off the boat and came out there. And then he was like, yelling at me because I didn't have flippers on. So I was just out there with just my shorts on and some goggles. And he signaled for the boat to come around and they pulled us up out of the water. So after that, we were celebrating our life. Yeah. So I got completely hammered. And then I was on the boat as I wanted to pick me up, you know, because I got to sit in with these guys and they're like college educated, like jazz musicians. So this guy comes over. He's like, Hey, man, you know, you're too ski. And I was like, yeah, me up. And he pulled out a spoon and he digs it down in the bag. And I go to take it and it's like a small, little mountain. I was like, give me a little more. And he gave me some more. And big snowing my whole face went numb. And I was like, and it stung. And I was like, whoa, what the fuck was that? And he was like, ah, dude, just a little blow. And I was like, no, it wasn't. And like, he said, yeah, it was. And I grabbed him by the shirt and I said, what the fuck did you give me motherfucker? And he looked at his buddy. Well, I had to, he had to have him, you know, like this. And he said, Hey, what bag did you give me? Brown. He's like, the blue one. He's like, oh, no. And he looked at me. And I was like, what was it? He's like, it's ketamine totally the wrong direction. But I ran into that guy at the Granol offering. He came into my dressroom and was like, hey, remember me wrong bag? I was like, yeah, I remember you. Yeah, I don't like you. Yeah, you can put me in a weird spot. What was that like taking ketamine after you almost died? Man, it was heavy. You know, I basically like from what I recall, like I became part of the boat. That's how I remember it. Like my feet were like in the deck, you know, and like I was moving the whole boat with every step that I took. That's what I remember. Whoa. Yeah. But there was this one guy that kept trying to get me to come play a festival in like New Mexico. And I kind of put him off the whole week. And then he ran into me and like, I just remember his eyes getting big Lexawcers. I don't know what I said to him, but it was some crazy shit. I mean, it wasn't English at all probably. Ketamine talk. Ketamine's a weird one, man. Because there's a lot of people that are doing that right now for therapy. Yeah. Like Neil Brennan, a comedian, the co-creator of the Chappelle show, he was the first person to tell me about it. Because Neil's had depression problems most of his life. And we were in LA. And he said, we're in the hallway of the comedy story. He goes, I've been doing ketamine therapy for depression. And I go, how's that working out? Is it good? He goes, yeah, yeah, yeah. But I didn't know what to expect. He goes, I thought, oh, you know, it's an a doctor's office. It's probably going to be just, I'm probably just going to close my eyes and don't feel it was. No, he goes, it's fucking a full blown trip. He goes tripping balls in a doctor's office is fucking strange. I bet. He said it worked though for a little while. Like he's done a bunch of different things. He did a ton of, uh, I. ripping balls in a doctor's office is fucking strange. I bet. He said it worked though for a little while. Like he's done a bunch of different things. He did a ton of ayahuasca. He's done a bunch of ketamine. He did like magnets on his brain, I think. He's did like a bunch of different things that try to like rewire the way his brain works. Yeah. Like whatever it is. That's a journey I'm on. You know, I'm on antidepressants and I want to get off them. Which ones are you on? I'm on Simbalta. What does that one do? Well, is it an SSRI? Yeah. So basically just kind of a, it's very chemical imbalance. You know? But like the best work that I did to combat my depression and anxiety and stuff was microdosing mushrooms. Yeah. Like that's the most progress that I'd seen in my life. And I'm going to figure out some kind of strategy because, you know, like being on antidepressants and I'm telling you like, well, don't just stop taking them all at once or you know, you could have seizures and shit. I'm like, I don't like that. I don't want to be like, you know, enslaved by a drug, by a pharmaceutical drug. You know? Yeah. And it's like also like, now you just take this the rest of your life. It's like, what's the end result here? Yeah. Theo Vaughn's going through the exact same thing. And last time he was on the podcast, he was explaining to me. It freaks me out because I know Theo has had conversations before. Like even publicly, he had a Netflix taping and it didn't go well. It was like they actually never, they shelved it. They never used it. You know, there was all these stories from people that were there saying he bombed. I think he just had a kind of a breakdown. And when he was talking to the crowd and there's a video of it, we said, you know, the people were saying, hey, we still love you. I was like, look, I'm just, I'm trying not to take my own life. That's what I'm trying to do right now. Yeah. And like you hear stuff like that. You just go like, oh, Jesus Christ. I've known too many people that I didn't think were going to kill themselves and then did. And then he goes down these spirals where he starts talking about world events and freaking out. I'm like, oh, Jesus Christ. Like I got to help this dude. And so I send him things about people getting off of them. And apparently there's some doctors that specialize in getting people off of them. But here's the thing about that chemical imbalance thing. That's not real. They used to think that that was what these things do, that they treated a chemical imbalance. But then recently, the studies have shown that that is not what they do. They don't exactly know what they do. And they kind of numb you in some sort of a way that helps some people. And I've had some friends and I don't want to make any blanket statements because I've had some friends that were suicidal. Ari's one of them and he got on SSRIs and it helped him. He got, he tried a bunch of different ones found one that worked, got on track. And then his career started taking off. And then as his career started taking off, he started feeling much better. He was on a good positive path in his life. And then he slowly weaned himself off of those and now he's off of them. So I think that might have saved his life. I also know other people that have been on their, on those things and taken their own lives. So I don't know. Because that's part of one of the side effects is suicidal ideation. It's one of the side effects. But see if you could find anything about the chemical imbalance not being true. The chemical imbalance reason for taking SSRIs. They've measured like levels of dopamine, serotonin and people that take, it's not, that's not what it's doing. And they don't even exactly know why it works. And it's a huge business. That's part of the problem. And it's also part of the problem that these doctors are incentivized to prescribe people, these things. I had a friend that went to a psychiatrist and was talking about their life and things not doing well. And immediately the doctor tried to prescribe him SSRIs. Right away. Like right away, here's something that you're never going to get off. I'm going to give it to you right away. First meeting. And he was like, well, I don't mean, shouldn't I like try exercise? Shouldn't I try diet? Shouldn't I try drinking water? And you know, like, I read something about like magnesium and red light therapy being far more effective than you can SSRIs. There is no good evidence for the simple chemical imbalance like low serotonin that directly causes depression or automatically means someone should take an SSRIs. But SSRIs do change brain chemistry in ways that can help some people. But so for decades, depression was popularly explained as a serotonin imbalance in the brain. Large reviews of the research have not found convincing evidence that people with depression have consistently low serotonin or a specific measurable imbalance that explains their symptoms. Experts now describe the chemical imbalance story as an oversimplified or outdated way of explaining a much more complex condition. And here's the other thing about depression. It has to be connected to the state of your life. Like if you have a terrible job, you're in a bad relationship, you have abusive parents, you know, and you live in a shitty neighborhood. Why would you be happy? Oh, I'm depressed. Oh, you need a pill. No, do you? Is that what you need? Right. Well, it's quite possible that you're eating processed foods and you have all these other things that we talked about shitty life, shitty house, shitty job, shitty neighborhood, shitty parents. Maybe you just need to make your life positive. Like figure out a way to get your life in a positive direction. They've shown that exercise is way more effective than antidepressants. It actually helping people with depression. Just exercise. Just fucking go on a nice long walk every day, do some cardio, you know, take a fucking yoga class. That's way better for people than these goddamn pills. But these doctors are financially incentivized to prescribe these things. And they prescribe them and hand them out like candy. And again, I think for some people it helps them. And that's the issue. Right. I mean, if it wasn't a financial incentive, I think it would be like, take these for six months, you'll be better. Yeah. It wouldn't be like forever. This is you now. Even six months. It's like, okay, how long does it take to get off them? Right. Because I know guy who was on him and it took him a year and a half after he got off of him before he felt normal yet. For a year and a half, he was fucked up because he was on him for us. I think he said he was on him for 10 years. And then for a year and a half, he got off of him. And it just took that long before he finally like balanced the ship out. Like whatever waves he had to go through for a year and a half. But he was like, whatever I'm doing, I am not going back on those goddamn pills. So he wrote it out. And he's not on the other end. It's fucked up too because it's hard to compare your experience to other people. Because everybody's brain chemistry is different. Yeah. So you could have two people on the same medication like you were saying earlier. Like it's hard to even quantify like I even taught him my own sister or like other family members about their depression and their mental health journeys. And it's just, it's interesting to think like you could say like it's hard to disprove it. You know what I mean? Because somebody could be doing well on it. But it's also like it takes two weeks for it to really get into your system. And I had to try like three or four different ones before one really I felt felt like me, you know? Like even at my grandmother's funeral, like I just felt nothing. I just felt numb. And like I didn't notice it until I got into the situation where I was like, this woman raised me and I can't feel anything. And it wasn't until like a heavy moment like that that I was able to kind of have that perspective of like I should be feeling something right now. So I put those down. And then it's like two weeks later, it was having dinner with somebody and like this song came on that just brought all of it up. There was this melody, this Wayne Shorter melody that just uncorked everything. And I was just sobbing at the dinner table. You know what? Um, what did you feel like before you took them? And what was wrong with the ones that you didn't stick with? Um, well, I don't know if it was a matter of like maybe the dosage was too high and it was just kind of creating a block. Because like you've got to feel some emotions, right? So how did you feel before you were taking them? Like what was what was bothering you that you realized you need to take something? Well, I think a lot of it had to do with just like substance abuse, but I was feeling really anxious and really suicidal and um, just really, really depressed. You know? And um, just this overwhelming sense of dread every day. And just also just a lot of helplessness like just trying to go into different doctors and just like trying to figure out like what the fuck is it that's going to finally, you know, take this away. But also realizing like I rely on that a little bit, you know, for what I do for a little, yeah. So there's kind of that, you know, rely on the feelings of the person. Yeah. Oh, that, you know, for writing and for creating. God, that's how fucking conundrum, right? Yeah. Being fearful that it's going to take your drive away because you know, I have anything to create for no substance, right? So it's a, it is a strange battle. It's one that I still kind of deal with, but I'm just in a much better spot on the journey. So which ones did you try and what was wrong with the ones that you tried that they just numbed you up? This was like six years ago. So like 2020, um, I can't remember the name of the specific medication. I'm sure I have a, an old bottle of it somewhere in my house, but, um, yeah, I don't know. I just, what did it do? I just made you too. Yes, maybe feel numb. And then when you found one that worked, what did that do differently? So the one that I'm on now, uh, I mean, like if I go a day without it, like I, like, the withdrawal symptoms are like fairly severe, just like headaches and just like, complete like body tingling sensations and just like really scary stuff. Just, you know, so I'm, I'm gonna have to wean off of it slowly over time. Like already dead. I wonder if I began would help with that. Well, I mean, you know, it's like I was saying like my credost in mushrooms, it was like the first thing that I actually felt some kind of lasting result. Like now, like when I get an anxiety attack or something, I can recognize it as something just coming from an outside force, you know, an energy that's not aligning with me. And I can recognize it. I can work through it. Where like before I would just get a little overwhelmed, you know, but I think also just like not drinking and like having to socialize with people and having to have a little exposure therapy to like social interactions and life in general without just masking myself with drugs and alcohol has helped a lot too in that growth. So when you first started taking it, you there's all the stuff that you're doing in terms of like abusing alcohol and substances and that which definitely causes you to feel like shit and definitely causes a lot of people to have like all sorts of angst and anxiety and just fucks with you. This stuff alleviated that. What am I now? Yeah. I mean, you know, it has kind of I'm afraid of like, you know, if I get off of it, are those emotions going to come flooding back in? Yeah. So did it stop those emotions? It this was all by the way why you were drinking right? You're not drinking and how long have you been since you've tried like a year and a half? Okay. But I mean, those those emotions do come back every now and again, even while you're on the stuff. Yeah. But it significantly curb them. But it's like, you know, at what price? I mean, I was talking to my boy Ernest about it because, you know, he's kind of a kindred spirit and like, you know, just talking about like, I'll be working out and like getting after it feeling good, listening to the stones, or whatever. And like, I noticed like, um, in my jam at my house, like, I guess they used to have a punching bag hanging up there. And just like, you see something like that and you just take a mental note of like, that probably hold my weight, you know, it's just like these, oh, you mean the hang yourself? Yeah. Like these thoughts just kind of come, you know, as I don't know where they come from. they just, they just pop in and as quick as I go, I go. And this is before you're taking the medication? No, I mean, this is not a month ago. Yeah. Okay. Did you did you have those thoughts before the medication? Oh, yeah. Okay. So they're still there. Yeah. So whatever it's doing, it's doing a little bit. I mean, it's gotta be helping to a degree. You think it is? I think so. But I think it's really just about like, your will and like your your mental, your ability, just like we were talking about like, with diets and stuff. Yeah. Like does it have a help curb, you know, appetites, but you could also just exercise and just have willpower. And I think mental health can be of a similar thing. One of things that people are finding about in Los Ampecs is that actually curbs your desire to be in love too. Yeah. That's a nasty thought. Yeah. You don't enjoy anything. Yeah. Yeah. What I'm hearing about these SSR eyes is like, like, do you want to tell you like, paralyze their, I saw that. Yeah. I saw that on Twitter. Some lady was talking about her. She got off of it and her clitoris is numb. She can't have orgasms anymore. That's fucked up. Yeah. If that happens, it's like, you know, the problem is I don't know if it comes back. So you can't wait for it to happen and like which medications cause it to happen. Yeah. If you do get off of it, if you talk to your doctor, like what is the protocol? Well, we're waiting off of it. Yeah. My doctor always just says like, I don't know. He just every time I talk to my doctor, it's like, every few months we check in and he's like, well, how are you feeling? You know how you doing? Yeah. I'm like, well, I'm okay. Yeah. Just kind of feels like the same. Kind of want to get off of him. And he's like, well, you know, if you want to do that, like you're going to have to go slowly over time. But, uh, you know, our thing's good. And I'm like, well, yeah, things are fun. He's like, well, you don't really want to change things if they're good, right? You know, that kind of thing. And you worry. What? Yeah, we're that. What's going to happen if I, you know, what's that going to be like getting off of them? Because the thing about it is like, I was talking about this guy that was on him for 10 years, like that year and a half was fucking rough, where he was experiencing all sorts of problems because his body was just kind of in shock. Did it be on, had been on SSRIs for a decade? And then all studies off of him is like, like the way Theo described it is like, the floor was missing, like the floor fell out from under him. Getting off him, he got off him for a while and then got back on him. He got off him about a year ago for a little while and then got back on him, but he wants to get off him. He just doesn't know what to do. And I mean, hell, it's like, it's like a, it's literally a plot device, you know, like the show, the Ozarks, you know, like the crazy brother, he's pouring his medication down the grain. Yeah. He goes fucking nuts, you know. It's like somebody being off their medication is kind of a pejorative term, right? Yeah. But I'm like, I kind of want to get off mine. Well, it depends on what medication, right? I think we're just kids of front. Yeah, if it's anti-psychosis, I guess. If you've got psychosis, do you exercise? Yeah. What do you do? Usually do 20 minutes on the Peloton and then a different muscle group every day. Oh, that's good. That anything cardio-wise is great for depression, supposedly, and even weights are supposedly really good for anxiety for some reason. I've noticed. Yeah. There's a real definitive difference when I'm working out versus when I'm, when I'm not. Yeah. Man. So like, do you have a strategy for when you're thinking about doing this or how you're going to try to do this? Well, I was thinking I'd probably do it when I had some time off, but I'm working the rest of the year, but honestly, man, being on the road is kind of my, my constant. So I think it's something that I could probably accomplish while I'm on the road, but I'd have like a breakdown. Yeah, funny. You're in Nashville about the Jewish show. Yeah. I got a cancellation show. Right. Yeah. So it's hard to determine. Yeah. It scares me, man, because, and again, it scares me because doctors incentivize to keep you on them and promote them and get you to do them. Also, and they've been prescribing them for people. They don't want to ever think that they're doing something bad. There's a justification process and there's somewhere 100%. Justification process, financial incentives. There's, there's a lot going on there. And then there's also this, um, this position that they're in of expertise with their explaining to you what you shouldn't shouldn't do and how it works. And when you're like, this is a fucking out my whole life and I can't get off from the like, those just went way slow down. Like, it was everything doing well. Just keep, keep on the same path. Marcus, it was fine. Marcus, bye. Click. Got a new patient calling. Oh, hi, Jenner. Do you? Yeah, it's, it's very weird, man. It's very weird that our society so hyper, hypermedicated. Yeah. Yeah. And injectables are the, the wave of the future. Like, hm. Even like, um, like, uh, my boy Chevy, it works for me. He's, um, he used to work in pharmaceutical sales and he's like, everything is injectables now because that's what's hot because I like the, those up here. So, so like every medication is like, paddling injectables. Because like the wave of like peptides and I was impicking all that kind of stuff. Now it's like, it's trendy, which is interesting to me. That is weird because I grew up with my dad having type two diabetes and my grandfather too. And, um, you know, just seeing them inject like insulin and stuff. I was like, yuck. Well, type two diabetes. The thing about that one is you can cure that. Yep. You just get to stop eating like a pig. But just crazy. I know a bunch of people that have stopped themselves from having type two diabetes. Yeah. And that, and that's, that's a goal that I'm on is prevent myself from ever dealing with that. Yeah. I don't, I don't eat sugar or anything. Oh, that's awesome. Yeah. I gave up sugar. Well, again, the keto genetic diet is supposed to be good for depression too. Do you take supplements? Do you take in magnesium and multivitamins and all that channels? Oh, yeah. That's good. That seems like you're doing a lot of the right things, man. Yeah, man. I'm, you know, I just, I don't want to be a prisoner to pills. Yeah. And I love my wife and I'm just excited to have some babies and just, I want to get myself like her career is taken off and my career is going really well. And like does she take SSRIs? No, that's good. She's very anti like any pharmaceuticals, which I could admire better. I was just reading something about SSRIs and the development of children. Children's brains, when women are pregnant and they're on SSRIs and apparently there's a bunch of issues. Yeah. I can see that. I mean, look, man, there's millions of people on those things. There's a giant business and they want to hide all the side effects and hide all the negative aspects of it and hide the impact that it does just to the overall psyche of the nation. When you've got, okay, let's just take a guess. How many people do you think in this country are on SSRIs? With liberal women, it's like 80% but like, what? The other 20% need them. Well, like what's with the percentage of people on SSRIs in America? Let's guess. Man, 30% like I've a going higher. I'd say like 60 to 75. Or healing? Yeah. 60 to 75% of the country. Yeah. Wow. I don't think it's that. I think it's under 30. It's too many. It's too many. Yeah. It's definitely too many. But there's also a bunch of people that are looking for a quick fix when there's a bunch of of factors to why you don't feel happy. Like we were talking about before, there's lifestyle, life choices, situation that is beyond your control, like where you're born, where you live, the job that you have, where you, you know, if you're in a place of limited opportunity and you got a bunch of shitty people around you and life sucks every day, it's hard to be happy. It's hard to not feel depressed. So then there's the question of like how does one develop the tools to get out of that situation and get somewhere else? And for a lot of people, it's something that helps them break out, whether it's starting a business or being a musician or an artist or something that gets you out of there. And then you start getting around more positive people and then you make more positive lifestyle choices, but you just can't expect to be happy if your life is shit. 13%. Okay. American SSRI prescribing, but I bet in your business, that's why you think of it because in the artist, I bet it's a lot higher. 13% of US adults report taking an antidepressant and then to give them 38 period, SSRI is the most frequently used class within that group. Yeah. Okay. So 13%. So that's 2015 to 2018. I asked for an update for 2020. I said it's about the same for 2026. I mean, yes, I asked is there any updates in 2020 and it basically says the same. I'm so about 13%. Still a lot. One out of 10 people on crazy pills is a lot. Yeah. And in the arts community, though, like within the artist community, the last data that I remember reading was like 70% of like artists struggle with some faction of mental health. But that makes sense. Yeah. And then there's also the newest element that targets your mental health and goes after it, which is social media. Yeah. That's a rough one. That's a rough one. And so many people treat that as if it's no big deal. Like you just shooting heroin into your eyeballs every day with that stuff. Yeah, man. Not good. So many people are in there. All day, every day, and then reading a bunch of negative shit about them and getting angry and upset. And then carrying that weight around with them all day. It's easy. It's easy to say like, don't read comments, but it's easier to say than done. Yeah. Yeah, especially if you have it on your phone. That's the thing. Like you got to not have it on your phone. If you have it on your phone, you're going to go to it. But then the problem is if you use it for touring and for posting information, to keep your fans engaged. Yeah. Well, the algorithm also serves you like you got to engage. Like anytime you talk to a social media group, they're like, what are your engagement levels? Like, so they want you on the app using it and commenting, responding to people. Because if you don't and you choose not to do that, then they're like, well, can we go on there for you and respond to comments? Or right? I'm like, no, I don't want you punching out any bullshit. So I'm like, I want to be on there and be myself. And like if this is a tool that I have to have, I want it to be me, like authentically. But, you know, it's a necessary evil. Yeah, but it ruins so many people's brains. It rots you. Yeah, it really does. And it's also your absorbing so much negativity just from what's going on in the world. Like on any given day, if I open up Twitter and I just start reading what people are upset about, it's just like, oh my God, the whole world is falling apart. Everyone's mad at everything and everyone and every little whatever fucking social issue, political issue, world issue, economic issue, everyone's blaming everyone and everyone's pissed and there's so many grifters and psychopaths that are just on there all day using it and stirring up bullshit and fuck, man. I know. It's um, yeah. You think I can use bathroom and stuff like that? Fuck yeah, we can use a bathroom. We're getting into this. Yeah, we're gonna save us. We're gonna pee folks. We'll be right back. And we're back ladies, gentlemen. Where were we depression, everything sucks. Stay off social media. Yeah. Let's talk about music. Let's talk about some music. Damn, that's how, how does it take so long to talk about that? Just seeing that James Brown interview from J.E.S. when he's got those big glasses. Oh yeah. I'm talking about some music. That'd be the fucking interviews amazing. It's the best when he had just got arrested and the amount on love. Yeah. He arched you out on bail. How about on love? Yeah. And he starts talking to the women in the thing. He's like, why is that ladies? Yeah, no, it's hilarious. He's the best. Clearly, hi, it's fuck. Yeah. It's something going on there. James Brown was an original. When you first started doing music, how old were you? Um, man, I was probably like two or three years old. When I feel it. Really? That's crazy. My grandfather played my uncle's. My dad still plays. You know. Wow. So were they professional or they just did it for fun? My grandfather, so he was a career service man. He was in the Air Force and he was a staff master sergeant. And he played hockey talks on the weekend. He was in charge of booking all the NCO clubs on the base. So he would book like Charlie Pride or Johnny Cash by Romandrell and his band would open up and then back them up. Oh, wow. So he was a country and western purist. Did you get a go to any of those shows when you were young? No, well, so this was this was back in the 60s. My dad's 73. I think now he was born in 53. And I was born when my dad was like 43. Oh, wow. So by the time I came along here, but he was, you know, a lot of my family traded in like, uh, I think they associated music with a lot of the secular lifestyle. So they kind of when they all got born again and into the church. That's around the time I came around. You know, so the music was really associated with church, but I was really interested in that other stuff. Isn't that interesting? Like wonder why there's a division. You know, I think about it a lot. I think that's the closest you can get to divinity. Right. You know, is music really allowing yourself to get that close to something. And the conviction that you feel in a church, you know, that's a good common thing for everybody to, you know, on the same level. And, um, yeah, that's part of the church experience that everybody having it together, experiencing it together as a group, being together live in a room with a great musician on stage when everyone's enjoying it together is very much a transcendent experience. Yeah. It really is. It's drinking the cool. Amen. Yeah. It's like there's a beautiful moment. You're all experiencing it together. when everyone's enjoying it together is very much a transcendent experience. It really is. It's drinking the cool-aid, man. Yeah, it's like there's a beautiful moment. You're all experiencing it together and you're all clapping and cheering. Well, you're all dancing and singing along. It's a beautiful moment. It really is. Music is like a drug, man. It really is. It's like a beautiful drug. Like the right song when you're on the treadmill, you're like, fuck yeah. You could just keep going, you know? Terre door off the hinges. Yeah, if I hear like little feet skin it back. Yeah. Yeah. There's certain songs that just give you fucking energy, man. We're like bitch by the Rolling Stones. Oh, yeah. That song, if I need to pick me up in the morning, that song comes on. A great weightlifting one is prison sex by tool. Oh, yeah. Oh, you know that song? Tools of band that I never really delved into. Oh, they got some no-danny carries. I know them because of my buddy, Brent Hines. Did you ever listen to Mastodon? No. Man, I gotta send you some choice cuts, but Brent was, he was the fucking man. He just died back in September. I took him on the road right before that, which was, Oh, really? Which was messy. Oh, really? Brent, he had Mastodon kind of had a mutual agreement that he would leave the band. So he was doing his solo thing. And like, he's one of my heroes, you know? And I was like, I'll take you out, sure. And like, he just threw it together somehow. And then I ended up having to kick him off the tour, which is like, broke my heart. But he kind of forced my hand. The night in question, like, I walked outside and he had this little tour manager named Angela. And she was crying. And my tour manager was holding her and she was crying. I was like, fucking, hey, what happened now? She said, I walk into the dressing room and Brent pee on the floor. And I said, no, no, you have to stop. So then he pee in his mouth. Oh, Jesus. Right. And like, I know. So he just had to picture my boy just like, pissing and she's like, you have to stop. And then he's like, oh, this is the system. And like, at his funeral, I told Matt Pike from a sleep. I told him that story. And he was like, yeah, like, and normal. He's like, it's a party trick. That's a Wednesday move. And I was like, yeah, no, it's hilarious. But it really offended her and she got very upset. And the whole thing just fell apart. And you know, that was the last draw. That was this and then is all about. that was what did it really, but you know, get him some paper towel. It's fixed this. I was ready to fix it. But like his whole banding crew, they were like, it's not working. So what was he doing? He was just just partying a little too much. And I mean, I really love that dude. Like brother, you know, I miss him. Miss him a lot. Sometimes it takes a really wild crazy off the rails person to make music or make any kind of. Or that just moves you drives you crazy. Yeah, I mean, he was a true artist. You know, like he was insane. Yeah. Like you got to have friends that your wife doesn't particularly love you hanging out with. Right. Yeah. There's something about that friends. Yeah, that's a lot of my friends. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but those are the ones that make the magic. Yeah. There's something to it. And again, it is a magic thing. That the, you know, and this is coming from someone with no music. I have no talent. And so for me, like watching it and experiencing it is a pure experience because I'm not like, oh, I don't like how he played that chord. I don't like how I don't know anything about music. I just know I love it. I mean, Rick Rubin, you know, he's held onto that. He wants to be, you know, and I think he has been like the, you know, the voice of like the consumer. Mm-hmm. He hears what the consumer wants to hear. And what he knows what he likes. Yeah. And he's got a very interesting mind, you know. He's a very interesting person to talk to. His perspective on things is very unique. I like him a lot. Really like him a lot. I like talking to him a lot. And he sends you the wildest text messages. He didn't text messages. Oh, yeah. He's some fucking conspiracies that are often sometimes have to say, hey, that's not real. Oh, yeah. But every now and then it'll send you some, some ones that make you question reality. I like the thought of you talking Rick off of a ledge. Not necessarily talking off a ledge. Just letting him know that some of the, you know, it's hard to know what's real and what's not real out there in the world. If you're not like deep into the bowels of conspiracy theory movement. Yeah. You know, right. But again, I got like Rick, like his sensibility, like he has a, it's like a very valuable position person just with a unique mind that is just helping shape how music gets produced and created. And because like whatever, whatever it takes, whatever, I mean, it's not a science, like a math thing or a, it's not carpentry, like you have to level this and square that. Like, no, man, there's like some weirdness and there's love in there and hate in there. And there's a lot of stuff that it's intangible. It's hard to describe like why this is better and why this is good. But when you hear it, you know, when you know, you know, you know, there's sudden riffs, you know, there's some riffs that just like, oh my God, like the beginning of a bougie child's slight return. Come on. Yeah. Come on. Just the beginning you hear, you go, oh, yeah. Yeah, dude. Yeah. I mean, Dan Ourback's another one who's just, oh, yeah, I love those guys. defected the riff. Yeah. Josh. Hommy. Yeah. Stone Age. Oh, yeah. You know, Rick's a funny woman. I love his philosophy on music too. He just, he looks at it the same way that Colonel Bruce Hampton looked at it. Colonel Bruce Hampton and Rick both believed that music is like pro wrestling. You know, is Colonel Bruce Hampton the Colonel from Elvis? That's not different. Different Colonel. This Colonel Bruce Hampton. Colonel Bruce Hampton, he was kind of like, so Billy Bob Thornton put him in a movie in Slingblade. Um, he was, I can't remember his name in the film. But yeah, Colonel Bruce Hampton, there he is. He died on stage at the Fox Theater. Wow. In Detroit? No, in Atlanta. Oh, okay. His story is he was born with two birth certificates. Um, he was just a wild man. He was just, he was all about, like instead of instruction, he called it outstructure. And like Billy Bob worked on a documentary about him in like 2003. Um, and he was just, like his whole philosophy on music and just like why we do it and just pointing out the hilarity of like the business and like the coffee getters as he referred to them. You know, we have a whole industry built around coffee getters now. You know, all the people that got the suits, their lattes and stuff in the morning, now they're calling the shots. And that's a, it's a weird place to be. But the Colonel Bruce Hampton, you know, I just, what I do now is I just buy copies of his, uh, his documentary basically frightened. And I just give it to people who aren't hip to the knowledge. So I'll send a copy down here. Yeah, it's called frightened. It's called basically frightened. Basically frightened. Colonel Bruce Hampton story. Is it available anywhere? Like is it on Apple or Amazon? It's not streaming anywhere. No. So I just, I just collect the DVDs when I can find them. Oh wow. Is it, can you buy a DVD anywhere? Like if people are listening to this and they want to get a hold of it? Yeah, like eBay. That's the only way. That's, that's the only place that I found him really. Yeah. And you'll be bidding against me. Oh my gosh. He's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's, he's of it. Yeah. Every time I get one away I buy another copy. Wow. Here's, I found a thread on Reddit people looking for it and someone's like just mail me the DVD and I'll copy it for you. Like you can't find it anywhere. Yeah. Wow. It would be cool if it were to be streamed somewhere. It's a fascinating story. Why is it? $15 on Amazon, but I don't know that it's going to be even real. Right. They might just send you a fucking brick. But he, he was somebody like, you know, widespread panic that was like their guru, you know, Colonel Bruce Hampton, Jimmy Herring, you know, uh, O-Till Burbridge, who I'm in a man with now, um, you know, he started with Bruce really. I've never heard of him before. And you know, it's just, he's one of those guys that, you know, he was like, to the southeast, he was like our Frank Zappa, you know, like our son, Ra. Oh, wow. He's just all about just the outrageousness. And, you know, I have a lot of friends who spent a lot more time with him than I did. But like he was one of the first people that took notice to what I was doing when I was like 15, you know, and then I remember like being in Germany and finding out that he'd passed away on stage, which he predicted. He did. Really? Yeah. He said that's how he was going to go. If you keep performing long enough, Carlin died in the hotel room on the road. Really? Yeah. I'm gonna have to download this for you real quick. There you go. It's unlisted on YouTube. Oh, perfect. I'll be there tomorrow though. After this episode gets released. Yeah. Can you download it? I can try it. Yeah. Oh, and this is download it too. I'll figure it out there. Okay. Jamie to the rescue. Sorry folks, if you get in this. He's my little fine still. I found that. Yeah, maybe. Somebody can upload it on one of the other social media platforms. That's cool. I'm interested in checking it out. I love music for inspiration. You know, it's one of the unique art forms that inspires you to create. It inspires you to go do things. Whenever I see a live band or a live performer, I can't wait to go do something. I'm going to go right. I want to go perform. I want to pump. I want to pump. Pomboni, who's a great comedian. Do you know Pomboni is? Yeah. He used to write for Richard Pryor. He was one of the real OG's back in the early days when I came to the comedy store. I was kind of blown. He was one of the guys I was always nervous around being around until he liked me. So he didn't mean like, yeah. Pomboni hates you. Fuck. But he gave me that advice once early on. He said, if you want to entertain people, he said, go be entertained. He goes, you want to entertain honey? Go be entertained. Homey. Go see some other shit. He goes, go see something. It gets you to go see a great movie. Go see a band. Go see something. Be entertained. That's what my process is like in the studio, man. This last record we did. We had a projector. We played like, you know, a giant with James Deiner. We played like, easy writer, big labowski. We were like films that like inspired us. Films that we like really gravitated towards. And all the while, you know, waking up in the morning and reading East of Eden and just like some of these great architects of Americana and just like being inspired on every turn, watching live concert footage of bands that we love. Marshall Tucker, man. It's getting our case. Just inundating yourself with inspiring stuff, you know. Just something to get the juices flowing. Just summon the muse. Something to sometimes we played just the footage of like a midnight cowboy or something. We would record, you know, in the mindset like we were trying to score this film, you know. Oh, wow. Just to kind of get a different approach. I forgot about midnight cowboy. What a wild movie. Is that a good one? Yeah, that was back when Times Square was dirty. Yeah. Now Times Square is one big apple bees. That's when people would go and watch pornography together. And a theater. And a theater. Yeah. Not only that, but it was a thing in the early days of pornography where couples would go out and like Johnny Carson went to see deep throat. Yeah. There's like famous people went to see the film deep throat in the theater. Yep. What was adult entertainment? But how weird is that that pornography like there was always stag films, right? That was the thing that they used to make like in the early days of movies that would film people having sex. And you could watch it like at a stag party, which was like a bachelor party. Right. But then people tried to make films like artistic films that had people having sex in them, which is really interesting that we find that abhorrent like people don't like that in today's society. We don't mind like this, this show from that I was telling you about. Bro, the violence is horrific. The gore and the violence is crazy. That's okay. Just don't suck someone's dick. Don't make them come. That's terrible. Do you remember the movie Bad Bunny? No, not Bad Bunny. Was that Brown Bunny? Brown Bunny. Do you remember the movie Brown Bunny? Brown Bunny was a Vincent Gallo movie that he made. And there was a real sex scene in there. Like how do you say that, ladies' name, Chloe? I don't know how you say it in there. She's really good actress. And she blows him. Like for real in the movie. Like it's a real scene. And the movie is a real movie. But then when it came to the sex part, they actually did it. And people were horrified. Yeah. I mean, that's so weird. Like if it was violence, like if it was a scene where she beat him to death with a baseball bat, people would be like, wow, what a crazy movie. Right. But if it was a scene where she blows him, people like, this is outrageous. And I think that movie ruined Vincent Gallo's career. Really? Yeah, because Vincent Gallo had been in a bunch of movies. It's a really weird guy, like a very interesting guy. And after that, it kind of dipped away from Hollywood. Like you kind of vanished in a lot of ways. And that was the big thing. I remember reading these articles on how outraged people were that they had actually seen real sex in a movie. Like it's so strange that we don't mind violence. Like once upon a time in Hollywood, Brad Pitt takes a lady's head and bashes it into a mental piece and fucking brains are fine. Fine. No outrage. No, everyone. Everyone, okay? Everyone's okay. But if he fucked her, like actually pulled her pants down, you see Brad Pitt's penis and her vagina. This is crazy. Something that we all do. Yeah. By the simulation I would have just gone on too. Right. The simulation of it is fine. Yeah. Like it was a sex scene. And you just see his hips and her face like, oh, and they're kissing fine. Life's not see actual sex. Even if it was like him and his wife. Like if he didn't make a movie with him and his wife and they decided to have actual sex in the movie, people would be like, that's disgusting. Get this fucking smot off the screen. But if they had a movie with him and his wife and she shoots him, they're like, okay, that's fine. Didn't really happen. Right. Weird, right? It is weird. I mean, I did a commercial for like I did a shoot for this car and like they couldn't have me in the car while it was moving for insurance purposes. So they had to like make it seem like I was in the car while it was moving. Insurance purposes. That's crazy. But that's more of a financial thing. Yeah. But the weirdness about sex, the point is like see if you can find that footage of all the people that were in line. was like an old, there's a YouTube video of an old news report of people in line to see deep throat. Right. And again, Johnny Carson was one of them. I think they even interviewed him after the film. Like they went and watched people fuck and like it was a movie. Like, you know, you're watching the Joker or something. Right. Very odd. It is odd. And they got that name deep throat from the Watergate. Did they? Yeah. I thought deep throat was afterwards. I thought the Watergate thing was after. I don't know. I could be wrong. Check under the egg. Okay. So Watergate was what? Seventy four. Seventy four. Was it? Oh, yeah. So the movie came out first. Okay. And so that was after those. So that's interesting too. And you think about like 72 was not that long ago. And people's ideas of pornography were very different back then. A lot of my favorite venues in the country were porno theaters first comedy mothership, bro. All right. Yeah. It was a porno theater at that point in time. And like people cared about like the quality of like the audio production and those films and like, you know, in these rooms sound really good. Variety play out in Atlanta. It's one of the best scenes in American world from London. Okay. Do you remember that movie? American world from London? It's a great fucking movie. One of the best scenes there in the middle of London and they're in an adult movie theater and these people are watching pornography. They're watching a smut film. And while these people are fucking, he turns into a wearable if he kills everybody. I got to check that out. It's a great one of the greatest movies of all time. That wolf that we have in the lobby, that's a recreation. Oh, really? Of the American world. Okay. That's what that is. The thing with Johnny Carson and Deep Throat, I think is like a conglomeration memory. Is it? There's a weird, there is a photo of people waiting in line to see the movie. Mm hmm. But it's like this is it on the screen. Mm hmm. But there was a video of Johnny Carson talking about it after the fact during his monologue that he went to see it. Oh, so there wasn't a photo or video of him at the movie theater? Well, thanks. Oh man, I'm looking for it. So remember what you're talking about? I think remember we might have read an article that listed all of this stuff together. What was that play where they had like everybody was like naked and it was like really a big deal. Was it like hairspray or something like that? Oh, no. In the late 70s, my dad told me him and his friends went to go see this like Broadway production or off-Broadway production where like everybody was like nude and it was like this really. Yeah, it was like this really racist thing. Yeah. And there was a preacher up front just like really just giving him hell, man. And then he got up closer and he realized it was his uncle. My great uncle was up there. Just motherfucker. That's hilarious. Widely cited overview. Many works are quoted note that several mainstream celebrities appear to have seen deep throat, including Martin Scorsese, Brian DePaw, Malatriman, Capote, Jack Nicholson, Johnny Carson, Spiro Agnew, Frank Sinatra and others. Barbara Walters later mentioned seeing it in her memoir. These references are usually brief, but they're pulled into many articles about the film's cultural impact. But that's what's so interesting. It's like that is not not normal in today's society. They even think that a bunch of people would say they went to go see a porn film. I think this is also so midnight cowboy, which is where you guys started this 1969, which is before this and one best picture as the first and the next rated or NC 17 movies. So they started a little bit of a trend then. Interesting. Three years later. Why was midnight cowboy x-rated? The reason? Yeah. Like what was so explicit that they had to make it an X? I would say a little bit has to do with marketing. But I don't know if this reads else. It says a reason. Yeah, I make people want to go see it. I guess. Crazy. This movie is crazy. Standing out here, right here. After consulting with a psychologist, they told to give it a next homeless frame reference and it's possible influence on youngsters. Wow. That's crazy. Today that would be celebrated. Oh, this is a rape scene. I have a rape scene. I saw it in the 80s. I haven't seen it in forever. Yeah, but even, I mean, like in that film, it's like a distant thought that John voice character keeps going back to like the rape scene. Whereas like, it's all the time you saw it. Couple months ago, bro. Oh, really? But like, fucking the deliverance plays on AMC on TV. Right. Right. Which is another rape scene. Nothing's edited out. Sweet like a pig. That won't fuck me out when I was a kid. Oh, yeah. Very much so. Not imagine it like supposedly took place like in the Appalachian like back up, which is like where I grew up. I was like, that's fucking happening. Like here. Because of then shocking sexual content, even more importantly, it's Frank portrayal of homosexuality and hustling, hustling meaning having gay sex for money, which the studio and sensor saw as potentially corrupting to young viewers. The film includes scenes and references to male prostitution, homosexual encounters and brief but explicit situations, including implied oral sex and nudity, which went far beyond what Hollywood had shown in a mainstream drama up to that point. Maybe now it would have just an hour. But also that would be with this never exists. Now it'd be celebrated. It's a film celebrating sex workers. It's weird. But it's also weird that there was a movie that was an actual porn movie that a bunch of people just went to see and talked about. Like today, people want to pretend they don't even watch porn. Meanwhile, I think last check we did, well, I know we've done this before Jamie, like what percentage of the internet is pornography? Internet traffic. Take a guess at that. I bet it's way more than SSRIs, right? I don't even guess right so far. 50%. Oh, I don't know. I would say 30%. I'd say 30% of the internet, but I can be wrong. I don't remember. 30% of the internet traffic is pornography. Let's say that. Maybe it's 40. What's the same as a myth? It's a myth. That's a bunch of people lying about Jurgenoff. I mean, I'm not sure if it's a myth. Okay. Porn makes up a small share of sites. Yeah, yeah, but traffic 30% or 40% while he stated, what about traffic? The amount of internet searches. Yeah, but no, but I mean traffic like the amount of bandwidth. And it's getting lost in this word because I used traffic. No, I used traffic. Hey, he did. Why do we see higher numbers? 30% 30% of the internet is porn. BBC reported tracing one of these popular figures back to single content filter company, press release, not an independent audited measurement. Some advocacy. I bet now today because of YouTube and the amount of streaming that goes on with like Instagram and TikTok, I bet it probably isn't as high as it used to be. The percentage was because there's so much more content that's being streamed now than ever before. Unrelated searches are 13% on the web and 20% on mobile devices. That's funny. It's more on mobile devices. People can hide in the toilet. The content filter company. Okay. I claim comes from this. Yeah, we read that. We heard it right there. So it could be just made up to begin. Yeah, could be. But there's got to be like a number of like the internet traffic. I don't know how you'd get that number. So some advocacy or internet safety groups site, very high traffic shares and storage figures. Example, nearly a third of all internet traffic. But these are rough sometimes opaque estimates rather than peer reviewed measurements. Hmm. Okay. So it's at least 4%. So it says roughly websites, 4 to 12%. That's a lot. Just 4 to 12% of the whole internet is jerk off websites. That's crazy. But the volume in terms of the amount of bandwidth used. But I bet if you went and watched Deep Throat today, it'd probably be pretty pedestrian. It seemed probably would seem just like soft core almost. Right. Yeah. Like one of them Showtime late night movies. Yeah. I mean, it is something that I, you know, I like to save all that. You know, when I get home off the road, see my wife. Yeah. There's some too. That it had a rich point. The woman had an unusual birth defect that came from a doctor who has an unorthodox solution to make the best of her situation. Is that a Deep Throat? Yes. Yes. Oh, that she could just take it. The Birthday Fact. Balls deep, downward, their chin. That guy, Harry Reims, he was like one of the first famous male porn stars. I think he went on to be a real estate salesman or something. Like if you're one of those people that gets famous, fucking, that is got to be a very weekend. Is that where the porn mustache comes from? Oh, yeah. Got it. Oh, yeah. He had a crazy stash. 1947. Wow. What's he up to these days? Did he? Yeah. When did he pass away? 13. Wow. Didn't live that long. All that fucking wasted all his jizz. A bit of shaved off his mustache. He was just anonymous. Just drifting in that traffic. Nobody would even notice him. Yeah. Right. Weird life. Having such a people on camera. Should we add that to the wall? Oh, look at that. Oh, look at that. When did he get arrested? When did he get arrested? If he added to the wall or a private room? And decent. Something. Yeah, we should add that to the wall. Memphis. You got to be up to some no good to get arrested in Memphis. I've got to get arrested for too much dick. This is a parents and deep throat. It was ref by resp by FBI agency Memphis. It's right. There's a conspiracy to distribute obscenity across state lines. Wow. Whoa. He called him forum shopping, but I don't was that mean. Forum shopping. The term for the practice of litigants taking actions to have their legal case heard in the court. They believe is most out to give them a good judgment. They're trying to find they're trying to get them convicted, I guess. Trying to make example of them. So they found a court that would take the case. Like for obscenity? Yeah, no, no, no. And they're interested in court. Miller versus California. Remed to granted a new trial charges were dropped in August. Wow. So they just fence argues the first act that ever be prosecuted by the federal government for peering in a film. It's like the lenny Bruce is swinging dick. And then all these people got behind them. Very surely McLean Warren, baby, Richard Dreyfuss. They all got behind them. Jack Nicholson, Ben Gazzara. Wow. Dick Cavitt. No, he was in Greece. That's the coach. Wow. He was in the movie, Greece, the musical. What? In 1978? Oh, out of fear, as notoriety would rip. Shepherdized the film was bought. He was replaced. Oh, he was cast and he was replaced by Sid Caesar. That's hilarious. Wow. After an eight year, in 1982, after an eight year hiatus from porn, Remes returned to the industry and performed in the film, Society of Fairs, and reportedly received a six figure salary. How weird. Very back then. Weird. It is. The whole porn auger thing is very strange. Because like people want to watch other people have sex because people like having sex. But it's like, but you can't talk about it. But you know, if you say you like it, people are like, fuck as wrong with you. And then they watch it. Very fucking. But it's like, but you can't talk about it. But you know, if you say you like it, people are like, fuck as wrong with you. And then they watch it. But if we could destigmatize it and like not give people unrealistic ideas of what happens in the in the bedroom and and noted as something that is entertainment. I think it's entertainment. The fear is that the women that are in it, the for their rest of their life, there was going to be thought of a certain way. And the men skate, they don't really have a like this, they're they're thought of CD, but they don't thought as like, you know, girls that got used. Well, I think what's going to get weird is AI porn because then you can watch porn and there's no victims. Right. There's no person you feel bad for like all that poor girl everyone's going to know that she sucked dick on camera. She took it in the ass on camera. This is not a real person. So then maybe you can watch that and. Move any kind of victim. Yeah. I don't know. People are fucking weird. People are weird. I'll tell you one thing I've never tried and I'm not going to. I don't want it. Nope. Not going to do it is VR porn. Cause Duncan told me to to be ever see VR porn. It's fucking amazing. Like not going to do it. I'm not going to say they were fucking goggles on jagged off. Joe hasn't left his house in about six months. I mean, you guys and you're watching porn in the people are fucking 20 feet high in front of you. They're bagging. And if you can move around in it like you can move around another VR, you can get really close to watch the dick go in there. That's one thing I haven't tried either. VR porn. Good for you. Stay away. VR in general is weird. You know what's really great though is VR games. Have you ever done any VR games? You know what sandbox is? You ever heard of sandbox? Sandbox they have one in Austin. They had one in Woodland Hills right down the street from our old studio in LA. And it is a place where you go. It's like a big ass warehouse. And you go to these rooms in the warehouse and they have fan set up and it's all like these walls, like it's all boundaries. They put a haptic feedback vest on you and goggles and they give you rifles and the plastic rifles. And then you get dropped into this virtual reality where you fight zombies. Oh shit. It's fucking dope. Dude it's nuts. When the zombies attack you they run at you. They claw you. You see blood splatter in front of your eyes and you gun them down. It's fucking great. There's one called Deadwood Mansion. That's my favorite. And the Deadwood Man. There's a couple of different Deadwood games. I think there's two or three now. I think there's three. I think there's three zombie games that you can play. That's three different ones. No it's here. They have one in Austin. Yeah. It's out at the domain. Yeah. It's out of the domain. It's fucking so fun. My family hates it because they get sick and I wanted this all I've already do. So I'm Father's Day. I make everybody shoot zombies with me. Like it's Father's Day. What do you want to do? Shoot. Zombie. It's like no. Like come on we have to do it. Yeah. Once you do it it's fun. Father's Day is coming in. Father's Day is coming in. I'm going to end you. Turn them in. Okay. At one point in time I had the number three score in the country. No, it was your day. Kill and zombies. Yeah. I went ham one day. One day I was just locked the fuck in. And the key is I'm going to give you guys a pro tip. If you're doing Deadwood Manchin get the shotgun. The shotgun is overpowered. The shotgun kills more things than anything else. It's way better at it. But the game is nuts man. I mean there's zombie rats that come running at you. There's fucking people that are attached to the walls. They shoot down their tongue and wrap it around your neck and they're pulling on you. Show them a clip of it. It's crazy. It is a fucking. It's really fun dude. You'll love it. I'm going to tell you the band to do that. Yeah. That's what you could do. You could do it like six people. He's going there. He's going there. He's going there. He's going there. He's going there. I only know of these two of Austin and LA. You want to put up his in Atlanta? Oh, his one in Atlanta? Yeah. They have to have them all over the place. I don't know. I have no idea why it's not everywhere because it's so fun. It's one of the most fun things you could do with your friends. We've done my wife and I've done it on double dates. You go do that and then you go have dinner. That's great man. It's great. It's really fun. They got tunnel locations now. Oh, shit. They're all over the place now. Yeah, that's great. See if you can find a video of Deadwood Mansion. Oh, Deadwood phobia. Oh, that's the newest one. That's the third one. Oh, there's a squid games one. We've done that one too. The stranger things one. They have so many different deadwood valley. That's another one that's really good. The Deadwood Valley one. Yeah, there we go. So check this out. So this is what happens. You get dropped off into this city. And the zombies are there. And so this is this is you. It's like it's cut between you with the guns and then like this is what you see. This is what it looks like. So but this is more like a video like showing you what it looks like on the outside. But when you're in it, which they would show you what it looks like. That's what it looks like when you're in it. And these dudes are chasing after you're gunning them down. It's really fun. But again, there's a bunch of games that you can do that survive the horrors. You got to save the heroes. There's people in there that you have to save. And there's other people that you have to kill. It's dope. It's really fun. It's badass. So that's a good use of VR. Don't be looking at 10 foot vaginas. Look at it. Go kill fig zombies. You get stuck on a train and as a train is running down the tracks, they're jumping onto the train and trying to get you. You have to gun them down. It's really fun. That seems like something like I could get into. I never played any video games growing up. Really? That's crazy. How old are you? How's it possible? I mean, I just never had much interest in them. Like when I was young, I don't know. Do your friends play video games? By the rest of the band, they all play. And you just say, not not interested. I was just never really into it, man. Well, this is different than a regular video game. Like this is very physical. Like you're running around. You're in a room that's bigger than this room. And you have your haptic feedback. You also have fans that blow air at you. You know, like you see, like it's also cool you off too, because it gets hot as fuck and you're running around. You have this vest on. And when you get grabbed, the vest vibrates. So you feel it? Like, oh, that's sick. Oh, yeah, that's really fun. But it's probably good that you never got into video games, because they're so time intensive. They rob you of your life. You think golf robs you of your life? You don't have to leave the house to play video games. Look at Jamie over there. How about if you play video games, Jamie? Not that often. No? I thought you were a junkie. I actually haven't played in weeks. Ooh, maybe. But you were hooked for a while, right? It's a fun. As I'm thinking in my head, I'm like, I grew up playing video games, but I also wish I was fucking sick of guitar. So there's a fucking trade-off there. And most people I know are sick of guitar. I don't know if I can play video games or play them. So that's a very good point. I did make, I made an effort like a year or two ago. I got a PS5 and I got red dead redemption. I was like, I'm gonna fucking do it. I'm gonna play this game. And I just got, I was like, I feel like I'm just doing chores. And I asked my drummers, he was like, yeah, it's pretty much what it is. Oh, red dead redemption. Yeah. You gotta play something like a first person shooter. You know, play like Quake or something like that. What's the big first person shooter that the kids played today, Jamie? I mean, Fortnite, really? Fortnite, Fortnite is still there. Fortnite's been around forever. When my kids were in grade school, Fortnite was big. Yep. And they just made some weird, I don't, I stop paying attention, but like Star Wars is now in Fortnite. And the games that they made for Star Wars are just like, nope, it's just in this thing now. You just play it in here. Wow, really? Yeah. And it's like they down on the stormtroopers and lifesavers. Whoa. Yeah, my nephews are always hitting me for, what do they call that? Fortnite bucks or a few bucks? A few bucks. A few bucks. I think what, B bucks so they can play more. Yeah, there's row bucks. My kids were always into row bucks for row blocks. So you could buy things, row blocks. But apparently now there's like pedophiles have gotten into row blocks. They try to message people. They ruin everything. They do. They do. Crapes ruin everything. But there's some very fun video games that you shouldn't ever do, because it will fuck with all the other things you do. Like not getting into golf, not getting into video games. Jamie's dead right. That's probably why you're so sick of guitar. That's what it's like. You can make a guitar gently. I can't. Well, there's other things like there's certain games we can play guitar. Guitar hero. That's not the fucking same. No, no, no, but having people learned how to play guitar, because of guitar. They're the game. There's technically a game, like a training called rocksmith, which is where you actually have a guitar, and it's plugged into it, not on run. That's cool. Guitar hero just hitting five buttons. Oh, I see. It just makes red, red, blue, to blue. And that's a timing thing. But as you know, transpose. It doesn't. Oh, but it would imagine that a game that would teach you how to play guitar with an actual guitar would be dope. Like if you get like, you know, like these games, like the sandbox game, Deadwood Mansion, you get a gun. And if you got really good, like staccato has a VR gun game. Staccato, they make pistols. And there's a VR gun game. And you get a plastic staccato. And when you're playing this game, like you're actually pointing the trigger. And when you pull the trigger, there's actually like a muzzle jump. Oh, wow. And so you get a reticle actually jumps up and down a little, your red dot, jumps up and down a little bit. That was, that would be exactly like it would do if you actually shot a gun. So they have to like, re-center it. And so you could run around doing things and shoot stuff and shoot targets. And that's here too. Yeah. And you know, but that's a game that you can get for like meta VR goggles, like consumer VR goggles. And so you doing that could get better at shooting guns. Because shooting a plastic doesn't wave the same, but it's the same shape, the same form. It's a plastic gun. And what they really should do is make one of those things with the weight of an actual steel gun so that you're accustomed to the actual feel of the thing. Yeah. And then, oh, God, why can't they do that? They should be able to do that. Maybe we'll talk to them. But if you did that, like that would be a skill that would actually transfer over. So if they could do that with a guitar, if they could figure out a way to attach like computer sensors to an actual real guitar. This is Roxmith. This is a... There's levels of it. You can slow it down. And what do you play in? Real songs. You picked the song. They're real songs. Right. But what is the interface? Like a guitar. Oh, an actual guitar? Yeah, it's plugged in with the USB cable to the computer. Oh, it's their virtual guitar? No, no, no. I just showed you what it looks like on the game. But... Right. But it looks like an actual guitar. It's a real... Whatever guitar you want to play. Oh. It's your guitar. It's not an old guitar. Oh, no. A guitar is just... The things that vibrate strings and... Ah! Oh, dude. That's dope. It's a digital sound thing. That is dope. I think... After a while, you'd have to abandon that. Right. Yeah, he's good at guitar. I'm saying you need to learn this. Did you learn by lessons or did you just learn by playing? So initially I just learned by just sitting around the house, watching cartoons, playing guitar. My grandfather would teach me something. He'd give me like a project basically. Or my dad would leave me a record to listen to. It was just his old record collection. So a lot of all my brothers, man, a lot of skinner, Marshall Tucker, Ben, that kind of thing. And I would just sit at home all day and just go over it. And then later when I was in high school, I studied jazz theory with Steve Watson. It was like a vocational school for the arts. It was called the Fine Arts Center in Greenville, South Carolina. And I'd go there in the afternoons and studied jazz theory, which was really beneficial because it's good to put a vocabulary to the things that you kind of knew. But you didn't know how to quite name it. Just kind of learning the vocabulary, learning what things are called and then expanding upon that. Music theory is a valuable tool. Does it help you in writing songs? It helps in like a naturally used song called the Nashville number system. So like you go into a session and like it's all based off of the major scale. So like one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. And then the eight is just the octave of the one, right? So they'll say like we got a one, four, five, you know. And it just represents what the chords are. Yeah. And then you can write math and stuff gets really interesting. You go down this rabbit hole forever. You could print a terence hour back in here. Honestly, and then you can print an ancient Egypt and say this is all vibrations and you can probably translate to high-growth glips into some of this music theory stuff. It's fucking weird. Terence hour trying to find the one. I don't like it in a beat. That's hilarious. But the first time I used the number system with hour back. Oh, really? Yeah. Dan, like his house man for a long time was the remaining members of the Memphis boys who played on like son of a preacher man by dusty Springfield. Oh, wow. And like suspicious minds, that kind of thing. Gene Crisman, 80 years old, playing drums. Bobby Wood, keyboard player Billy Sanford. And his second session in Nashville was pretty woman. And he wrote the riff. Well, blah, blah, blah. Oh, so I walked in and I was early to the session and they were still, they were finished in the session of their first session of the day, which was John Prying. And I walked in and it was just like, wow. Wow. Dan was like, Dan Marcus, get his ass in here and play some slag guitar. So they threw a chart in front of me. I just had to pretend I knew what was going on. You know, that's where you got to rely on your ear. Mm. But it's conversational too. Like if you don't really know what's going on, like you don't want to say much. Yeah. Right. That's fascinating, man. I'm scared of music. Not really, but I'm scared of practicing it. I'm scared of learning it because I just feel like it would be very rewarding. It is. And I'd get very obsessed. Yeah. So I'm to it. Yeah. Listen, man, I'm glad there's people out there like you doing it. Man, I'm just thankful. Well, that's the best attitude to have. That's what I think. I think gratitude is the best attitude to have. Yeah. Anyone that's doing what they actually want to do, what's going to propel you forward and keep it going is probably gratitude. Yeah. Just be happy that you're able to do one of the coolest fucking things in the world for a living. Yeah. Kind of amazing. Just and don't be an asshole. Don't be an asshole. That's it. You'd be surprised how hard it is to follow that one. I know, right? A lot of people fail. Well, thank you Marcus. Thanks for being here, brother. It was fun. I enjoyed it. What's that? Oh. Anytime. Do it again. All right. Bye, everybody.