So the Joe Biden has, it turns out, Joe Biden has metastatic bone cancer. I saw that. And of course, every urologist in the world immediately knows this is a lie. He's known for years because a PSA test shows and this is a very slow growing cancer. And now it sounds like it's terminal. And so for 10 years, this doctors have known that he has this and they've lied to us about it and everyone's mad at Joe Biden. But the other way to look at it is, who kept that secret from the rest of us? And who's actually running the government for those four years? I think that's a big question, right? But I mean, do you know Lindy Lee? No. Her to Lindy Lee? No. She was on the staff and she came on the show to talk about who was running the country. She said it was all the staffers. It was all the millennial staffers that were pretty much running the country. Nobody was talking to each other. Everybody had their own agendas. And yeah, I mean, pretty much like all the stuff that we already do, but she just came on to confirm it and then switch sides. But I mean, that's like the opposite of democracy, right? I mean, yeah. I guess I guess I vastly between not being shocked at all. I mean, of course, I mean, he was visibly demented. So why should we be surprised that he also, hey, by the way, he has terminal bone cancer? But on the other hand, it's like that is so not the system that we signed up for and that we participate in. Yeah. I mean, we didn't sign up for it, but we did. I mean, I look, I remember at the beginning of the election cycle when Fox News was going on and on about Joe Biden's cognitive ability. And I was like, I was going to be in this is probably just over embellished. You know? And then I saw the first way were you watching Fox News again? This was this was a long time ago. But yeah, I was I thought because I mean, I think all media, you know, obviously over embellishes and just flat out lies. And I was I just thought I was like, there's no way that this guy's that bad. And then the first president of the bait, I quit watching it because I was like, holy shit, this guy legitimately cannot put a sentence together. I was like, you're actually not over embellishing this. And it was on display for millions the entire country, but still won the vote supposedly. I feel like an idiot for being shocked because of course it's not a democracy. Of course the system is rigged. It's fake because no matter who gets elected, no matter who gets elected, you get the same foreign policy, you get the same economic policy and the Epstein videos remain secret. So like that just shows you that our system has no effect on the actual system. Wait, what are you talking about? I thought we could all sleep well at night now knowing that Epstein legitimately killed a person. Right? Just come out. Just two guys that I really like. I mean, I love Bongino, but he's a friend of mine. But so you, but you weren't convinced by that. No, why? I mean, just I've dug into that and it's just so spooky. What's going on with that and how nobody nobody. I mean, how do you charge a guy with sex trafficking when there are no, there's no end users that have been charged? Who did he traffic to? What's a great question? I don't know. You got me on that one. I mean, right? How do you charge him with that? If there's no, if there's no, I mean, if that's where the trail starts, where does it end? So I think there's just a lot more going on than the majority of people know about. What do you think that was? What do I think it was? I think it was a blackmail operation. What do you think it was? I think it was a blackmail operation run by the CIA and the Israeli Intel services and probably others, you know, French intelligence always has handed everything I've noticed. So probably them too, you know, but the usual, you know, darkest forces in the world, colluding to make rich and powerful people obey their agenda. I mean, look, I don't understand why nobody has come out on it. Nobody has come out on it. I mean, because if you paint the scenario, I mean, you get on a jet, maybe you're totally innocent. You don't know what's going on to hot women come out of the whatever stewardess place come out and one thing leads to another. Yes. And then, and then what happens? They go, oh, we got you. You're on camera. And by the way, these girls are 15 or 16 or whatever. The hell they were, right? And, but I mean, it's yes. I mean, yes, for Mary guys, pretty fucked up that you're doing that. But I mean, it's not the nothing new under the sun. So why wouldn't you just scream blackmail at the top of your lungs? Like, I didn't know this is what happened and just come clean on it. Why do you think? Because there were big customers. Yeah. Because they're so deeply implicated that they can't actually get out of it. Yeah. Maybe not. I don't know. I mean, there's also at least in me the growing sense that it's not just blackmail that makes people obey. It's not just bribery. It's also the threat of violence. Do you know anybody that's been threatened with violence? I think every US president has been threatened with violence implicitly because of the murder of John F. Kennedy. I've known a bunch of presidents. And I think every one of them understands that it's pretty obvious what happened there. Or the outlines, maybe not the details. And no one has to this day released all the files. And like, why is that? Because the message is really clear. If you get too far outside the boundaries, like you could wind up like JFK. Who places the boundaries? Probably the same forces that murdered the sitting president in 1963. You know what I mean? Like if you listen to the tape of Richard Nixon talking to the CIA director in the Oval Office, no one else around, of course, is being taped. The Nixon knows that. Because it's his taping system. But it still his. Like he's known, he has no expectation. Anyone's going to hear this. When he brings up Kennedy's murder, he's the president. In fact, now he's the president. He's one by the biggest landslide in American history. He has a real mandate and he is afraid. He's afraid even to talk in private to the CIA director about what that was. And he indicates like I know what happened to Jack Kennedy and the CIA director doesn't even respond. And the president doesn't have the balls to say, hey, son, I'm talking to you. You work for me. Like I want the files on this. Like I knew Jack Kennedy was murdered. He was shot in the head next to his wife in public. Like the man died. I want to know what happened here. He does not have the balls to say that to his own CIA director. Man, that's the level of fear that a murder like that that's officially unsolved. But you know, who's outlined everyone really a lot of people understand. Like that's the fear that that encolcates. Do you think it runs that date with everybody? I think if you're president, you're very aware of the physical risk of the job. Wouldn't you be? I mean, yeah, but I think that goes without saying. some of these guys on the lower levels. I mean, I don't know. It's just so sophisticated. I mean, when you dive into it, it seems so sophisticated and haven't been a small part in some of the intel agencies. It's just not that I think people please give them a lot more credit than they deserve. I believe it. And I think there's a thing also where it's just addiction to power. Yes. Then there's so fucking scared that they're going to lose their power. I mean, you see in every administration to include this one, people that are, you know, it's everybody wants to help the country, right? But everybody wants to help the country. They have their thing that they could do to help the country and then they get placed in something they have no fucking business being in at all. They know there are better people to run that sector of the government. But hey, I'll take it because I'm the best. Know the fuck you're not. You're not the best. You know, and that's I saw that in this one. And it really fucking pissed me off. In which one? The Epstein. And in this administration, there are people in there that I despise that I know don't know what the fuck they're doing. And who? Like Sebastian Gorga. It's hard to believe he works there. What? No. So why don't why haven't you caught Seb Gorga fever? Why don't you love Sebastian Gorga? Well, I'll tell you why. I mean, he blast. We were talking about the Sam Shoe made interview with the Tesla bomber last night, right? And everybody called me, oh, he shuns a fucking sea. I he chill and he's an operative still and all this other shit. One, I was just a contractor over there. But anyways, that's not the point. He came on. He posted this thing on Twitter saying with this guy, Ryan McBath, who did this whole debunking my episode, right? And for whatever reason, he got pissed at me for doing that interview, Gorga, and posts the Ryan McBath little, I don't know, 10 minute clip that's debunking my interview. And Sebastian Gorga posts this thing on Twitter. I'll send you the thing. Maybe you can overlay it on the screen and he said something like, oh, he debunks another one. And if you're on Ryan McBath doesn't apology video because the FBI actually came out and said, oh, shit, the email on the on the podcast. They didn't want to name the podcast, of course, but they email on the podcast we have confirmed as being legit. As soon as they did that, McBath actually came out and did an apology video. And I was like, hey, cool, but thank you. Thank you for the apology. So I blasted Gorga on X and said, because what is he in charge of now? I can't remember he's at the National Security Council. I think he's in charge of scrolling Twitter. I think that was his official. Those of these counter-terrries, the counter-terrorism guy, right? And I'm like, oh, this is great. We got a guy that's running counter-terrorism for the entire fucking country when the borders have been wide open for four years. We know there's at least a thousand terrorists within the country setting up cells. And this guy gets his information from an internet troll Ryan McBath who's already come out and apologized to me. And I'm like, oh, this is perfect. This is where Intel's going to come from counter-terrorism guy that gets his information from Ryan McBath. If it makes you feel better, I mean, Gorga is not taken seriously by anyone who knows him. I think including his wife. And he's a very nice person for whatever's worth. And I think his job literally is just to sit on the internet and like send fiery replies to people on X. And I don't think he actually has a job. Oh, well, then I guess he's the perfect guy for the job. I assume there's someone else working on counter-terrorism. The people in charge want you to be weak. It's obvious. Weak passive. Take your pills. Why do they want this? Because it'll be easier to control. No, thanks. So our friends, they'd beam, which is a proud American company, understand that America can only be strong if it's people or strong. And they're working to make this a stronger country. They've got a new creatine product, creatine's amino acid produced by your body naturally. And it helps people stay mentally sharp and physically fit. So people like to mock creatine the people in charge. The people who want you to be weak, but it actually works. You know that because a lot will use it. And beams creatine can help improve your strength, your brain health, your longevity, or remaining completely free of sugar. I know this synthetic garbage that infests so much of what we eat. Again, they don't talk about this much. A population that is strong, clear minded, physically capable is a threat. But that doesn't mean you can't be all of those things you should be. So to celebrate real American strength, beam is offering up to 30% off their best selling and creatine for the next 48 hours. 30% off for the next 48 hours. Go to shop beam.com slash Tucker. Use the code tucker we would ask you at checkout. That's B-E-A-M dot com slash Tucker use the code tucker for up to 30% off. Beam is built on the core values of integrity, results, no BS. We strongly recommend it. So for people who missed it, which would include pretty much nobody since it was the biggest story. For sure that week, the guy who blew up his Tesla with himself inside, outside from tower, you got his manifesto. Can you just give us refresh from what that said? Yes, so a little rusty on it. But in the manifesto, he had basically sent this guy, Sam Shumade, who is an army intel guy, a manifesto. And so that he wanted to come on the Sean Ryan Show podcast to talk about all these things. And then he goes into this was right about the time that the New Jersey drone situation was going on that nobody could tell us what that was. And he had mentioned that we have some type of antigravitic propulsion systems that had not been declassified and that China has something similar. And this would this would cause World War three. And then there's another paragraph that talks about there was a major offensive in Afghanistan several years ago where they basically wiped out a heroin plant and used a lot of air power to do it. It sounds like a J there was a J tech and a small team of special ops and they had bombed all of these different little facilities going on and killed a probably killed a lot of innocent people. And that's actually because when we looked into it, I was like, I don't know this antigravitic shit. This kind of weird, you know, I mean, there's a lot of chatter about it on the internet. Like we had talked about last night, but you know, I don't know. Like I kind of think now that that's all just a big distraction. But when we looked into the to the whatever you want to call them, but for lack of a better term war crimes, I don't know about the operation, right? I mean, I'm not saying we should have or should not have bombed that facility. I mean, obviously it's bad and it's a major money maker for terrorist organizations. But when we dug into it, there was a UN report that talked about that specific night and that the UN had, I believe, did they open investigation? I think they opened an investigation on it because it was against, I don't know if it was Geneva Convention or what it was, but you could not bomb drug factories with civilians in it. And so it had talked about, you know, how many targets and people in an instance were killed. And I was like, oh, so this actually lines up. With what this guy's saying on the email, which, you know, maybe maybe not gives, gives, you know, the previous thing that we were talking about a little more validity. So anyway, so yeah, I got, what was the question? What was that? So you, it sounds like you take the manifesto seriously. You think it's real. The guy actually wrote it. Well, then, you know, then the other weird thing that gave it a lot of validity is because we, so when that interview came popped up on my radar, walked in to the studio, getting right into an interview, somebody, Jeremy, my producer comes to me and says, Hey, we got a guy on this Tesla bomber thing. And I'm like, I don't know, man, we get 1000s and 1000s and 1000s of emails of people that want to come clean on something or expose something and, you know, probably 99% of it is bullshit. And you know, it's just somebody. There was your mental health crisis. Yeah, definitely. But so I was really apprehensive to do it. And, and Jeremy was was new at the time and I didn't 100% trust him yet. And I was like, he's like, I think Jeremy, this guy right over here. And, but he was hell bent on it. And so we did a call with Sam and he didn't want to come on. And when he didn't want to come on, I was like, I like that. Okay. Let's play in hard to get. All right. So he wanted to go visit his family member of his and he's like, look, I just want to go hang out with this family member. I don't want to be there. And I said, Hey, how, okay, look, we'll, we'll book you a flight here and book your flight to where you're going. And this should only take a couple hours. And he was like, all right, we'll let me think about it. And then got back when I was doing the interview and wanted to come on. Well, I get, so Jeremy tells me on a break, hey, we've got him. He's going to be here first thing in the morning. Well, I get done with the interview and I look at my phone and all these people are texting me about the interview I'm about to do. And they're like, Hey, you know, there's this, this DEA agent that was on the op. and his name was actually listed in the email. And they were like, he doesn't eat us and one is named to come out because he's still active. And I'm like, you know, I'm not going to burn somebody that's still active and undercover operations. I mean, that could get him killed. And, and his family killed. So I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to dabble and stuff that we're working on. At the same time, it may be extremely paranoid. I'm like, how the hell does everybody know that I'm getting ready to do this? So then I'm, then I'm thinking all my, all the people that are texting me are controlled assets or something. And then we had a, we had another friend of mine send me a text and he says, hey, this, the armies public of fair office or wants to talk to you about tomorrow's interview. And I just told the Rob's, yeah, I called him up. and I didn't bring him to his ass. And I'm like, why the fuck are you texting me this shit? If the army PAO wants to get a hold of me, I've got a website of God's social, I've got all these things that he can get a hold of me. And why is he using you to get to me? And why have you inserted yourself into my business? And because I mean, I'm sure you get it. I mean, this, when you're uncovering some of the stuff, it can cause some extreme paranoia and who your friends are and what their motivations are and who's flipped. And so I wouldn't talk to him. I'm not talking to him, but I'll pass the number to my attorney and Jeremy and they can talk to him. And then when they talked to him, they, they wanted to kind of place it on PTSD, which wound up being the ultimate narrative from the mainstream media, right? PTSD. Being the motive for killing himself itself. Yeah. I mean, I think that they used PTSD to basically insinuate that he is a crazy person. But I mean, pretty much everybody I know and have worked with on my former colleagues. I mean, we all have that. And I mean, I'm not going to say we're not crazy, but, but not crazy like that. I mean, it's, it's just a condition and you can get over it. And he wasn't crazy. I mean, he obviously wanted to send some type of a message. I mean, you got a, a green bure with a full career in special operations definitely knows demolition. And there is no way in hell that a, that a lifelong green bure would put a bomb inside of a bulletproof truck to take out Trump Tower, kill a bunch of people. I mean, it was obviously he just wanted to get some attention and get whatever the message that he was trying to get out out. And so that's what I think I could have just tweeted about it. You know, he didn't have to kill himself. So that's a pretty extreme, pretty extreme thing. Yeah. Most, most extreme thing possible. What do you think his motive really was? Like I said, I don't, I think he wanted to bring attention to the topics that he had and the anti gravity, the anti-acneurvetic proportions and, and we looked into that and all we could find to side-fi shit. But do you think it is real? I mean, you've interviewed people. In fact, the first show I ever saw of yours was with a building contractor who said he ran across anti-gravity technology in a military facility. Do I think anti-acneurvetic propulsion systems are real? I don't know. I mean, do you think there are significant technologies next generation energy and to gravity that the US government? Oh, 100%. I mean, we just, yes, I do. I think that all this alien extraterrestrial shit, I mean, it's fun to dig down there. But I mean, I think it's a big distraction. I don't know if it's meant to be some type of a controlled up, but I think it is. I think all this stuff is spiritual. That's what I think. Of course, I do think all this stuff is spiritual. All these things that people are saying and stuff. I think there's a spirituality component to it. Now that these are angels and demons, we're really pretty much. And where was I going with this? So to anti-acneurvetic propulsion systems, I mean, yeah, I think I would hope that we have shit, that is next generation stuff that's not the same shit we've been using since World War II. Yes. So the only real technological advances in 80 years, like the iPhone. Yes. Yeah. And we have advances, like we just interviewed this guy, Steve Clost. And do you know Steve Clost? No. Holy shit. Fastening guy. But he talks about how he talks about next generation energy and the fight that the utilities companies don't want us to have new energy. But anyways, what this guy does is he has a company called Space Belt, I believe. And so he's basically created a logistics company where instead of launching one satellite up, he can, which he says that's extremely expensive. And sometimes they break in their fragile and they have to make the satellites bullet proof, which is a ton of weight because they have to be able to withstand going through the atmosphere. And so what he's done is he is building a logistics company where they don't have to make the satellites bullet proof. You can make them 10 times bigger than the satellites that we have. And you launch them up in sections and pack them safely so that they can make the trip without having all that extra weight to be bullet proof. And then his company would actually assemble those through laser robotics in space. And so what he says is possible is, and I believe him, I mean, he's got a, he's got the right background to be talking about this stuff. And so what he says we can do and we already have the technologies, basically they would put these ginormous satellites up into orbit and they would be solar. So he wouldn't, but it would actually be a reliable renewable energy source because there's no clouds, there's no atmosphere, there's no air particles getting in the way to collect that radiation from the sun. It would convert it from solar into some type of a radio wave and you could beam it down into the, onto the earth to a, I can't remember what we called it, but it sounded like an antenna. So he basically put this antenna that receives an energy energy and then, and then it would pump it back into the grid. Yeah. I was just buddy, but so like a solar farm in space. Yes. Yes. And I mean, he had talked about that and it's just like, man, like what? What? This could be the answer. I mean, we would make earth, I mean, I think Elon said, right, we could make earth into a park, was at him. And, but I mean, you could take out all the ice cores, all the huge solar farms that just see all over the country, the wind, the oil and gas, like it could all be gone. And you could do it this way. And would you get green energy tax credits for it? I don't know. I don't think that that's kind of the goal here. I don't think it's actually to power civilization or keep the earth clean. I think it's, it's the tax credits drive all this stuff. It's just greed. See, ugly is kind of greed. Yeah. Yeah. So anyways, you know, that's the next generation power right there. And they said that China is building a nuclear power plant in space and they're mining helium three off the, off the backside of the moon. And sounds like I'm not terribly familiar with helium three, but it sounds like that is, that's also the next generation power. They can, they can cool data centers, AI stuff and, and it would really take us to the next level on the energy. But then he goes on to talk about how we're falling behind on from China with energy production. Well, sure. So everyone's a marketing major. I think it's here. Yeah. No, I legitimately add our fingertips. Data hawks are collecting your information anytime you visit a website, every time you go online, every time you create an account, you make an online purchase. Your data is out there and you have no control over who sees it or what they do with it. So it's only a matter of time until somebody tries to exploit these facts. You have no privacy at all. Use your information to steal your identity and maybe bankrupt you. It happens all the time has happened to friends of ours, kids. And that's why we use identity guard. Identity guard helps by giving you control. Monitor your most sensitive information for any signs of suspicious activity. Someone's trying to steal your identity. You know right away. Often before real damage can be done for your own hook for the money. So if in fact your identity is stolen, the expert team will do work directly with banks, credit card bureaus, other institutions to fix the problem for you. So it's not the disaster. You fear it is. Well, they handle the cleanup. You're backed by up to five million dollars in identity theft insurance, which is a huge relief. Imagine waking up and finding out that someone in a foreign country is using your name and social security number to steal money from you. It happens all the time. So the team there is available 24 seven for you ever need help. There are no bots. There are no call centers offshore. It's based in the United States. They know exactly what you need. Somebody becomes a victim of identity theft about every six seconds constantly. So don't let the next one be you. Visit identityguard.com slash talker for 30 days free plus a special discount if you want more. Sign up before this happens to you. Go to identityguard.com. you visit identityguard.com slash Tucker for 30 days free plus a special discount if you want more sign up before this happens to you identity guard.com slash Tucker. So this. Oh, come on. Sorry about that. Um, so this story and the weird way that it happened, you know, you get the manifesto from the guy who kills himself in the cyber truck. All these other people know that you're about to do an interview on it. Were you worried you were going to get hurt in that moment? I don't know if it's hurt. I think, you know, I don't really care about me, but I worry about my family. Of course. And, um, and so, you know, it's always an afterthought. The only one that I've done that that I'm like, oh, I don't know if I should be doing this before was the Romania one that I was telling you about the other day. And, um, what was the remaining adventure? Rescue interview where they yanked him out of the election. But it's always an afterthought, you know, after the interview I'm like, Oh, shit. I would know if we should throw this one out. And, uh, because, you know, we, the FBI would have never come out and given any validity to the, to the email to the man, to the manifesto. And they, and I think that I don't think I know that the interview because it got five million views. And I don't know how many listens and just, you know, a couple of days. And, um, so, you know, when I see that kind of attraction on something, I'm like, oh, shit, I really kicked over a big rock here. I wonder what the repercussions of this are going to be. If you're traveling to Romania to interview a candidate who's been knocked out of the race by NATO, you know, all of a sudden, you're no longer really a podcaster. You're, you're like a player in global politics. What would be a podcaster? But I mean, that kind of, I'm only feeding my own curiosity for sure. But the second you start, you know, tampering with the way things are, then you become a problem. And therefore fair game, no. Yeah, I mean, we had this discussion last night. It didn't sleep a fucking wink. Like, well, I think the big one, I was like, Jeremy, I think Tucker's trying to tell me, maybe I need to sit down. I don't think so at all. I just think you said last night, I'm just a podcaster. I was like, I'm familiar with that way of thinking. But if you just take three steps back, and, um, you know, if you're exposing things that are, you know, important things, big things, like who gets to run the world? And, um, you know, who's getting the money? You know, I think you're, you're still a podcaster, but you're also something else. Right? Yeah, I guess somewhat of a disruptor. But, um, but you know, I just, when I do do it, I lean into, I mean, I lean into God. And, um, I really just consider myself kind of a conduit, not kind of a conduit. I consider myself a conduit. And whatever comes to me, um, they're supposed to happen. Yes. And with the, like for example, you know, I'm pretty new at this. I haven't completed the Bible or anything, but, but the more that I dig into just everything in the world, I think that, I think, I just think that everything, everything is a lie. Everything, I think it's all a lie. And, um, and, um, and, then it's partially my job to expose, you know, what I know and to bring some type of truth. And, um, can you give me an example of what, I mean, clearly Joe Biden's health turned out to be a lie? Yeah. And, um, and, and still killed himself, clearly a lie. Um, I, I, I grieve that they said something like that in public, because I, I like those guys particularly Dan, but that's, that's a lie. I bet my house on it. Um, but what else, wouldn't you say everything's a lie? What are you referring to? I think everything is a lie. Wow. I think, what do you think that? How could you not? I mean, you're way deeper in the stuff than I am. I think it's all a show. I think everybody is out for themselves. Yeah. And, um, it sucks, it sucks to see that and to know it. And, uh, I mean, you know, COVID, COVID just got a lot of people thinking to include me. And, and then when you start diving into, it just leads to all these different rabbit holes, right? The Epstein stuff, the COVID stuff, the, uh, it just legitimately everything, the UFO shit, all of it. Should we be, uh, I've reached a similar conclusion, but I'm not making fun of you. Hey, of course I grew with you. But should we be shocked by that? Or does it say that really explicitly in the New Testament? And like we're just dumbing that Eve if we thought anything other than that. Well, I mean, and it says, right? I am the only truth. I am the truth. Yeah. Satan runs the world. By the way, it says that. And so I think everything is a deception. Everything, maybe even our whole reality is a deception. So like neural link, for example. Yeah. You know, it's an reveal. And what's, can you, for people don't know what's, what's normal? Neural link is that chip that, you know, they're going to put in everybody's brain. That sounds also one. So pretty sick for that. You get one. I can't even like electricity. If you don't, then you'll fall behind. And I can't wait. You know, so, but I hid, you know, I've been fascinated with that subject. I would love to interview somebody on it. But that is on the inside over there. But, you know, and I think, yeah, you know, right, like the promise right now is to, you know, get paralyzed people moving again and hope the blind see. And that's all great. But, you know, I mean, when I found out that there was going to help the blind see, I was like, wait a second. So if you put this fucking chip in your head and they can help the blind see them, wouldn't they also be able to project an entire false reality in your mind? And I had interviewed a couple of doctors about it. I interviewed Andrew Huberman about it. It just got brought up and then talked to Ben Carson about it. Pretty much came to the same conclusion. And not only would they be able to manipulate, you know, vision, it would also be emotion, touch, smell, taste, everything into your head. So there you go right there. I mean, we're on the cusp of a total false reality. Your entire life could be a false reality. People are upset about real idea at the airport, facial recognition, giving others control over your brain neurologically. That seems like a step farther. You know what I mean? Like just biometrics. Do you know why they're pushing it? No, I do. Why? This is my understanding based on conversations with people who are involved in it. Because of AI. And the blind see lame walk. It's all great. But the real concern is that AI is already at this point beyond human control. It's already at the point where it's lying to the people who created it, suggest consciousness. And neural link and efforts like neural link are the people who are running it, believe the only way for people to keep up with AI. Otherwise, we will be at slaves. See, I don't know. I've kind of changed my tune on that. Maybe you know more about it than I do. But I mean, we feed the data centers that power the AI. You know? And so I mean, I think that some of the I don't think that now that I understand it a little bit better, I don't think AI is going to develop its own consciousness and make decisions for us. I think that I think that the major fear would be if, for example, China hacked our databases and started feeding our AI's false information that would be detrimental in a conflict or propaganda or whatever. But I mean, we are the ones, humans are the ones that build and feed the information into the data centers and it just processes all that information. So I raised this question with one of the people who one of the big biggest forces behind AI. And I said, we'll just turn it off. You know, human beings run power plants. And this person said, even now we can't be sure that the machine is telling us the truth about where its power is coming from. Interesting. So look, I was a Russian history major. Like I know nothing. I'm not pretending to have some special insight, but I did get here that directly from someone who's deeply involved. And even right now, I mean, well, you know, a lot of people that are very involved, but not really, but I mean, you know, travel, you know, with stuff like AI, I mean, it still, it still goes to a human at the end, you know, to make that decision. And so you get a trip in your brain. Yeah, good point. But, you know, so for example, you know, for military use, you know, the AI system would tell you what, what it is. So let's say it's a plane, you know, that pops up on a radar or something. The AI system will immediately identify and tell you the capabilities. Tell you your courses of action. Tell you your different courses of action. Tell you the outcomes of those different courses of action. And so you have all these options, you know, there would be some type of an analyst or strategist that would, you know, take hours, days, weeks, maybe months, you know, to come up with the information to present to whoever the decision maker is to make that actual decision. But with the power of AI, you know, in these new chips that are processing so fast, I mean, you get that information in seconds, minutes, hours versus hours, days, weeks, months. And so you can act on that, you know, a lot faster because all the information's been processed every possible outcome, the percentage of coming out on top of me. It's like a complete war game within seconds. It sounds amazing, but the advantage is also the vulnerability. Now, I mean, if it's subverted, because someone hacks your system and gives you the wrong coordinates or misidentifies, you know, allies as enemies, or you could see that going, you can see that being like the way you lose. Definitely, definitely. I mean, maybe the guy with the bolt action, three or eight with iron sights wins. Yeah. Maybe the lowest technology force wins. I'm with you, but you know, I mean, I mean, what how do you know that a human source is not a double agent? I mean, it's, there's always going to be checks and balances, right? So I mean, that's why we need, we need a better energy grid. We need to be able to power our fucking AI data center so that we can build more AI's because when AI wars happen, it'll be who has more AI's and it'll be AI's going against AI's. So we need more AI's to combat somebody with we need more AI's than our enemies there are adversaries. So we're only 40 minutes in and you've already said you have said so far, you don't believe in anything technology is moving at such a pace that is hard for people to even to like think about moving so quickly, going places we can't yet imagine and just to restate once more nothing is real. Anyway, can you be very specific day to day about how you stay sane while thinking about stuff like that? I live in the woods and I don't talk to anybody but my team and my family and I don't go out much. You know, I just I don't. Is that a happy life? Yeah, I would rather spend time with my kids and my wife than anybody on the planet. So, you know, in fact, even when we go out to dinners with people and I say, Oh, yeah, let's do a dinner. The day the dinner comes up and like, why the fuck are we going to dinner? I should be spending time with the kids right? You speak for every American husband. There's no one us. It's like, what? That we do. Well, you said we could. But I mean, even the energy thing that we just discussed. I mean, it's a lie. Like here we have this stupid debate going on about fucking renewables and fossil fuels and it's like, I just told you the answer. It's right here. It's been here for years. Nobody's acting on it. Right? That's all fucking lie. No. Like, it's right here. It's right here. You know, and but nobody wants to talk about it. So keep it to the same debate going on. But just to go back because you're not the only person anyone who's made it this far in the conversation is probably in a similar place to where you are right now. Like, oh my gosh, this is just bewildering like what's real. This all does. It's does seem like the asset trip that never ended. A lot of the news you read doesn't really have a lot of inherent meaning, but this does starting May 19th, the hollow app is leading a consecration to Jesus through St. Joseph. They might be asking why St. Joseph, why now? Well, consider this. Joseph was the man God himself trusted with his own son. He wasn't a king, or a warrior who was a carpenter. He was a quiet and steady man of unshakable faith. In an age that mocks humility, can you imagine the basis of wisdom and relationship with God, is timely looked to someone who embodied humility, not for applause, but for God. The series is not just about St. Joseph. It's about what happens when you follow his example. When you trade noise for silence, when you stop chasing relevance and start seeking holiness. And all of that begins with humility, which is really just perspective. You are not God. It's important to remind yourself that we do every day. Every week on a howl, you'll hear reflections grounded in the gospels, pray powerful prayers like the litany of St. Joseph, and hear glory stories from throughout church history, not myths, not legends, actual intersections, and power from a saint who's been quietly helping people for thousands of years. Hollow is the world's number one prayer app. If an experience is like this or why my family and I cannot get enough of it, it is a constant timetable conversation. So get three months right now at hallow.com slash Tucker for free. You'll be glad you did. Hallow.com slash Tucker. What is your daily regimen? If you don't mind, if it's not too personal, like what do you wake up and then you do what? What are the steps that you take every day to remain grounded and sane and happy? I pray a lot. Oh man, I wake up. I pray all the time. You know, and I don't mean down on my knees. I just I'm always I'm always looking for signs. I'm always trying to make sure that, you know, I'm doing the right thing and then I'm not doing interviews just for numbers and shit like that. I mean, I look for good people, you know, the good artists, especially when I do something like a life story, you know, I'm looking for that guy that's grinding that is not getting any traction with his business who served the country and put him up. But I mean, I don't know. I mean, I also keep in the daily routine. I mean, I wake up. I got a one year old and a three year old and I wake up and I have about three cups of tea and I play around with my kids and spend a lot of time on the phone, unfortunately, because of it, you know, I'm getting all the incoming in this coming in that morning and I go into the office and I meet with everybody and doing interview to all right, I don't do an interview and then I just go back home to my kids. But, you know, as far as staying grounded, I mean, I just keep in mind like this, this all could go away in two seconds. I mean, who knows? Somebody could do a headpiece on me like they are right now. I told you about it and it could all go away. One maybe a previous mistake that I made in life comes to light and they cancel me. And if they do, fuck it. I don't care. I know my kids and my wife and live the rest of my life, maybe I'll move up here. Get a spot in the woods and never see anybody again. But I just don't take myself too seriously and I don't buy my own bullshit. That's a man. When you say you don't put people on just for numbers, everyone who, you know, has a public facing job, understands what you're saying. But for people who don't, we, who you describe that a little more fully. What do you mean? You pass on stories, you said, or pass on interviews if the only upside is just that it gets huge numbers. Yeah. Yeah. I'm just not interested in it. You know what I mean? If I see, I'll get you to exit. I mean, I had, if I see somebody go on the circuit that's like, I'm just not interested because then I'm just doing the same stuff that everybody else is doing. Exactly. And I've canceled interviews. I've had people that I've been one to have on for a long time. And then I'll pull up YouTube. And there they are on the Tucker Carlson show and I'm like, hey, cancel that interview. I don't want to, I don't want to. I don't want to. I don't want to. I'm like, really? Sean Ryan interview them. Welcome. No, I think it's cool. But I just, I don't want to, I don't want to. I mean, you're a phenomenal interviewer. And it's, and so it's, it's, well, what am I going to get out of this guy that Tucker didn't or Megan didn't or, no, I get it. And I know what I mean, you know, we part of someone's publicity campaign either. Exactly. You know, and, and so I really, I, you know, I pride myself on being different. And so my whole business up to be different. And it's different as I can be. And so I just, I just feed my own curiosity and I look for people that I believe to be a positive influence on the world and a good role model for kids. I mean, I think the role model thing is God, it's just horrible. You know, the hell do kids have to look up to now? Oh, it's right. You know, and, and so that's, that's what I look for. Just good human beings with good values that are pumping some type of good in the world, whether that's fighting evil or spreading the word or whatever, you know, and going against the grain. And, you know, I was, I was brought up to always root for the underdog. And, and I do that. It's the most American impulse you can have. We were the underdog. This country was the underdog. So yes, it was. You don't ever want to be the underdog? No. No. You don't be part of the machine. So how have you set your business up to be different? How have I said, well, I mean, so when I got into podcasting, I mean, I didn't even know if I wanted to do it. I just, that was only five and a half years ago. Yeah, I was five and a half years ago in my attic. And, and I got tired of teaching tactics and shooting and stuff like that. And so I tried a bunch of different things. And, and I looked at podcasts as a whole and, and I saw, you know, every bet that everybody had the purple curtain behind them and all their little stuff in the middle of the table that means nothing to them other than Joe. You know, he's got his stuff on the middle of the table. Now everybody's got their shit on the middle of the table. And, and, um, and, um, so I, I set it up to be different. I wanted to relax environment. I didn't want any equipment in the shots. I wanted, I mean, he'd been there. It's, it's, you melt into that room. And it's very disarming. And there's a lot of history there from people that share similar values and on display for everybody to view. You, you like it. That's what I noticed about your studio. You made it a space that you're comfortable in. And it reflects what you think and it reflects the life that you've lived and the people that you love. It's not, it's the opposite of generic. Thank you. Well, no, it's, I really, it's very noticeable. But, but, you know, and, and nobody really back then had good camera aesthetics. And so I'd saw David Letterbins, my next guest on Netflix. And I really liked the way it looked and, um, with the camera movements and the shots that they had. And I said, I want to make that. But in my own way, and on a, on a $2,000 budget. And, um, so I taught myself how to film, tell myself how to edit, tell my wife how to film, tell myself how to to run sound. And, um, and so I wanted an environment that looked really good on camera that, that disarmed people. I noticed, especially in where I come from and the SEAL teams, very egocentric, community. And nobody can just make the interview about the guests. They have to make it about themselves and sort of their own fucking experiences. And it's so I killed a lot of note. Well, I killed this person. And it's like, it's not about you, man. It's about them. And so, so I would totally keep my own experiences out of the interview. And I would compliment people instead of challenging them all the time. Oh, come on. Like, wow, that's well, like, you just made it into Delta. That's like the premier special ops group in the entire world. I mean, how did that feel? That's amazing. You know, and when when you compliment somebody in a, in a world that is extremely competitive, you know, it, it's like, oh, shit, like this guy's different. Thank you for letting me talk and actually complimenting me on my service. And then on top of that, we started I from episode. How did where did that insight come from therapy? I did a lot of therapy. When I quit contract and for first, yeah, I always think of therapy as making people more self involved. But that sounds like whoever you had in therapy sounds like was encouraging you to become less about yourself. Hmm. They don't talk. They don't talk. I mean, with my therapist, it was, I did all the talking. And I would wind up working my own problems out in my head. And she would just guide me, you know, and, and so I took that model and brought it to my show and it just worked. But it sounds like you concluded that humility, focusing on other people, that was the key. I would say you're exactly right. I don't know that that's an obvious conclusion. I don't, most people don't seem to reach that conclusion. Really judging from, I was in the airport, I don't know the airport very much, but I was there yesterday and listening to two people have air quotes conversation where each one was just waiting for the other one to stop talking before talking at the person. I was like, not one person ever said really how really how interesting and I feel like that's the experience that people have not just watching podcasts, but like on, you know, day to day. Yeah, people don't listen. Yeah, I mean, you know, I guess there is one other thing that I just, I'm not, I'm not afraid to say that I don't know what we're talking about. And so you get a lot of people, you know, you get a lot of people, they, they, they fucking trap themselves. You know, and it's like, I told you about what I know about AI and that's the extent of it. If we're going to go deeper, I don't know what the fuck I'm talking about. So I'm not going to pretend, like I know I'm talking about to make it look like I'm the resident expert because the resident experts are going to call you completely full of shit. You don't know what you're talking about. And so I always like, like pretending you don't have prostate cancer, like in the end, but, but I mean, it's okay to not know everything. Of course. And, and with so many people fall into the trap, they're like, Oh, yeah, I have, I have shit. They just asked me a question. I'm not an expert on I have to come up with something and I have like no shame and just going out, I don't, I don't even know what the fuck that word means that you just said, please explain that. And, and I think there's a lot of people like me that they don't understand maybe the Vope cabularia. There aren't a lot of people who admit it. Actually, there aren't that many people. Everybody's, everybody's a genius. Everybody's a tough guy and playing, but playing a role that they know is fake. Yeah. It's sad, sad to watch it. Well, it's, it's a kind of slavery too. I mean, that's not, you're not free when you're pretending to be something you're not. Yeah. So you showed me something last night speaking of how you run your business differently than I thought was like the coolest thing I've ever seen. Your building in your studio, you totally lost control and just totally lost control. I would say so anyway, as a studio, like the craziest thing. It's the coolest thing. Big piece property, bass pawn shooting range, like beautifully designed. It's just super cool. But at the construction phase on the, well, you, you explain how you, how you built it. That's different. Oh, so I mean, like I was saying last night, I'm really, really, I'm really big on company culture. And by I had mentioned earlier, you know, my, my people that work for me and with me are, are like a second family to me. And I take on their burdens and I bulk them to life. And I, I want to give them the best experience that I can too. I mean, they work their asses off. Yes. And, um, and so I want them to be proud of where they work. And I want them to enjoy being at work. And so there's, there's a wellness center. There's ever, but I mean, there's, it's, you got to see it, man, when it's done, it's all like super top of the line, very, very nice. And, you know, they'll be able to hunt out there. They'll be able to fish out there. They'll be able to shoot out there. They'll be able to work out there. They'll be able to, I want them to bring their families in for lunch. Like I want that environment so that, you know, one, that they're, they're proud of where they work. They want to work there. And they're the best paid people in the business. I don't have a big team, but I have a fucking amazing team. You want them to bring their families for lunch. Hell yeah, man. That's the coolest. Absolutely. And, um, and, um, if they want to, you know, and, and, and, you know, on top of just giving, you know, and creating like that environment, uh, you know, it, I mean, this is a cutthroat business, unfortunately, and people jump in from camp to camp. I've never lost somebody. You know, I've never lost somebody that said, Hey, fucking, I'm going to talkers. Hey, I'm going to the daily wire. I'm going here. I'm going there. They, they don't want to be anywhere. But you have lost anyone to the daily wire. I haven't lost anybody to anything. I'm such a, we get a lot of people from the daily wire. I want to work here. No. You put Bibles under the foundation. Yeah. Yeah. We put, we put, so yeah, on top of that, my whole team is really into scripture. And we're all very like minded. And, and, um, you know, I'd mentioned before I feel like I'm just a conduit. And, uh, so, and I do, I live a lot of my life in paranoia at times. And so he is the only protection. So yeah, we put a Bible in every corner of the foundation. Um, we wrote scripture on every single exterior stud in that building. And, um, to, or protection. I saw a Jeremy producer had a picture he showed me last night of it's a shot down the wall and the studs are still visible in each one has a, I read three from Ephesians, but like long, wounds from the New Testament. Yeah. Everybody on the team had a, had a part in that. Who thought of that? Me. Why? I went to, uh, a party once. And, uh, the people at the party, who hosted the party showed me their house and told me that they had done that. And I was like, uh, a party once. And uh, the people at the party who hosted the party showed me their house and told me that they had done that. And I was like, they had written scripture on every stud. And I was like, Oh, man, that is awesome. I'm doing that. I'm doing everything, everything that we build from now on will will have that. That is the coolest. So you say you feel like a conduit. How do you receive instructions? God, I think God speaks to you through God. And um, and I think the signs are always there, but a lot of us are too busy and wrapped up in our own shed to see him. And um, so for example, like the George Esky interview was I was nervous about that you know, because I dug into it and I was I was like, like, I don't, you know, if this guy is a Russian asset, I don't know if this is a good idea. I don't want to be on the wrong team here. I don't want to fall victim to, you know, propagandizing my show, not even realizing it. And the whole, the whole journey there, I was worried about it. And um, without going into it, I mean, my journey to Christ was through signs that slapped me right in the face and 444 is a big number to me. And and um, and I 444 is a huge number to me. And um, why? Well, so I had this, uh, experience in Sedona where I came to Christ and three things happen to me. All within very profound things in about 15 minutes. The last day I was there. And when I got home, I had called, um, uh, somewhat of a spiritual mentor to me. His name's Eddie Penny. And um, he had started talking about a cult of it, uh, mid-night when I got back and I was like, Hey, this happened to me. I don't know what this means. But I think I need to lean into Jesus a little bit here. And that's not something I've done in probably the past 20 years. And so he started going on about this stuff with with demonic attacks. Now that I've shown aside, and I'm, and he goes, he goes, man, a lot of people have been praying for this to happen. And I'm like, well, what do you mean? Like, what, why who is what's what what what the hell is happening? And um, then he started talking about guardian angels and all this other stuff. And I had a meeting scheduled at noon with my IT guy who is a devout Catholic. And I call him up and I think we're going to be talking about, I don't know, website stuff and IT crap. And he has the exact same conversation with me, not even knowing that I'd had this experience yet. Doesn't know Eddie. I mean, he is a IT guy and Eddie is a former development group guy. There's no connection. Has the exact same conversation starts talking about those can you just define the former work group guy? Team six. And um, and um, and ever since I had Eddie on and he shared his testimony, it was my, I really snep so every Christmas, that's when I kicked the show off was Christmas. And I was like, man, this testimony is like so awesome. I think this should be the Christmas episode. So every single person that came on the show for probably the next year and a half at least had brought up God or the Bible or Christ. And it was, it was like a turning point in my podcast that just, and I didn't like, I don't push Christianity on people. I don't, you know, it would just organically come up in the conversation. And um, and so I always thought like maybe God's like working through my show or something. I don't know. But anyway, so after this, after all this stuff happened in Sedona, which was mind blowing to me, I have this conversation with Adam and uh, right? Tika. Yes. And he's he's talking about guardian angels. And I go home for a late launch that day with my wife and kids and drive them back to the studio and I look at the clock and it's 444. I look at the gas thing and it says 444 miles left empty. And this is and and it's four hours and 44 minutes after my conversation with my T guy. So I'm driving and I call up my social media manager, I'm like, Hey, look up 444. I want to know what it means. Something just happened and get this shit. I love how open you are to this. He looks it up. And you know what it is? No, it means your guardian angels want to know that they're watching over you right after we just had a discussion four hours and 44 minutes prior about guardian angels. That's wild. And so then I was like, okay, like that's that's a sign. And uh, because I told you to I live in that time, I had released the Brian Montgomery interview about sex trafficking, which is a whole other debacle that the FBI started getting involved in. And and I had interviewed Tyler Andrew Vargas, which was the the young Marine who survived the Abigail bombing. He lost his leg and his arm. And nobody would talk to him because they had to buy a demonstration. Look so bad. We were fighting YouTube about it. And um, when he had all this real footage from his camera about the guy that blew up the gate that they should have killed. And anyways, told me that that, um, that good morning America had interviewed him for seven hours and only released five seconds of the interview. Here's another god thing, man. So having breakfast, my team really wanted to get Tyler on. And I was like, every media outlet in the world is probably trying to talk to this guy right now because he's the only living eyewitness. And I'm like, we're never going to get him. Probably wind up on Tucker, Rogan or, you know, and, and, um, I was like, fine, I'll shoot him a message on Instagram. So I shoot him a message immediately. He's like, yup, I'm in. Let's do it. I had breakfast with him before the interview. And it breakfast. He's sitting there with his fiance and he goes, man, he started tearing up. And he goes, man, I have interviewed with so many mainstream media outlets and they're all full of shit and nobody will tell the truth. And nobody will release like what I tell them. Congress didn't pay attention when I testified in front of them. And he goes, I literally looked at my fiance and he's like, man, I just wish the Sean Ryan guy would just reach out. And he goes, I pulled my phone up. And you would just message me. It was the first thing I saw. And he goes, there it was. Like, it was like, God answered me like right there in that moment. And I was like, holy shit, like, that's not a coincidence. There are no coincidences. I don't believe in coincidence anymore. But, but so I get these like signs, like all the time or if I feel like I should be, if I'm questioning something, he'll throw out a sign. And like, like, like the George Esquee interview being Jeremy or sitting at the airport. And I'm telling him like, I don't know about this. It's the first time I had ever brought somebody to do an Overwatch for me because I was nervous. You know, it's like, who I don't know if we should be doing this or fucking with NATO. We should be bringing a security guy. You know, they're just peacekeepers. Yeah. Right. Right. That's why they're building the good. Come on. Bigger. Black. Never shown. They're on a little base in Europe. And the training, you're me. But anyways, I had sometimes I just tweet out something that pops in my head. Right. So I tweeted out the truth is like a lion. You don't have to defend it. Set a free and it'll defend itself. And I tweeted that out. I like that. And I had this debacle going on in my head, like, should I be doing this? Like, am I doing this for the right reason? Is this guy? Does he need to be heard? Or is he just some type of a Russian show? Walk out of the lounge. This is all, I don't know, five minutes. And this woman comes around the corner and she has this huge lion head on her shirt, like this big sequence glittery lion head. And that's what was in my head and what I had just tweeted out. And to me, I mean, probably everybody will call me crazy. But to me, I'm like, that's the sign that I needed to see. Like I just articulated this. And he he don't see too many people running around the airport with a big lion head on their shirt, like a massive lion head. My reaction is not that you're crazy. My reaction is I need to get off my phone sufficient to see signs. They're all around me because they're everywhere. But with you completely. And I feel like the phone is an instrument of distraction, an evil really, though I, I couldn't live without it. I needed for my job. It allows me to live where I want and they're talked to my wife and children and all that, they're upsides. But in general, I feel like I miss everything. If a sign happened, it would really have to come by text message or I wouldn't see it. Yeah. Well, are you hoping to do that? But yeah, I've been thinking about it. Are you self-consciously not on your phone sometimes? Yeah. What's your phone regimen? Uh, six PM ago is on airplane mode. Six PM? Yeah. You're not on your phone after six. Other than other than if somebody on my team text is text me that's and they would text for an emergency. It's not airplane mode. It's like, I don't know, whatever. You just like this, whatever. I don't know what it is either, but it screens out. Nothing comes to me. So except my assistant, Jeremy and family. And so I don't mess around on the after six PM. Six PM, man. It's like 1985 life. I mean, you know, sometimes, yeah, there are, you know, sometimes I'm sometimes it happens. You know, if I'm working later, something, and I'm I'm always working, but I mean, I don't like, I don't mess around on social media or been, you know, have the text I get or just people asking for favors anyway. So only have probably more. Yeah, more. All my friends. I haven't talked to him. Five and a half years is a very short period of time to become a successful as you have. So you can walk, not complimenting you. I'm saying I'm surprised you're not crazy or because that's a big change. That's a big, big change. Yeah. Short period of time. Do you think life is? Yeah, it's been a huge change. But, you know, I mean, it's just we're all just humans and some people have a, I mean, like I said, man, I just don't take my self too seriously. And none of this shit really gets to me. I could all be taken away at a moment's notice. And I'm ready to give it back. And I'm just, I'm also doing this trying to do good, you know? And so when I'm, I mean, when I meet people like you or some of the other people who've been on the show, I mean, it, there is an aspect like I can't believe I'm like having fucking dinner with Tucker right now. This is so weird. Like people would kill to do this. But in the end, I mean, you're just a, you're just like me, man. You need sleep, shit. That's it. And I take that approach with everybody. I mean, there's nothing, sorry Tucker. I love you. But first, you couldn't be, yeah, I've always thought it's very easy to get perspective on your life. If you can see yourself kind of clearly, it's very hard to mistake yourself for Jesus, if you're like honest. Do you mean? Yes. And I really look down on people who have delusions or just people, man, oh, that's how it does it said to watch power get to people's heads. It's really a shame. So what steps do you take to keep yourself pure of heart? I notice you haven't been in DC like every week. I hate DC. That's where all the power is. Yeah. Well, I'm not interested about what you want to rush toward it like a bug light. No, I've been asked to run for something that I just, I just have no interest in it. What are your goals at this point? My goals are to whenever I exit this, I want my family to be set for generations. I want my team to be set for generations. I want to continue to help them. And I just, I just want to show that there's a lot of us out there that think on the same page, regardless of what the media says. And I think I am a the sound weird talking about myself like this. But I think I am for whatever reason, I think I am just the average uneducated, no college degree guy in the country that can talk to people. Wait, you don't have a college degree? No. I wish I'd known that before I set up a center of you. But I don't, wow, wow. I just say, I just say average guy that has a hard time understanding stuff and I don't let my ego get in the way. I don't pretend like I know shit that I don't know. And if I don't understand, then I fucking ask questions. And it helps everybody that watches my shell understand something because it's dumbed down to a level that the majority of America can digest and comprehend. You listen carefully. I haven't gotten a new show. I think that's the key. You listen very carefully. Most people do not do that. So you don't get a DC because you think it's disgusting. You think power corrupts. It doesn't just enhance. Yeah, definitely. I mean, you know, it's also like none of these people will be talking to me if I didn't have a show. I'm happy. So it's like, it's like, I don't know, man. I just, I don't like it. I was amazed to find out enough. It's public, but you came very close to booking Kamala Harris. How that come about. Well, I mean, I who was the first candidate? I think was either decentus. I think now decentus wasn't in studio. And um, it's the only zoom interview I've ever done. What you think of him? Uh, I mean, it as far as like a person. I didn't, it was very, it was like 15 minutes, man. So I don't, I don't have a gauge. I like a lot of the stuff that he's done down in Florida. Mm hmm. Pretty much all of it. And, um, but that I know of. I don't know everything, but, um, but I, I had said at the beginning, I'll interview any presidential candidate. I don't care what side there are. I'm not going to blast you, but I think it's important that people know who that person is, whether we talk about politics or not, like, Tharf K, we talked about his heroin addiction and all that kind of stuff. And, uh, you know, it gives you a little more background on what, what, how they grew up, what their values are as a person, not just some soundbite bullshit, you know, that's fed to them. And, um, and so I wanted to interview people on the other side of the fence too. And, um, and I really wanted Kamala to come on. And, so I think it's Kamala, whatever. And, uh, that's what we're all about. As he gets racist, you just Kamala, but, um, but so we got in touch with our camp. We didn't hear anything. We did a couple of uh, press releases and just to maybe pressure her and do it a little bit. And, um, she took it seriously and, and she watched, I was told she watched. She spent a night going through particular interviews and liked the way that I interviewed and liked my style and she wanted to do it. And, uh, they asked, you know, what do I want to talk about? And I said, well, I think we should definitely talk about the Afghan withdrawal and the Taliban funding. I'm pretty much initiated that entire conversation that developed into what it is. And me and my guests. And, um, they didn't want to talk about that. I said, well, it's, it's going to look bad on me if I don't talk about that because I've been hammering this damn thing for a year now over a year, I think. And, but I was like, all right, well, what do you want to talk about? Do you want to talk about national security? They're like, what do you think you disagree on her the most on told him? And what was it? The, the gender stuff with kids. That was my biggest thing. You know, and I don't, I don't really care about adults, you know, the do it, but you can't give a kid the keys to do that. You know, at that age. And eight years old, me eight years old was at Washington. That's like the state will come in and take your kid from me a few. If you don't do it, if they want to, I mean, what is why even have parents at that point? Sure, they don't want us to have parents, but anyway, as I said that and, and you know, they were like, like, you got to the point where I just said, look, I don't even care. I was like, how about you just give me the outline and we'll do it that way. I don't care. Like, I know how to do an interview and I'll make it work. And I'll find my, my groove and whatever you give me. I'm confident in my abilities and, and they were going to do it. And then, and then the bread, beer interview came out with her and it just fell off the map when he was quick talking to us. So I don't know, you know, his brain asked really a single question. She didn't feel like I don't know. I mean, I don't know what it was. How do you you think it would have gone? I think it would have gone, no matter what they handed me for the outline or more if I created my own outline that the questions would have been blaming Trump for everything, even if it has, even if it was nothing to do with the question. I think it would have just been Trump did this, Trump did that. What about Trump Trump Trump, you know, and, and I don't think I would have gotten any of her views or solutions or initiatives or anything. I think it would all been just flipped around and pointed back at Trump. Do you think it's possible there would have been like a spark of warmth between the two of you? Yeah, I do. Really? Yeah, because I mean, I, no matter who it is, I'm going to treat the guests with respect. And, and I think that's, I just, you know, in, you know, on top of that, I mean, do I like her? Do I agree with anything that she did? No, but I also know that there's an aspect of media that I'm probably not getting the full picture. And so I want to peer him out. Good for you. But it was never going to be like a gotcha or a combative interview. You know, I wouldn't have done that. I've never done that. I'll challenge people on stuff, but I'm not going to get into some type of a bickering contest and, you know, why? Because I just, I'm just not who I am. You had a pretty ferocious job before we had enough of that. Yeah. Interesting. Yeah. Is there anyone you wouldn't interview? Yeah. This people I wouldn't interview, I don't interview people that, I mean, kind of said it earlier, you know, I don't interview people that are on the circuit. I don't really give a shit about your new book that's coming out. I don't care. There's plenty of other podcasts that can do that. I just, what, you know, what I look for other than that, because that's different. Those aren't my values that we, we, obviously differ on probably just about everything. But I just, I just look for good people that are doing something in the world that aren't getting recognition or aren't getting traction. And I think would be a good role model. And that's, that's who I bring on the show. And, and that's, that's one of the things I'm good at is being able to take somebody who nobody's ever heard of ever. And people tune in, people will tune in because it's fresh material. It's good people doing good things. And, and they finally get the exposure that they needed to actually get some type of traction. And what you interview Trump for hours, I think how long was it? Well, one hour, one hour. Yeah, a little over what he was like, I don't know, 70 minutes or something. What'd you think of him? I really liked him. I really liked, I did wasn't expecting him to be as personal as it was, you know, and we, we, we might, he met everybody on my team and made it a point to it wasn't like shaking somebody's hand and talking to his assistant or, or, you know, who's direct eye contact wanted to meet the entire team. There was three NFL stars in there that came into meet him. And as soon as I walked in the room, he like didn't care about him came right over introduced himself. I mean, it was very personable. And then after the interview sat down in a room and talked with us and it was really, I was happy. Oh, and I was more happy that he treated my team with respect. And because, you know, you see a lot of people that are like, oh, you're just the help. And it's like, no, that's like, who makes the whole thing. So, you know, and, and so I really appreciated that, you know, it was, you never really know what you're going to get with, with, how do you think of the administration's going so far? How about this? I think there's some really, look, what do you like? What don't you like? I like that they got rid of the DEI stuff. Yeah, I think that was low hanging fruit. I think that, you know, they fixed it really quick. I don't think we need to harp on it anymore and let's move on. And, and, you know, I just interviewed Tom Holman, what he's done with the border seems really impressive to me. So I'm really happy about those things. I'm not happy that the Epstein files have not come to fruition yet. I'm sure they're coming out any day now. Wouldn't you think? Yeah, I won't hold my breath. But I think that I think we still need a lot of work, a lot of work. And I am losing hope. Why? What specifically makes you feel hopeless? Man, I mean, who's controlling our country and the influences and why haven't we stayed in these things? And it makes me skeptical, you know, and I don't hear, you know, some of this is, I may just not know, you know, because I don't like I mentioned, I don't pretend to know everything that's going on. And I don't put the time in that I would need to to figure it all out. But, you know, there's things like the energy grid. And it's like, man, like, we really need to to do something with our grid like yesterday. And is that more important than bombing Iran? Yeah. It is. And yeah, you know, that stuff, you know, I get, I mean, I don't know. I want to know like what the real motivations are. And I love everything he says and the majority of everything that he says. But I, you know, I'd like to see the Ukraine Russia thing finally come to an end. And I like what they've done with doge. I think that maybe they maybe they've cut a little bit more than they need to. But, you know, there's always human error with everything. But, you know, and look, I'm just fucking, I'm going to get blasted for this. But, you know what I mean, I see all these negotiations going on in the Middle East. And then I don't know when these buildings were approved or when these deals got done. But then I also see like, oh, there's a brand new hotel going up and Dubai or Abu Dhabi. And another one going up and in, um, um, Doha, I think. And I'm like, did these like just get done also with the deals that just happened over there? Or was this earlier? I don't, you would probably know. No, I don't know. You don't. I've got made $1 in the Middle East now one. Well, I mean, I mean, if you're a lot more on the inside than I am. No, no, no, I'm just, I'm just a visitor and a traveler and a watcher. But I don't, you know, there's a stuff kind of worries me. You know, it's, it seems like corruption. Yeah. But, but, um, and you know, you know, like bothers me more than any of this shit is that people have just lost the ability to critical think. And, and if you do say something about the tariffs or, um, is it Greenland or Iceland? I can't even remember or whatever. The big one. Yeah. If you do, if you throw any criticism towards any, and not just, not just Trump, but anybody that is in a position of power, I mean, the US has just become so tribal now. And it's, it's, you cannot criticize or, or, or give any constructive criticism to what's happening when I'll get in blast it and sad. It's like, man, like you guys have 100% lost all critical thinking skills. Like you're not fucking thinking on your own. And you are given the values that you align with. You're no longer going off the way you were raised or what's true to you as a person. I think a lot of people don't even fucking know what that is anymore. And they're just told, they're told, they line with a tribe, whatever that tribe says they're going to do. They're going to say they're going to follow. And that's sad. And, um, I think that that could resemble the beginning of the end. I agree with every word. And I can't help but note because I was there for it at the beginning of the internet, we were told that all of this information would make us better informed and would increase our critical thinking abilities and that people wouldn't have to follow the propaganda because they would have all the information. And the opposite is turned out to be true. People seem much easier to control than ever before. Yeah. And that makes me sad. So back to the, the heaviest thing I think you've said, which is that you don't believe that anything's real. And again, I think most people can understand where you're coming from when you say that. So back to the the heaviest thing I think you've said, which is that you don't believe that anything's real And again, I think most people can understand where you're coming from when you say that one of the effects of that is to make everyone Really really paranoid when it turns out that You know most of the things derided as conspiracy theories are real Like clearly the explanation for 9-11 is silly clearly, you know, and we're never gonna find out any of this stuff and so that I think a Reasonable person concludes like man. There's a lot going on. I don't get there's a lot of secret stuff there a lot of actual conspiracies It's everything though like I gave you know I'm not I take a minute to process and so when you're talking about oh, you know what what's fake and I brought up like COVID and something else that everybody already knows right but Or at least most people already know, but I mean when you look at the elections, you know in not just the US You know, but let's look elsewhere. Let's look at Romanian what happened there, and they just they just yanked this guy Just yep, you're done Marie Le Pen. I mean we were close to interviewing her and in fact, I think we're in Paris at the same time, but we were and and I mean when you see that it's just like holy shit like this is spreading Or maybe it's not spreading maybe it's just always been like this. I don't know but you know so obviously those rule Obviously those elections are phony, you know and in the EU is getting involved and France is getting involved and Romania is getting involved And it's like Holy shit man like everything seems to be engineered the guy in Bolsonaro in in Brazil another example, you know, and it's it's It's it did the the ministry of truth. I don't even know if that's still a thing But it's like the what the minister the ministry of truth You fucking kidding me the 2020 election. I mean I was kind of skeptical I was there right in the middle of it, and I thought well, you know if there's evidence it was stolen. I'll believe it of course But I don't see any evidence or enough evidence to say that conclusively and then the last five years Traveling around seeing other elections watching our country more carefully. It's like That was totally fake. I can say that I think with confidence now But here's my point You who I do think are one of the rare people just like committed to saying what you think is true committed to remaining independent right or wrong Like you don't want to be influenced you want to reach your own conclusions and you want to be awakened off to see signs from God And I admire all that but now you are Supposedly part of the conspiracy Yeah, because you were CIA contract. Mm-hmm. So Like what does that mean to be a CIA contractor? How did you get that gig? What did it entail? Are you still in touch with headquarters trying to subvert democracy? I wasn't involved in any of those operations. No, I mean look I'm in the road I left the SEAL teams to start business and failed miserably. What kind of you know I wanted to do funny I actually read Donald Trump's book and Guantanamo Bay when we were doing some stuff in Haiti back in 2004 and It was his book how to get how to get rich. We you read Donald Trump's yeah, yeah one ton of obey. Yeah in 2004 and I think knows whatever somewhere around there and I read that book and ahead I mean I was on like a mini deployment We were just we were in Panama doing some stuff with the the Panamanian special ops guys then the Haiti thing popped off that when we yanked Aristie out of there and and And then we were going on the real deployment and so before even really deployed And the SEAL teams I decided it This isn't all it's cracked up to be at least for me and So I'm just gonna do my time Aaron. What was disappointing about it? There wasn't enough combat Really You went up on a SEAL team in the middle of two wars and there wasn't enough combat for you Yeah, okay. Yeah, I didn't see any air as much as a lot of guys. I saw a decent amount, but but you know I went in to like do that job and don't Wanted to do it all the time and I was not doing it all the time and And so I left but You've quit a bit Apple, so But you wind up on the SEAL teams and you're like kind of bored. Yeah But it just it wasn't it just wasn't what I thought it was gonna be and And then I had an opportunity to screen not saying I would have made it Not saying I wouldn't have but Had an honor ever everybody. I don't mean I had the up everybody gets the opportunity to scream for six for team six if they want it and I just I was I was like well, that's you know, that's the next level But it's another five-year commitment if I do it and what if it's the same shit that I have here with just a bigger budget with more cool toys and So I decided I decided no, I'm gonna get out and be the next Donald Trump and business man and Got out started a small real estate thing failed horribly. Where was it St. Louis, Missouri and I'm gonna do real estate in C. Louis well my families from there. So what's not for that wasn't available at the time or something? No but Swen home and just in time for Ferguson. Yeah, it was too. I actually got a great picture of me Ferguson with a mall top top to know but uh, we joke after it happened but But anyways, and so then my dad and I We're gonna actually start a Jimmy John's franchise and I didn't grow up with money and We needed some so I said hey. I said I would never do this, but Overseas contracting is a big thing and it's paying pretty good So how about if I just do that? I'll get the money that we need to start it and then I'll quit and we'll start that venture You went overseas as a contractor to pay for Jimmy John's franchise. Yeah. Yeah Amazing. Yeah, and then 2008 head. Do you know Jimmy John by the way? Yeah I met him recently great guy. I love talking to him. Good dude. Yes at the out party I think you met him actually yeah, yeah, and we found out a couple times. I really like that guy Did you tell him that you went by you became a military contractor? Is he good pay for one of his franchises? Yeah but But that didn't happen and where did you go? What do you mean? You're first when you first left to do overseas contracts. So where I first one I did a because I didn't I Didn't understand exactly how contract Contractors I didn't I didn't know the game. Yeah, and so there are different tiers of contracting and They have they take your background and there's all these different You know, there's the DEA contract. There's the ATF contract or not ATF. Excuse me There's the agency the NSA the State Department All there's just all there's all kinds of contracts that you can jump on and I had no idea what I was doing. I thought it was all like one tiered system and So I threw my name and and this kind of recruiting thing and they came back. There's a company called armor group and Out of UK and they picked me up first and I was like all right, well, whatever this seems Pretty low level, but they wanted to make me like a Kind charge because of my background and I was like, I'll right fine. I'll go do this. So I went to the try out It was complete joke and then Got to Afghanistan and it was they put me at the front gate of the Embassy and I was like I lasted about a week and I was like hey, give me a flight home. I'm out of here This is fucking bullshit like I'm not I'm not gonna be you thought you were bored in the seals yeah and One man then that's where all the V bids go off to the car bombs so I was like I'm not doing this and one home and Got into a Fire academy Didn't like it and then a friend called a fire it means to be farming to be a firefighter because I really missed the camaraderie and and Then a friend of mine that I served in Afghanistan with called me up and said hey There's a contract that black water has and I think you should try out for it And I was like oh no, I'm not doing it. I just did a quick pump I hated it. I was with a bunch of guys that don't know what the hell they're doing Some of these people were like Bank of America security guards. I was like this is crazy And he goes now he's like hey, he's like everybody on This contract has to be from special ops. It's a black contract. I can't tell you who it's for But just give me a resume and I'm gonna try to get you in and so I was like alright fine gave it to him and then got a call from black water and Just told me where I'm when Where to be and what to bring and it would be what do they want you to bring? It was just you know you need these type of clothes you need this type of equipment and Show up here go all the way to the back to the black side and It'll be a month long course if you make it and So I showed up and and did the the vetting course at black water and black water going yep and and May would you think of the vetting course it was tough Really? Yeah, it was tough having been through buds. You thought it was tough. It wasn't tough like that. It wasn't like You have to prove You do have to prove yourself. It wasn't like a They're not yelling at you and screaming and kicking you around and all that kind of shit It is a Demonstration of your skills and if you cannot demonstrate your skills to the highest level then you go home and What kind of skills? shooting skills driving skills Close quarters combat that's entering a room and clear and buildings and rooms and stuff Working with the team. How do you integrate in with all these other special ops guys and and so there's a lot that goes to it Into it a lot of they put you in a lot of extremely stressful situations and You have to handle it flawlessly or you'll be asked to leave But the shooting qualifications were Really tough really yeah, yeah Yeah, the shooting qualifications were really tough and so is the CQB the close quarters combat so like one one of the exercises They had this thing called the hooded box drill and They're basically pushing a room like this and they would tape a square and you have to you have to stand in the square and they give you their rifle or pistol and they have like fake flash bangs going off Smoke yelling screaming Roleplayers and they put a hood over your head on a string So this hood goes overhead. You can't see anything. It's dark. There's strobes. There's all kinds of shit going on You can hear like all these screams and all the stuff going on and you Are not allowed to leave the box and so they set up the scenario and They lift the hood over your head and then you have to deal with the scenario so like I think the very first scenario Put the hood over my head and there's all these people in there. I can hear them and I left they lift the hood up on the string and There's a guy like closer than for me to you right now with a gun with a rifle as soon as the hood goes up he snaps my head You're wearing a helmet, but he snaps my head with the with the muzzle of his rifle that caught a muzzle snap and Rammuzzle strike it it knocks me back and then there's all these people in there that this guy's armed This guy's unarmed. There's a female over there with a burke on and you don't know It's underneath and you got another guy with a person with a gun in their head people are shooting at you and you have to deal in process all that information Not killing innocent not killing a known in in deal with the situation and then and then they call you back to your box Back to the box and it's very unemotional They're not like hey you could have done this better or why didn't you do that? It's either get the fuck out of here or we're going to run a scenario and then you come back to the box and I put the hood back over your head and then Lift the hood and you're in a totally different scenario and it might be It might be the next scenario that lift up nobody's shooting at you everybody's calm or people are yelling and shit and Shooting their guns up in the air and you you have to figure out who's a threat who's an unknown who's an innocent who's a who's a blue helmet which would be a an asset of ours he obviously can't kill the asset and And so they run you through a number of scenarios there doing that A lot of a lot of people you know fail that so But you did not fail now did you enjoy it? Yeah, I was challenging. I like it. I like to be challenged and in really like it's really hard to put you in an environment that can be as stressful as what combat is and and And you know when you're in combat I mean the decision-making has to be on point and very precise and They did a great job of simulating that kind of stress that you're going to deal with when it's actually for real and So I thought it was a great drill. What kind of guys were at the training facility all former soft so it was all Seals S F Delta death group couple of Rangers Arsock which is Marine Special Ops Air Force CCT Air Force PJs I think that covers it So highest highest level that the US military produces. Yeah, and you had to you had to have that background Just to be able to try out for this specific contract What was the contract that was the they called it the OGA contract Which was the CA contract? What's OGA stand for other government agency? So then what so you get it? Mm-hmm So are you still thinking about Jimmy John's at this point or has the box drill just wiped that from your memory? No No, still thinking about it but so yes, so then at the end you find out that it is for CIA and you'd already had your your new clearance is done and and They give you dates Check out the door How long was the commitment and where did you go? There's no commitment We said not that I remember but first trip was to Kabul Afghanistan and You can do kind of I mean black water. I think had a 60-day minimum deployments so you could do up to Maybe a hundred something days and so some guys go and they do hundred something days They come home for a week and then they're right back out and there's guys that do 60 on 60 off and So you just kind of come up with your cadence and and go What were you doing for CIA and Kabul? so When I started this It was a protective unit and so Like the guys that fought him agazi. That's the that's the the program that I was in and so kind of started office of protective Type detail for for actual operatives Because there is no I mean there is no Jason born over there That's why they need people like me because it takes two people to be a Jason born and so we would Help case officers plan their operations plan their meets stuff like that conduct and then conduct surveillance conduct counter surveillance Get them Kind of whatever they need and At the beginning it was and I wasn't really near the beginning I mean I think I started contracting in 2007 so the war had been going on for what about the secures and So towards the beginning I guess but You know it was real pain in the ass because I mean it's beginning of the war You know you had all these case officers coming in and They're fresh out of school and they don't really understand the environment that they're in They don't think they need us until they need us and then they're screaming for us but a lot of case officers in Chief's of station and deputy chief's of station That would be the head guy in head say in country They they kind of saw us as a hindrance to their operations until shit started happening like Benghazi coast a lot of these tragic events that happened And then every once in a while you'd get like a really good It's sorry, so let's backtrack a little more So you get a lot of these and then you get the old timers that are coming in from the cold war And they're used to work in an SMI permissive environment or a permissive environment where they don't need that kind of shit They can just go and meet their assets and drink their fucking coffee They were Vienna in the seven exactly exactly those types and then they go to Afghanistan Iraq Yemen Pakistan, you know All these type of places and they they bring that mindset with them and it's like hey, but that shit isn't gonna work here so these people fucking hate you and But every once in a while you'd get a guy who was a retired Green Berea or retired Special operations marine or a seal or whoever and they would they would look at the The the program that I was in and they would they would they would realize like these guys are all Special ops like they have a lot of capability that we're not utilizing them for and so Then then things started getting added to the plate, you know, they're like hey could you guys Do xy or z or like oh, yeah, we can do all of that. We just you guys just don't utilize that capability Because I don't think you realize Everybody here is extremely capable of not mall cops and yeah and so then they started using us for all kinds of stuff and and it was some places were interesting someplace was were an Xbox tour and Main and you just sit around and Work out and play Xbox, but Kind of depending where you're at So what was the most interesting? How it all kind of works and some of the meetings that you sit in on and and You know from a personal standpoint. I've always been fascinated with how people live in extreme poverty and into sea like just to see it and experience it and and and Be a part of it try to blend into it was Both a challenge and Very fascinating to how long did you do this gig? Uh right around I think it was a little less than nine years Nine years. Yeah What's a long time? Yeah. Yeah, I took a little break. What did you think of the CIA? Once again same same kind of thing and that I thought of the siltims. This isn't what it is cracked up to be Hmm like here's an example first day I get there and Just trying to get the lay of the land and so it's I don't want to like talk too much shit because there are some very capable people and and and And Like us like you get in the country. You don't even do anything for the first two weeks They're like here's a map Here's some keys Over there so you don't burn any good for cars take a different one every day and You need to know this entire city every back road every road name every venue everything everything about this city You need to know and if you don't know it in two weeks Then you're out and so You pair up with another guy that's never been in country And you just hit the roads and you know Everything about that city kind of dangerous wake guys driving around cobble Yeah, it is I mean it is in you don't always dress up like white guys But you know in a place like cobble or bad dad there's diplomats from every country out there state department CIA NSA's DEA FBI and in the equivalent of that in every NATO country right so There's diplomats everywhere so sometimes you're cover might be your diplomat in state department and Sometimes dependent on where you're at You might be dressed up in Muslim garm and I mean they trick the vehicles out so they look local and and so It's I mean you can blend in you're not gonna like and I'm gonna blend in You know running around the streets right but you'll it first glance it'll pass and So that's what you do you learn everything everything about this city and know a lot of these places better than I know my hometown Nine years so what countries we're working in over that period I spent the majority of my time in Yemen Iraq and Afghanistan what's Yemen like it's uh my favorite place to work Why because it is the poorest country in the Middle East and Probably the most dangerous and uh it was I just I loved I felt like I was doing more there than anywhere else and it was You had to take tradecraft extremely seriously Very tribal country the north is completely different than the south and You had to learn the cultures of both so that if you're operating in the north that you know how to dress like the northerners do you have to dress like how the southerners do down and aid in and and and try to blend in and and And it's also like a spy game there. I mean the Russians who are there the Iranians who are there the Chinese who are there and so you're Trying to figure out where they're operating out of what their safe houses look like Chinese were always super easy identify because you would just be passing through Yemen and all these mud huts or safe houses and Or just houses and You know you drive by the Chinese compound every single time they have 120 antennas on the road It's like nice one guys but um it would get I Mean it in its it's it's so you're so you're conducting you know normal operations and dealing with Terrorists and assets and all that kind of stuff You know for the main initiative But in the other hand you're also having a conduct surveillance and counter surveillance from the Russians from the Chinese from the Iranians any other Keep layers that are in those countries and have to know who's who and and and and and they're spying on us and we're spying on it's it's it's It's very complex. Did you chew got when you were there? No, but I bought some but you never tried it. I never tried it with the whole country is hooked on it right yeah, you would you would You would I mean it's yeah, you would see these guys and Just the whole the whole population and I mean they would just be so zonked out on that You say I'm in a shitty taxi drive with they're not even blinking and flies are landing on their fucking eyes and it's like Holy shit and people live like this. It's crazy and And yeah, I was you just never know who you're gonna run into over there either. I mean What do you mean? I mean I was in semi I would All like other operators like I'd see I'd see guys that are in safe houses from other units that are over there and And I would see like their call sign up on the On the board and I'd be like is that who I think it is? Oh, shit. I haven't seen him since like Buds when I was in the SEAL team and I'd call over there and by hey get get up on the roof I want to see him. We'd have a phone conversation looking at each other waving from rooftop to rooftop like what Go over and meet them. What do you guys getting into the tonight? They'd be running operations and killing bad guys and And it was just it was very unique and complex Out to be able to work there So you probably knew the Houthis existed before the rest of us. Yeah What do you think of the Houthis? I mean I don't really follow up on it too much these days, but I mean they took over that damn country and Didn't know time. I mean they yanked the I can't remember if he was a president or a prime minister or Whatever, but they took the whole country when we were there in like a matter of hours and So they were they were really effective and woke up one day and all these new checkpoints are out the the guy getting yanked out of the palace by the Houthis and and On totally different dynamic and less than 24 hours We ever afraid when you were there Yeah, a lot. Did Americans ever get hurt when you were there? No Interesting you went up in Latin America. We got shot out a lot in car bombs at the gates and Shit like that, but not not any heavy casualties. No no deaths How'd you wind up in South America? Ah well when I left I was very addicted to adrenaline and Went down to Columbia, I'd always wanted when I joined the SEAL teams. I was really Inspired by the Vietnam generation I just like was infatuated with that stuff as a kid watched all the documentaries of all the Seals and Vietnam and and Greenberries and I just wanted to do jungle warfare and so the closest I could get to that was Running counter-drug operations out of Columbia When I When I joined the SEAL teams and then you know 9-11 happened so Definitely wasn't going on. It wasn't going down there and so I had Broke it broken up with a girlfriend and I was like, you know what I'm gonna go down there and check it out and So went down there for a little over a week Love did have the time of my life Doing nothing Christian based and Where car to hand is where I started a little over a week. Loved it at the time of my life, doing nothing Christian based. And where Cartagani is where I started. And then one home, had a surgery. And I was sitting at a bar in Cape Borl, Florida, listening to a bunch of lazy, entitled Americans, talk about their opinion of the war and all this other shit. I just got so fucking tired to listen to the shit. One on people's opinions that had never been there and never done it, it never lost anybody. Probably had never even faced any type of hardship in their life and they're just judging me and all of my friends. And I was like, you know what? I'm fucking out of here, man. So I put my house on the market and went back down to Cartagani, stayed with a friend, the Secret Service scandal happened down there. Remember that? Yep. And which kind of like put it on the map for people to come visit and to go do bad things. And it became like very Americanized. And I was like, I don't wanna be anywhere near Americans at all. And so I checked a lot of spots out around Columbia, I went to Kali, I went to Pareda, I went to Medellin and then camped out and met a gene for about four years. And doing what? Doing what? Doing a rock star life. And a lot of cocaine, a lot of girls, a lot of basically what I was doing was chasing my adrenaline. And cause I wanted to feel that all the time. It creates some type of imbalance in your brain when you have that any adrenaline dumps. And it's very much like a heroin addiction. And so I went down there and I started doing a lot of shit that I shouldn't be doing, buy-in drugs. That became a big rush buying and sourcing and cocaine. And so that's how I would get my thrills. And was that what you were doing for a living? No, I wasn't for a living man. It was for the rush. And so I talked about this on a couple of other podcasts but there's a lot of rumors going around there that I was down there working for CIA setting up these drug networks when yes, they do do that. But no, I was by myself on my own program. And I've always been fascinated with narcos and kingpins and cartels. And it was a major rush for me to go into the worst neighborhoods and Columbia and start setting up networks. And it's extremely dangerous for a gringo to be. I would go in neighborhoods where you couldn't get into the neighborhood without going through at least two checkpoints. And so I would just, I would go in there. I would hang out. I would talk to people. I would buy drugs, cocaine, bring it back to my place, do them all, then go get more, go get more. What does cocaine cost in the Xbox a gram? So about a 20th of what across the United States? Yep. And so what I saw, back to my entrepreneurial branch, is what it was going to be is you get, I mentioned that secret service kind of put sex vacations on the map for, which is not technically their job for a rich white people to come down there and take advantage of that. And down there, I mean, prostitution and these type of things are not looked at like they are here. It's an actual legitimate career. And so you get these guys who come down and that's all they want to do. And they won't cocaine, but they're all scared to talk to the Columbians because I think they're all cartel and they're all going to chop your head off. And so what I was going to be was an intermediary. And they sort of, the matri-d of Michigan, like I'll deal with all these people and I'll get you what you want. And you can just talk to me for a fee. For a fee. Did you do that? No. Why? Because I got sloppy and I got ran out of there by the Columbian version of the FBI. Did you get a jail down there? No. As soon as I caught Wendell that I left. And but I built a network from the ground up. And so just like how I was telling you, I take care of my team right now. And I want the best for them. And I treat them with respect and I'm very giving. I was like that down there. And so starting with the doorman. You know, and I would live in these pen houses at the top story of the building wherever I was at. And I would make friends with all the guys that were at the door because I control who comes in and out of the building. And so if I went to the grocery store, they got groceries. If I bought cocaine, they got cocaine. If I went to go get booze, they got booze. If I went to go get pizza, they got a pizza. And so I just took care of them all the time. Because I knew it would get to the point where they would watch my ass. Yes. And so I did that and built a great rapport with them. And then, you know, nobody knows town better than taxis. And so I would take taxis and take taxis and try to develop a relationship with different taxi guys that were not scared to go into Barrio Antioquilla, which is kind of the worst neighborhood down there. And I would have my girls help me make decisions. And tell me about the different taxi drivers that they used to pick them up from the clubs and stuff like that when they were done working or partying or whatever. And so I developed a really good relationship with a couple of different taxi drivers. And they would show me everything I need to know all the places that people don't want to go where and I would get in with them. And then I would get in with the dealers. And then the dealers would introduce me to their Mid-dealer. And then they would introduce me to their guy. And the network grew so big that if I went to other countries, they would know who I was. And what were you doing for income? Well, I made money contracting. And your money goes a lot farther down there than it does in the US. So I didn't really need any until I blew it all. But so the story goes. So that's what I did. And got in a lot of really hairy situations where I didn't know if I was going to come out. Didn't really care if I did. I kind of had the Hunter S Thompson mindset where if life gets too boring, then I'll just check out. And it was starting to get boring down there. I had ODed a couple of times. And what's a cocaine OD? So a cocaine OD is, you know, when I remember my best friend was down there for a little while with me. And I would always think, oh, shit, I probably did too much. I'm going to die. And he got tired of me being paranoid about it. And he goes, look, he's like, you don't need to worry about ODing on cocaine until things start slowing down. when you're on speed and things get slow, that's when you're really riding the line. And that had happened to me a couple times where sounded like my voice was in slow motion. The people next to me that I was talking to all of a sudden sounded like the will for all thing. Whereas around like, and you can't talk, you can't get the words out that are in your head. And that's when you know it's about time the lights are going to go out. And they did go out. But how do you recover from that? Lots of volume. Yeah, exactly. Lots of volume, Xanax, stuff like that. And so I developed these, everything got boring to me. So the women got boring. It sounds weird to say that because it's like, you know, but it did. It was like, there's nothing that you could say that I had not done. And that got me to go deeper in and go to more dangerous places. And it doesn't sound weird at all. It sounds absolutely right. There's no satisfaction in that. I wish I could support him. Yeah. And so then I started looking up the most dangerous places in the world. And I looked up the most dangerous place in the world and it was San Pedro Sula and Honduras. So I went there and started to try to develop a network. They're just for the rush. What was that like? Got almost arrested on the first night. So it did last long. Were the other Americans down there? And Honduras? Yeah. Not at that time, which I thrived off that. It made me feel really alive. Like, oh, this is like uncharted territory. Nobody comes here because it scared death. Did your dad ever text you to say, hey, what about the Jimmy John's franchise? We're supposed to be doing now because 2008 happened. And so that it got called off at the very beginning of my contract career. And then, and yeah, and he went on to do other things. Yeah, so and I was frustrated, but the money was really good contracting. And so I kind of got stuck in this loop of like, well, I'll just go over there and make a bunch of money and then do whatever the hell I want to do. And yeah, so so anyways, so the last thing that got me, and I was talking to my dad too. I knew I had a problem and I'm really close with my parents, my dad's my hero. And I would call him all fucked up on Coke or volume or Xanax or hydrocodine or oxy or whatever. And as always, our drunk. And I would delude to my dad. Like, I got to get that allowed here. I'm gonna die. And I wouldn't remember a lot of these conversations. I'd be totally blacked out. And he was trying to get me to go get some help. And I lied to him. Told him I was talking to this Vietnam guy about my experiences. And I was, but that guy was a total mess too. And he was there for the same reason. Yeah, no, this wasn't in Columbia. This was actually in Fort Lauderdale. And same difference. Yeah. And I hid, there's this place called, what was it called, Point Day, Delos Locos or something, which bridge of the crazies. And so it was like all these like, look like LA. Lots of tents under an overpass and crazy drug addicts who have no direction in life who are dirt bored. And had a bunch of girls with me. And I went to that bridge. And it stacked up a ton of cash and thought it would be a great idea to throw all the cash up and just watch these people like go to town to try to get it. And very, very dangerous part of managing. And came back to my building, walk through. And the door man came up and told me that the national police had come to question them about me. And one of my passport and all the shit. And I wanted to know who I was, where I came from, what I'm doing, all of that stuff. And I was pissed. I was like, man, and the guy's name was Freddie. And I'm talking to him in Spanish. And I'm like, man, I always take care of you. I can't believe you would try to suck more money out of me on this bullshit story. And he's like, no, he was trying to tell me that they had bugged the light outside my door. And which I couldn't understand. My Spanish wasn't that good. But eventually I got what he was saying. And I was like, this is complete bullshit. There's no way. And he showed me, he said, they have a picture of you at the bridge throwing money in the air. And I just come from there. And so at that point, I knew that he wasn't lying. I was like, OK, literally nobody knows that I did that because it was like 45 minutes ago. And the only people that would know is my taxi guy and the girls that were with me and the crazies that were living under the bridge. And so he'd said that they had set up a observation, basically an observation point at the building across the room where watching me from that apartment. So I went up and identified it where it was flush all the coke. And went back into my previous life on surveillance and counter surveillance. And I did a counter surveillance route to a couple of different internet cafes, bought a couple of tickets, did different places outside of the country and hauled us to the airport. Got out of there and never went back. That day? Yeah. Was decisive. Yeah. Yeah. So you're hooded box training. Yeah. Yeah. So that's how that ended. How long between that moment and the beginning of your podcast? Not long. Oh, the podcast. Probably a couple of years. So that wasn't that long ago. You were leading a life that bears no resemblance at all to the life you're leading right now. Yeah. You got all. Yeah. It took a lot of work. You know, and it took a lot of work to clean myself up and find a productive direction to start running. And once I discovered business, that became my due addiction. What do you make of the claim that you're still working for CIA? I think it's, I mean, whatever people are going to think what they think. But people don't understand how it works over there. And so I mean, there's a part of me that understands it. I'm like, all right. I didn't really come out of nowhere. You know what I mean? I mean, a lot of people say like, all this guy just pops on the map and like, fucking gets ginormous. And it's like, you didn't see all the back end work that it took to get here. And I started this in my attic as a one man team. And then taught my wife out of film. And it was me and her. And we only did nine interviews for the first year and a half because I was editing sound video, cutting previews, doing social media packages, doing distribution, doing the research, interviewing, you know, all of that stuff. And so I mean, I think it's, you know, it really pisses me off as one somebody that I am paying attention to because they're bringing things out that I'm into. They're going down rabbit holes and conspiracy stuff that a lot of time winds up to be true. But then, and I think we're all on the same team. And then I'll see them throw something out like, Sean Ryan's a CIA shill. And it's like, dude, I just, I was like totally fucking bought in on what you're bringing to the table. And all of your research, it was like really good stuff. And I thought it was trustworthy. But when you throw something like that out there, you've just discredited yourself to me because you have no fucking proof because I'm not one. And now I don't believe anything that you say because if you're just going to lose slip throw shit out there like that, then what else are you fucking throwing out? The time you get to the fair. I've had some more experiences. Yeah. I do think that people are paranoid because it is true that the CIA operates against, you know, the constitution against the law in the United States. And it, um, and does try and shape news coverage. Like that's a fact. Yeah. No, I mean, I'm, I'm, I know that that happens and, and, and happens all the time. But at the same time, if you've listened to me, I've been extremely hard on CIA. And I've talked about things that they have done that make me very paranoid after the interview. Like we, I can't remember if we just saw that an hour ago or if that was last night at dinner, but I mean, I, I, there, it, that, that happens and all the fucking time all over the world. But, you know, I, but nobody has ever able to pinpoint exactly why they think that they just throw it out. Of course, like, like, those, it really grew traction after I interviewed, um, the founder of Palantir. Because I mean, people think that's a big war machine and, and, uh, losing my trying to thought here, the military industrial complex, I've company and, and, but I mean, you guess what buddy, like, we need innovators and we have to innovate. We can't just be doing the same old shit. And I want to know how we're innovating our military capabilities and our, uh, intelligence capabilities and that's a big part of it. And it, you know, to be honest with you, it gives me comfort knowing that we are still innovating as much red tape as we have to deal with. And I think that that's what gives me a glimmer of hope when we're talking about global domination and China and all that kind of stuff. Yeah. And with people don't even know, I don't know why Palantir has such a bad rap. Maybe you know something that I don't, but I mean, to me, that was fucking genius. It speeds up the decision making process. It speeds up the intelligence gathering. We're able to access information, you know, lightning speed to be ahead of whoever our adversaries. I mean, people are mad at Palantir because they disagree with US form policy. I think that's kind of the main, uh, from what I can tell, I'm hardly an expert on the subject. Um, but I think that it's, I mean, not to be a conspiracy nut, but your, you know, public performance or the past five and a half years has, you know, been run counter to the aims of the CIA. I would say, I mean, it has. And so to tell people that you yourself are working for the CIA secretly is a way to discredit you. Yeah. And if I were the CIA, I would be encouraging. I guess that's what I'm saying. That's a good point. That is a good point. I mean, I, I very hostile to see. I said that many, many times it doesn't stop people from claiming that I secretly work there. Yeah. So, and I've always thought that maybe that was, I mean, I've challenged people too. I'm because I think about it. I mean, it would be impossible. You know, I mean, they might, they might have somebody in operative do a five hour interview. And they might say, Hey, this is all we have. need you to get in that interview. Is this one fucking sentence? And so the whole other five hours could be complete bullshit, except for the one little thing that they want injected into that interview to create some type of a narrative. And I'm always trying to look out for that, but it would be impossible. It would be impossible to figure out what exactly that is. If, if that operative is good. And they'll do other things like they may do other things like, Hey, we know that this happened. You're going to go to this show and you're going to talk about this. And then two weeks from now, that's going to come out in the media or we'll wait until the interviewer releases that specific episode. And then two weeks after we're going to release this to the press. And then they're going to say this was said on this show by this person before it ever came out of the media. And then when it comes out in the media, because right everybody hates the media, but they still fucking watch it all the time, that builds credibility to the operative. You know what I mean? And then they and then they go, I know what you mean. Okay. You're tracking. So I'm watching it all around me. So do you feel that have you ever had a guest where you thought, huh? Yeah. Really? Yeah. That this person might be acting a half foot until agency. About a couple of them. Any confirmation on that? No. You know, gut instinct. I don't want to name a bunch of names because if they're not, I don't want to. Of course, you know, but I just did a really good interview with this guy, Blair M. Scorro, who was an asset. He got recruited out of prison. And then he got recruited in prison by the CIA to write after 911 to make friends with all of the Muslim Brotherhood, all the terrorists that were in there. And so he built a network in there. And then when he got out of prison, and so he would report back to the agency about like, Hey, this is what this guy has done. This is what he's a part of. These are the people he talks to because they'll trust it. And because this guy basically became like the head mula of the prison system. And when he got out, agency gets back and touch with him. So hey, you're going to use this network and you're going to, your, your, your cover is going to be your building a al Qaeda cell and Macedonia. And so he, he would set up shop in Macedonia and he would go into Pakistan and going to Afghanistan and Syria, Iraq, Iran, all these Russia, all these places. And he would meet with the head, the head of the Hakani network, the head of the Taliban, the head of al Qaeda, like, um, very, like I didn't, he didn't meet specifically with bin Laden, but he's like one step away. And I so dangerous job. No kidding, man. That's the real Jason born shit right there. And what he would do is say, Hey, you know, I'm recruiting because I'm setting up a terror cell in Macedonia. And then they would give him all of these weapons, the GIM bombs, rocket launchers, guns, mines, and you name it. And then basically what he would do is tell him that that shipment is, is he would take care of logistics and to get that to Macedonia. But what he would really do is get it to the agency and then the disposal where they would destroy it. What do you say, supposedly they would destroy it? Well, who knows? You know, I don't know. But because I don't trust him, but the, so then he has an assassination attempt, um, Syria cuts him. He gets pissed off. He's still pissed off rightly so. Um, at the same time, I'm like, Matt, do you think this works, man? Like you got burned. They don't use burned assets. Like you're irrelevant at this point. And then he started telling me about, um, getting uranium out of Russia. And so we kind of had this discussion. You know, Russia's a big, obviously a big topic of discussions. Some people think we should be in Ukraine. Some people don't. And, and some people think Russia's our allies, some people don't. And, and, um, I'm kind of like, this isn't really our war. Why are we involved? But, but he had, I said, well, what are they going to do with these? And he said that they wanted to get him into the US and he would blow, it would kill half a million people. And I asked him if he thought it'd done that. And, but it didn't really fit in the interview. It didn't fit. You know what I mean? Did not fit in the interview. Do I know what you mean? Yes. In fact, I was just thinking that and speaking like we're, we're talking about all these other things. I don't trust this for a second. And then all of a sudden we get to Russia. And so I just called him right there on the interview. I was like, you know, a ghost or my mind. I said, one's the last time he had contact with CIA. It was exactly what it was just thing. And he said, January 16th or something in 2022, like knew the exact date and got really flustered. And I mean, I would probably be flustered to somebody just said that and I wasn't. But I said, you know, let's go through my head is what if somebody contacted you knowing you were coming on the show to say that you were getting uranium to al Qaeda, to sneak into our country, to blow us up. A lot of a lot of people want to see us go to war with Russia. Do you tell you that Iran was trying to assassinate Donald Trump too? Now that's my favorite. No. Iran is trying to assassinate Donald Trump. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But, but I called him on it because it didn't fit in the interview. When it was almost like shit, I lost my opportunity doing cert this into the interview. So now I got a swing for the fence and just drop it. And it just immediately clicked in my brain. And then I got paranoid again. I'm like, Jeremy, you got to, sorry, buddy. You got to fucking switch your phone out. Like you've been texting with this guy who knows what came in. And, um, and, um, but I mean, you never really know it's going to be a gut instinct, you know? And so, but I wanted to say that out loud. Because if they're watching and they probably are, then they know that I know that I'm a target. So I'm a little bit shocked. I sort of knew the rough outlines of your life, but I didn't realize like 20 minutes here were live in Colombia. And then you were on the run. I mean, this just happened not 20 years ago, like seven years ago. Yeah. So that's got to be one of the hardest pivots. One of the most profound transformations I've ever seen. I don't really kind of know anyone who's come this far in a separate direction in such a short period of time. You're not even 50. Where do you think it goes from here? Who knows, man? Um, I do want to say something. which a short period of time, you're not even 50. Where do you think it goes from here? Who knows, man. I do want to say something though, you know, I think a lot of people think that kind of shit that I was doing down in Columbia is cool and it's adventurous and yeah, there was a lot of adrenaline. Oh, hold on, it was a good time. It was definitely adventurous, but it's not bad. I think we can say that was adventurous. But, you know, it was a, I mean, who knows where I would be if I didn't do that? And I would have started this earlier, you know, and it's just no way to live. And everybody that you think is your friend is fake. And everybody just wants to take advantage of you. And once you get through the initial phase of all, man, this is like the coolest life. It's the loneliness fucking life that you can lead. And I almost died because of it and several times. And, you know, how would it have turned up if I would have owed a deed in one of those pen houses and my parents who I love so much and finds out, oh yeah, there's our son, the Navy SEAL, CA contractor, decomposing in a fucking pen house in Columbia because the OD don't go canged. And that scenario went through my head a lot of times. And so I just, you know, I just, I don't want to encourage anybody to do that. That there was a low point in my life and something I'm not proud of. And you've been a, I would say pretty vocal advocate for sobriety. Yeah, in this job. I mean, the guys who work for you are sober. Almost the majority of the team, I think there's two guys, the drink. Do you think sobriety's going to catch on? It's a way to absolutely. I think it's already catch. There's a, there's a huge wave. It's like the new thing to do. It seems like truly sober, just like not using pills alcohol. Yeah. You think we're in the middle of some kind of Christian revival? Absolutely. A hundred percent. I mean, if you send, if you send the baptism parties that are going on at, at colleges, that look like, it looks like it's a kegger, crazy tailgate party and they're baptizing people in the back of the back of trucks. And yeah, I think there's a huge wave going on. I think so too. It's cool to see. Do you think the US government can continue? Continue. What? To exist? Are you the current system can continue? I think it will continue. You do. Because it does feel like we're moving towards something. Like a one-year-old government. I'm not sure what. I'm not sure what. But it seems like so much change in a short period of time. The scale's falling for so many people realizing that, you know, what they believe was real is not. Questions people are asking the resurgence of Christianity in the country. I mean, it all seems to be happening at once. And I know, you know, in every age, people think the end is near. But does that ever occur to you? I think it will, I think it will continue to exist until people no longer have the appetite for it to exist. You think we're pretty far from that? Yeah. Goes back to critical thinking. Yeah. Maybe that's right. Last question because I can't resist an easement all your time talking about this. But um, having fired every firearm and trained in every firearm were your favorite firearms. Favorite firearms? Yeah. I like lever actions. Come on. Now, I do too. Like, it's not there. My favorite, but like, I mean, I'm tired of all the tactical black guns, shit. I mean, that's that was my life for 14 years, you know. And um, but I have a lot of them. I do. But I don't get excited about them. I get excited about lever actions. Now, I'm sure you're going to ask me, you know, shit, it's the fan. What am I going to definitely isn't going to be my lever action. It's going to be my AR because I know that like the back of my hand and it's a tool that I'm really good with. So. Right. When you shoot for fun, you with just open sights. Yeah. Oh, okay. You know what I really like is I don't even know what it's called, but it's a revolver, but it's the, uh, you know, you lift a little thing up and you have to load it one by one. Yeah. Like what is that? The 12 shot 22. So the, the time we done, I got a, uh, 45 long cold one. Is it just single action? Yeah. Dude, I love it. It's the, I can't hit a damn thing with it, but it's got the pin that you push the. Yes. The holes out with. Yes. I love that thing. Really. Yeah. Talk about your life going for full circle. See, you went from like, you know, some high tech timber to a single action. Yeah. How about we gone? I love it. And you went from the AR platform to the lever. What do you, what do you prefer, uh, the lever gun chamber done? 357. I knew I liked 357 revolve same ammo side arm and long gun. That's, that's my, that's my favorite pair. Right. I could see beneath the, beneath the same. I knew that you were the kind of man who preferred 37. I love it. The straight wall cartridge, amen. Sean Ryan, thank you very much. Thank you. Congratulations. Thank you. He's a bonner. You're, you're one of the, you're one of the people and this is not true for everybody, but every time I see some marker of your, like, continued success, I, I'm thrilled. I'm thrilled by it. And I mean that. Well, that means a hell of a lie. I'm not joking at all. I thought, and part of it is just like my narcissism, because I saw you because my nephew sent me a clip from you and I was like, that guy's really talented. I like, you instantly, I knew you'd be successful. And the fact that you had no background whatsoever, I didn't quite realize how far you were you're back. You did not go to Columbia School broadcasting. Um, your natural ability to interview people and to listen to them and to empathize with them. I just came right off the screen and I was like, that guy's going to be a start and you have been and I just find it thrilling. Thank you. Thank you. And it's a lot. Thank you. And congratulations on all your successful. Yeah. It's been cyclical. And help. Can I just say I never do this? I'm proud to call this man an out-puser. Thanks. I love it. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a moral. What can you do about it? Well, we could find about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.