Joe Roman reindeer. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. John, what's happening, Matt? How much? It's very nice to meet you. You too. Thanks for having me. I know you're in the middle of a project. You're doing a project with David Chase, right? It's about MK Ultra. Yes, he has gotten the rights to this book. You know, this book project mind control. And he's interested in adapting it into a series. Well, I am endlessly fascinated with the subject. So as soon as I heard about it, and the series is coming, but you could talk to the guy who wrote the book down, like, let's go. So here we go. Project mind control. Sidney Gottlieb, the CIA, and the tragedy of MK Ultra, which really is a tragedy. You know, I really got, and I knew about it, but I really didn't get completely obsessed with it until chaos, Tom O'Neill's book. You read that? Oh, yeah. And when you realize what the MK Ultra program involved and how long it ran and how insane it is. And it essentially had no oversight. And these people were just running these wild mind experiments on American citizens. And nobody with a jail for it. Yeah, that's part of the crazy thing. One of the things I really try to focus on in the book, especially the second half of the book, or the consequences of MK Ultra in society, but also just what happened to these people afterwards? The victims of MK Ultra, they launched several lawsuits against the CIA, and basically really nothing much came out of it. They got paid a little bit of money. But the people who perpetrated MK Ultra, they didn't really face any consequences. And so I'm glad you brought that up, because one of the things I really try to talk about in the latter part of the book are what are the failures of oversight that allowed this to happen? How is that possible? How could people within the CIA be doing these kinds of drug experiments on people unwittingly and yet never face any hardly consequences for their actions? So I delve into that pretty deeply. How did you get interested in the subject? Like what was your introduction to it? I feel like my introduction is a little bit different probably from most people, because I didn't know that much about MK Ultra. And I was doing my PhD at UT. And I studied the history of science, but my dissertation was on a group of scientists within the intelligence. They had connections to the intelligence community. They were called the science attachees, out of the state department. The state department would send these science attachees to different embassies around the world. And the CIA was very interested in these people, because hey, we have these scientists going abroad. Maybe they can interrogate foreign scientists and figure out what kind of research they're doing. So that led me into being interested in scientists within the intelligence community. And from that, I learned about Sydney Gottlieb, but also mostly my initial interest was this man named Stanley Lovell, who was essentially the Sydney Gottlieb of the OSS. So prior to the CIA, the US had the OSS, the Office of Strategic Services during World War II. And that was the US kind of intelligence agency. And Stanley Lovell was in charge of a branch within the OSS called the Research and Development Branch. And that was the branch that was composed of a group of scientists whose job was to basically invent the deadly weapons, create ingenious disguises, forged documents for secret agents that are center broad. So my first book, the Journey Tricks Department, it's about Stanley Lovell in that group. And one of the things they do are drug experiments. And truth drug experiments, trying to find out whether it's possible to give someone, you know, a captured enemy agent, some kind of drug to make them tell the truth during an interrogation. And it turns out, when I was researching that book, I came across a series of depositions of which Sydney Gottlieb is one of the departments who would later lead MKUltra. And in these depositions, he was talking about how, when he was assigned to be in charge of MKUltra, he didn't really know where to begin. He didn't know anything about mind control. So one of the things that he did, he went into the old OSS files and was starting to look at the drug experiments that Stanley Lovell was doing. And so I thought that's the connection between Stanley Lovell, my first book, and now this one, so that naturally led me into becoming interested in MKUltra. So a lot of the things that Sydney Gottlieb was up to with MKUltra, his blueprint was basically Stanley Lovell. Just imagine being a government agent, the CIA, the OS, that's whatever it is. And then someone says, hey, figure out if we can control people's minds. And that's where you start from. It's not like Sydney Gottlieb was some expert in a test or really, it was a psychologist or really understood human minds. No, they started a program going, what can we do? How can we fuck with people's minds? How can we figure out how to control people's minds? And they did it for decades. Yeah, yeah. And they're probably still doing it now. Well, even before MKUltra, so there are a couple of programs that proceed it. I mean, so during World War II, the OSS was already doing truth drug experiments, not with LSD, because that wasn't really around then. But with THC acetate, they would inject it into cigarettes and have people smoke it. And then they would get high. And the idea- The idea- Well, supposedly, supposedly. The idea was that it lowers their inhibitions. And so maybe they'll be more beautiful to talk in. Oh, that's hilarious. They would just give them splits. Yeah, exactly. They gave them splits. That's a European smoke. Now, and so one of the guys who was actually on the truth drug committee that was overseeing these drug experiments during World War II was Harry Anselinger, who, of course, is launching this crusade against marijuana. And at the same time, he's overseeing these experiments about dosing people with THC. So it's very ironic. That was the case. It's really stunning the kind of damage those people did to just our trust in government. What we know about these psychedelic compounds and drugs and what they did with them that completely changed our idea of what the future of legalization and all these things, there's so much negative impact to what they did. On top of what they did, they essentially created Ted Kaczynski. Well, I'm a little- Are you on the fence on that? I'm a little skeptical of whether M.K. Ultra is connected to that. Well, it's certainly Harvard and the LSD experiments that did it Harvard. And I don't imagine they would do that without the involvement of the government. Yeah, well, without them wanting to have access to research, if you have people at Harvard that doing really critical LSD studies on people, humiliation studies. Yeah, well, with him in particular, he, the study that he was involved in was Henry Murray, was the guy who was running that, is like a psychological experiment. About, I think it was interpersonal relationships where he would basically interrogate them and berate them and see how they reacted to it. Now, Henry Murray, who ran that experiment with Ted Kaczynski, he did have connections to the intelligence community. I just am not convinced that he was funded by M.K. Ultra or something. His connection, he has a couple of connections. One connection that I mentioned in my first book, the Dirty Tricks Department, he was tasked with creating psychological profiles of German leaders, like Hitler. And so the idea was that he would kind of figure out what their psychology was and maybe we could find ways to exploit that psychology. So Stanley Lovell, who was the head of this R&D branch of the USS, he read Henry Murray's psychological profile of Hitler and he decided, maybe I can figure out a way to kind of drive Hitler crazy by using this. So Henry Murray said that Hitler had a very feminine kind of personality, he was on the border between masculine and feminine and at least that's what Henry Murray is saying in this psychological profile. Stanley Lovell reads that and he thinks, maybe I can exploit this by getting one of the gardeners near the eagle-ness where Hitler often had some meetings. There were some gardeners down there. We can get an agent to slip a gardener and there's some female sex hormone in that garden. That gardener can inject it into the beats that are destined for Hitler's plate. Hitler's gonna eat it and it's gonna like exacerbate this feminine tendency and it's gonna make him go crazy or something like that. That was the plan. That never actually happened, but so Henry Murray is kind of connected to the USS in that sense. And then later he developed some personality tests for the USS and CIA, I believe it was for recruits to give these two recruits to determine whether they kind of have the psychological profile. That would be amenable to being in an intelligence organization. Did you see that they recently did a scan of some blood that was found in Hitler's bunker and they determined that he has a very unusual gene expression? Can you find out what that is? It's something that would lead to him potentially having a micro penis. Yeah, which is... The most obvious psychological profile ever, I want to destroy everything in the world, it's got a tiny dick. Maybe Henry Murray was on something. Look at, yeah, I'm sure he was. Hitler's, I'm sure there's something, some research behind it, like somebody must have said something around him. Yeah, I hadn't heard of that. I didn't know that. Hitler's DNA reveals Nazi leader likely had syndrome that can affect genitals, researchers say. According to the Cleveland Clinic, the syndrome can disrupt the process of drug puberty and manifest in symptoms that include undecended testicles and a micro penis. In that wild? It is totally makes sense. Like we should kill everyone with a micro penis. They're too dangerous. It is, you know, maybe useful to be careful about a correlation in causation. A lot of people probably have this in the next... I was probably just coming to people out there. I'm just kidding. Obviously there's like the nicest view of it there that just have it to have a micro penis. But I couldn't have helped it. Maybe his temperament, I don't know. Well, it was also on a bunch of drugs. You know, he had a special doctor that just worked for him. Those videos of him at sporting events or whatever. He's like, the only thing that can forth. It's in comparison. That he's living. Yeah, completely out of his mind on something. Have you read Norman Ollers book, Blitz? Blitz? Yes. I don't know if I've read the whole thing. I know I dipped into it. I can't remember. It's insane. Yeah. It's insane. Yeah, it is. The entire Nazi army was met out of their minds. Yeah. And you know what these... There are a lot of LSD experiments after World War II within the CIA and MKUltra, of course. But also army LSD experiments that aren't really connected to MKUltra. So I don't go into them that much in this book. But there are, you know, the British are doing LSD experiments on their personnel. The US military does too. And, you know, it's some of the stories that come out of it are very silly and really interesting saying. But there is one document I found that talks about how they were giving these two army personnel, these two soldiers LSD, to see how they reacted to it. And so each of them took the LSD. They were in like a padded room isolated with each other. So nobody else was there. And they started hallucinating. And one of them pretended to like start smoking a cigarette. And he didn't actually have a cigarette. He had nothing, you know, but he just pretended to smoke a cigarette. And the other guy was off in his own world. And then the first guy, he reached into his pocket and took out an imaginary pack of cigarettes. He didn't actually have one. It was just an empty hand. But he was just hallucinating that there was one. And he reached it out to the other guy. Basically to offer, hey, do you want a cigarette? And the other guy looked at it and he said, no, I couldn't take your last one. It was just an empty hand. It was nothing. No, I couldn't take your last one. No, I couldn't take your last one. It was just a shared hallucination or something. Wow. Wow. I mean, also back then, we didn't really know too much about that stuff. So they were kind of gathering information about what would happen if you gave someone LSD. Yep. That's kind of the motivation for incalatory in the first place. There were several motivating factors. One of them is, how do we get prisoners to speak during an interrogation? Maybe there is some kind of truth drug that can give them to tell us the secrets that we want to know. Another is, maybe we can use this to discredit individuals, like Fidel Castro. Let's say we know some of the LSD before a big speech. He appears to be crazy. And his people are going to lose trust in him because he's making nonsense. He's just talking gibberish. Was that proposed? Oh, yeah. Yeah. There was proposed a plan to put LSD into cigars that would sneak into Castro's kind of place that he would smoke before he'd get the speech. What I don't understand about that is they were trying to kill him. So if they couldn't get poisoned into his cigars, why do they think they'd get asked? Well, the original plan was to discredit him. And then the later plan was to kill him. There were a couple original plans to discredit him. One is to sneak him LSD to make him appear insane so that his people will lose faith in him. Another one was to slip what's called thallium salts into his shoes. And these are depillatory. They make your hair fall out. And so the idea was that he's got this masking and a masking in a lure with his big beard. But if we can slip these depillatories into his shoes and he puts them on, his beard's going to fall out in like Samson, he's going to lose his power or something like that. That was the idea. So Sidney Gottlieb was kind of involved in some of these that I talk about in the book. Another one. So you have the LSD, you have the depillatory. Another one was to Photoshop images, basically, of Castro with a bunch of beautiful women around him and a buffet of food in front of him and to have a captain underneath it that said, my ration is different to indicate like, I'm getting all the benefits of this, the spoils of society while my people are going hungry. And so the idea was to spread this around Cuba and have people resent Castro for indulging in all these. Well, that one's actually reasonable. Right. A little bit more than the other two. That one's probably the closest accurate. Yeah. So those were attempts to discredit Castro. And then there were several attempts to assassinate him that Sidney Gottlieb and others involved in this story do. So some of the main assassination attempts on Castro involved his hobby of ocean diving. So he liked to dive in the ocean. And one idea was that what if we get this really beautiful shell that he would just be unable to pass up? Oh, you'll be so beautiful that if anyone swam by it, they would obviously want to pick it up. We packed the shell full of explosives and put it on, have some kind of trigger mechanism for when you pick it up that detonates the explosives. So when he's underwater, he's going to swim by this. He's going to see this beautiful shell. He's going to pick it up and it's going to explode. But it turns out they couldn't really figure out a shell big enough that would catch his interest. So that never happened. Another concept with his scuba diving hobby is that what if we gift him a scuba diving suit, there are people kind of negotiating for the return of the Bay of Pigs prisoners. So what if we get one of those lawyers to gift Castro a suit and in that suit, we would lace it with some kind of poison or some kind of fungus that would cause him to break out and what it develops some kind of disease. But it turns out the guy that they wanted to give him the suit had already given him a diving suit. And so it was like, oh, we can't use him anywhere. LAUGHTER Wow. And they were the people running it. Yeah. That was the best they could do. Yeah. But it's just the concept of not having any experience whatsoever in any studies about mind control and just given this assignment, what do you know about mind control? What can we do? How much does it work? What did the Nazis learn during World War II? Because they did a lot of experiments, right? They're doing a lot of experiments. And I mentioned the OSS is doing true-thrugg experiments. The Nazis are doing true-thrugg experiments in their concentration camps as well. And the British are doing some true-thrugg experiments during World War II as well. You can get the British ones online. The, at least, the post-World War II ones was at 1950s. You can have, have you seen the British LST studies? Oh, you haven't seen it? No, I don't see it. Oh, it's wonderful. You should watch it. Well, watch it real quick, because it's kind of hilarious. They stab breaking out. They can't. They can't. You have seen it. I think so. They can't concentrate. They can't concentrate. Some of them start laughing in the middle of doing their task. Could they just start laughing on control when they sit down? Yeah. He, you know, during, I mentioned those like THC acetate experiments during World War II. Yeah. He's got some. He's giant smiles on their face. Yeah. It's kind of the guard goal of it. Yeah, he might have been having a hit. Yeah. If he had to be removed from the experiment after 35 minutes. Look at the radio operator trying to figure out how to work it. And just, they just so confused. And eventually they just start laying down and just laugh like these guys. These guys just get it. Yeah. And these, these THC experiments during World War II, guys. For some of the people, they would give them this THC. They would smoke it through a cigarette. And some of the reactions that talked about was it made them just uncontrollably start laughing and it put them in a good mood. And like some of the reactions were, oh, yeah. I mean, they were just getting these people high and they were reacting to it. It didn't make them tell the truth. No, no, of course not. They did actually make them talk more though because they, they actually recorded these interviews and they would count the number of words per minute that these people spoke. And it turns out after they smoked this, they would, they would talk about like 40% more words per minute. But it's not that this guaranteed the truth. They would just talk. It just ran away. They're talking about cartoons. Yeah. It's, it's just, what other drugs did they experiment with? Did they experiment with amphetamines? Oh, yeah. Yeah. So one, well, I should mention that MK Ultra was broken into 149 sub projects. So MK Ultra was the umbrella term and within MK Ultra there are 149 sub projects that were kind of farmed out to in many cases independent researchers who might be working at a hospital or a prison or a university or something like that. One of the main people who is running these studies is a guy at named Harris Isbel at the Lexington narcotic farm. This is where drug, drug addicts could go to get treatment for their addiction. Prisoners could go there as well. And whenever Sydney got Lee found a drug that he was interested in, he would basically just give it to Harris Isbel who could try it out on these prisoners to see how they reacted and then Isbel would write reports back to God leave. So he tried. Silla Sibin when that came out LSD, but also stuff like, I mean, heroin, the CIA was particularly interested in heroin because if you can induce an addiction in a captured agent, let's say, then you can use that as leverage in interrogation with draw symptoms. So you get them addicted to heroin and then use the withdrawal symptoms saying, well, if you tell us about this, maybe you'll give you that. So that was at least the concept. But there were dozens and dozens of different kinds of drugs they were testing just to see how people reacted to them. And if any of them could be used as a potential truth drug, the heroin one actually makes sense. I never thought of that. Well, one of the ironies as well about this experiment that I mentioned, you know, Harris as Bell and giving these prisoners all these drugs, the prisoners are in this place. It's called the narcotic form because they're supposed to be getting off drugs. You know, they're they're supposed to be, you know, curing them of their addiction at the same time they're giving them all these drugs to test them out. And then as a reward for participating in these trials, they had two options either they could get like a positive letter in the parole ward and like a hundred bucks or something. Or they could go to the drug bank window, stick out their arm and they would get a needle full of heroin as a reward. Oh, my God. I was just beginning off drugs and yet you're incentivizing them to participate in these drug trials by giving them drugs. Wow. This episode's brought to you by visible. When your phone plans is good as visible, you've got to tell your people it's the ultimate wireless hack to save money and still get great coverage and a reliable connection. Get one line wireless with unlimited data and hotspot for $25 a month, taxes and fees included all un-varizes 5G network. Plus now for a limited time, new members can get the visible plan for just $19 a month for the first 26 months. Use promo code SWITCH26 and save beyond the season. It's a deal so good. You're going to want to tell your people. SWITCH NOW at visible.com slash Rogan. Terms apply. Limited time offers subject to change. See visible.com for plan features and network management details. Wow. That's one of 149 sub-ratches. Are you aware that heroin was created as it was a substitute for people that were addicted to morphine? No. No. Yeah. That's correct, right? Search that and pretty sure it's correct. Yeah. They came up with heroin to treat people that were addicted to morphine. Hmm. That's what? You know, it's like oxygivin the moxie cotton if they're addicted to heroin. Yeah. Same thing. But getting someone addicted to that and then pulling it away from them seems like it would be very effective in terms of getting them to give up information. Yeah. That was the idea. So here it is. We put it in the our sponsor perplexity. heroin created as a morphine treatment. Originally developed in late 19th century as a medical drug that was indeed marketed as an improved non-addictive alternative to morphine and as a cough suppressor. Right. Hey, what do you know? Yeah. How nuts. Who, uh, what company came up with it? German bear. There you go. Fucking bear. I think at the same time they were doing this. They just, um, find out if it's true that acetaminophen is what's toxic and tylenol correct. I find out if it's true that at the same time they decided that acetaminophen was too dangerous. It is tylenol. Yeah. I mean, the substance, you know, that's tylenol's the name brand. That's the question. Um, did they poor Jamie, if you're here his voice, that he's a gentleman, inform the people at home, poor Jamie got a tooth pulled last night. It was, it's rough. And he, like not even, yeah, excuse me, last night you were in pain. Today you got a tooth pulled and he's got what looks like a softball stuffed in his cheek. Oh, man. Did, did, did bear decide not to release acetaminophen during the same time period? I, during the pandemic, I got fascinated with acetaminophen because I read this horrible story about this poor lady who got COVID and she was in real pain. So she took a bunch of acetaminophen. She took a bunch of tylenol and kept taking it and apparently didn't realize how dangerous it is to overdose on tylenol. And she died of liver poison. Oh, yes. Yeah. And I was like, oh my God, how many people died of liver poisoning? It's like 500 a year in this country. acetaminophen, it's scary stuff. Was not being actively held back by bear at the same period that it promoted heroin and aspirin. It was simply not yet recognized or marketed the way those drugs were. And his development adoption followed a different path. Existing historical accounts focused more on scientific uncertainty and competing drugs than on deliberate suppression campaign by bear. I don't think, I was, I don't think they were saying in this article that I read that it was a, that they were suppressing it. That they decided not to focus on it because it was dangerous. Why, why I see the medicine last in early clinicians, fabled, fantasy routine and a set of not, how does that work? Was it a nylide? A set of nylide. Despite their later recognized toxicity and instead of a set of menophines, advantages, better safety profile at therapeutic doses was not clearly distinguished at first. Okay. Anyway, we're getting off track. Oh, I was just going to say one of the ironic things too, with some of these MK Ultra sub projects, they're interested in finding these supposed truth throws that could get someone to tell the truth during an interrogation. But it turns out the, even just the threat of giving someone a truth drug turned out to be a lot more effective than any drug that they actually tried out. So for instance, in an interrogation, if you tell someone that this is a truth drug and I'm going to give it to you and you know, it's going to make you tell the truth that can lower their defenses in a bit in a, in the, in the sense that the person who takes this, that might give them kind of the permission to be able to talk. Because it makes them think, well, I couldn't have stopped myself. Well, you know, I mean, they gave me this truth drug. Of course, I'm going to have to say this. So I can't be blamed. No one's going to blame me. So it takes kind of the burden off their shoulders. If they think they've been given a truth drug, even if they haven't just give them a sugar pill. So that actually turned out to be a lot more effective than any of the drugs that they actually tried. Exactly. Totally makes sense. They did the same thing with hypnotism too. The hypnotism turned out to be not that effective in at least an interrogation, but if you could convince someone that they had been hypnotized, even if they hadn't, then that could be effective. So for instance, this is what a guy called Martin Oren. He was one of the psychologists who was in charge of one of these sub projects. But he, he put forward what's called the hypnotic situation, not hypnotism, but the hypnotic situation. So for instance, you pretend to hypnotize someone, the person you're interrogating, and they know they're not hypnotized. They obviously can tell that you're not controlling me, this nothing's happening. However, you start saying things like, you know, I'm hypnotizing you and your hands are getting warmer and they're going to think to themselves another night. But under the table, you secretly implanted a heater and their hands actually are getting warmer because where they're sitting, there's this heater under that, that they don't know exists and it's making their hands warmer. So after a certain period of time, they start thinking to themselves, maybe I am being hypnotized, like the things that he's saying are actually happening. And so if you can make them think that they've been hypnotized, again, that lowers their resistance because I mean, who could blame me for talking now? I've been hypnotized. I couldn't help myself but talk. At least that's the idea. It's just so fascinating to me how much time and effort was spent just studying how to control people's minds and trying to come up with ways to do it. Yeah. It must have been really exciting to be them. I think what they did is horrible. I don't, you know, I'm not in any way forgiving MK Ultra for what they did. However, boy, it must have been fun. Just to have no oversight, no one even knows you exist. You kind of get this impression by looking at some of these MK Ultra documents, especially at the beginning before the Frank Olson incident and Frank Olson eventually dies after one of these experiments. And so that kind of that definitely puts a damper on a lot of things that are going on. Before that though, I do get the sense that it's almost like they're a bunch of guys just trying to, you know, play around with each other in a way, even though what they're doing is completely unethical, but they would just be dosing like the CIA coffee pot and see what happens to people who are taking drinks of it. Just to, I mean, the rationale is that well, if the Soviets possess some kind of hallucinogenic drug and they were going to join to release it into the water supply of a city, we need to know how people would react to that because we need to know how to defend against that. Therefore, we should be doing that to people just to see how they react to it so that we know what kind of signs to look for in case the Soviets do that. And then they dose up a town in France. I don't think the CIA was connected to that. I mean, I think it actually was like an ergot poisoning that came from the red. I think so. But yeah, there was some speculation that it was purpose. Yeah. The town's called Point St. Esprit, I believe. But yeah, there were multiple dozens of people who came down with hallucinogenic symptoms. They were one guy stripped naked and started running around the street. Multiple people died after this. That was one of the things that led the CIA to become really interested in hallucinogens because if a poisoning from a bakery could cause that much havoc within this one French town, how much more damaging would it be if the Soviets did that to a city's water supply? And so that kind of leads the just the IH. That's the justification. So they start to see the coffee fots and the running brothels. Oh yeah. That's the crazy one. Operation Midnight Climax. Look it up folks because it's really crazy. They had their own brothels and they would use two waemiers with cameras behind them and they would dose the John's up that give them a drink. Would you like a drink? Have a seat. You know, sure, I'll have a drink in this poor guy. Get out for work. Has a drink. Think he's going to be with a prostitute and have some nice sex. Next, you know, he's just tripping out of his mind. Why he's been recorded by Jolly West? Yeah. You know, the guy who actually ran that is a guy named George White and he was involved in the OSS. So he was, you know, I mentioned Stanley level and the THC acetate. George White was the guy who was hired to do that in the OSS. Then Sidney Gottlieb, when he's thinking I need to do these drug experiments for myself, who am I going to get it to do it for me? I need someone who has connections to the underworld who has criminal connections. George White was a Bureau of Narcotics Officer and so Gottlieb was going through the OSS files and it turns out, oh, this guy's already done these experiments. I'm going to hire him. So that's how George White eventually gets involved in the CI stuff. Wow. I can't wait for this show. Because David Chase gets a hold of a subject like this is good. There's so much room. Like it's so endlessly fascinating. Yeah. I'm really excited. Obviously, for me, I mean, it's just so lucky that he happened to be interested in this kind of topic. I mean, there are a lot of books out there on any number of topics that anyone could be interested in, but the fact that, you know, I mean, I do consider myself extremely lucky. I happen to write this book at the right time and someone happened to be interested at the right time. So yeah, I can't wait for that to come out. Yeah, I'm very happy that you did write this book and I'm very happy to this happening. Because I talk to people about the subject, you know, like Normie's per se. And they look at you sideways like, what do they do? They do, but they're responsible for Manson. What? Huh? And it's like, oh my God, the rabbit hole is so deep. I don't have enough battery in my flashlight to take it down this rabbit hole. That's one of the things with MKUltra just in general. I mean, initially reading about this, my first impression is that obviously that that's like a conspiracy theory or it can't be right. But some conspiracies are true and the MKUltra stuff, they actually did this. They were dosing people using prostitutes behind a one way mirror. They were white sitting on a toilet watching this happen. They're, you know, I mean, even besides drugs, MKUltra is involved in a lot of psychological experiments. So not just LSD. Most people associate MKUltra with LSD. But one of the, one of the most expansive of the sub projects is sub project 68. By this guy named Ewan Cameron, have you heard that name before? Okay, Ewan Cameron. He is a psychiatrist up in Montreal in Canada working at what's called the Alan Memorial Institute. And... Cameron have you heard her that name before? No. Okay, you and Cameron. He is a psychiatrist up in Montreal in Canada working at what's called the Allen Memorial Institute. And Gottlieb wanted to expand MK Ultra besides drugs because he already had a lot of people doing drug experiments. So he wanted to see if there were psychological techniques that could be used to manipulate a person. So not just in an interrogation, but can we actually like control a person's personality? Can we make them behave in certain ways, make them do something? So the idea that you and Cameron had come up with before the CIA is involved, I should mention you and Cameron is a behaviorist. So he thinks that all behavior is a result of nurture, not nature. So it's the environmental input that causes a person to behave a certain way. And he thought that if you could bring a person back down to a blank slate, remove all the environmental inputs that put into them, and then you can build them back up in your image into whatever you want them to be. So his idea to bring someone down to the blank slate was to induce enough stress that they forgot who they formerly were. And so you reduce them to the blank slate. And then the CIA is really interested in if you could do that, then you could form them into whatever. So you and Cameron, his main goal is to try to figure out what can induce enough stress in a person to bring them down to that blank slate. And so he performs a lot of experiments. His most famous one is called psychic driving where he was doing a therapy session. Quote, unquote therapy with one of his patients. And she had, he was recording the session. And she said something about how, you know, my mother, when I was young used to tell me, blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, she said something negative to her. And so you and Cameron rewinded that on the tape that he was recording and made her listen back to it and said, hey, I want you to listen back to what you say your mother used to say to you. When he rewinded the tape and played it forward, as soon as the woman was kind of quoting her mother and she listened to that herself on the tape, she recoiled. And Cameron thought, oh, you have a negative reaction to that. So he rewinded again and again and again, and he kept rewinding it and she just got more and more emotional had this more and more kind of visceral reaction to what she was saying her mother used to tell her. So this led Cameron to develop the concept of psychic driving, which is you record some kind of negative message and then you make someone listen to it for thousands and thousands and thousands of times for weeks on it for hours every day. All their waking day, they basically are strapped into a headphone that is playing this negative message and it will break them down over time. That's how you induce enough stress to break them down to the blank slate. And then you can record a positive psychic driving message to build them up into whatever image you want them to be. So that was his initial idea. Was it based on anything? Not really. It was just based on he had this one encounter with his woman and she had a negative reaction and he's just trying to do stress. This obviously seemed to induce stress in her. Therefore, we're going to start playing these negative tapes to them. So it was just his idea. It's just his idea. He was known for doing this kind of thing, like kind of spur the moment. In fact, there was one kid basically who had been at this Allen Memorial Institute where you and Cameron was. He had eventually had gotten out, but he had tried to commit suicide. And so he was sent back to the Allen Memorial Institute. But the way that he had tried to commit suicide was to close the garage and have the CO2 build up with a running car and then he would breathe in and pass out and die. That ended up not working. However, when he went back to the Allen Memorial Institute, you and Cameron thought, you know, his personality seems like a little bit better than it was when he was here before. Maybe CO2 can like influence someone. So he sent out some of his assistance to go by like CO2 canisters and we're going to start like giving this to me. But it turns out the assistance knew that this was like completely unethical. There's no medical basis for anything. And so they lied to him and said, oh, the canisters were way more expensive than we could actually afford and we can't do that. So he was just he was trying to find any way that he could have a breakthrough to cure mental illness and he was using his patients as guinea pigs completely completely guinea pigs. What was the result with the woman? The woman where they played the negative recordings? Well, there are dozens and dozens of people who that happened to. I don't know about her in particular because I don't know if she's actually named in the documents. So I don't deal any of these experiments have a positive effect. Oh, hardly hardly hardly hardly. So that was why should he say positive? I should say were the effective. No, no, for the most part, the people who he did his practice on came out way worse than when they went in. So psychic driving, that's initially what got the CIA interested in Cameron. So it's important to keep in mind, it's not that the CIA told Cameron to do this. He's doing this on his own because he thinks he's going to cure mental illness by having this radical breakthrough where we break them down and build them back up and we can build them back up and make them forget their schizophrenia or depression or whatever they have. The CIA reads his article about psychic driving and they think this is the kind of thing we're interested in. So from that point on, they start funding him not only to do psychic driving experiments, but also he does like puts people in chemical commas for months on end. And while they're in these chemical commas, he would put an audio device next to their pillow playing these psychic driving messages and he would put them in sensory deprivation chambers for weeks. You know, they would have goggles over their eyes, earmuffs on their ears. They would have cardboard tubes over their arms so that they couldn't feel anything and they would just be in a room for weeks on end. The idea again being to induce enough stress so that it breaks them down so that you can eventually build them up. But one of the saddest stories in the book really is that this woman named Mary Morrow who was one of the patients of UN Cameron in Montreal. The sad thing about her especially is she had been a resident in training at the Allen Memorial Institute under UN Cameron. So she had been training to be a doctor under him and she had administered some of these techniques including electric shock. So that's one of the things too. We would put these electrodes on the heads of people and just he would continually shock them until again the idea was to reduce them to like and in one case he says an infantile like state where they lose control of their bladder. They can't eat. They can't talk. They can't go to the bathroom on their own. They can't put on their own clothes or anything like that. So she was in charge of administering some of these, I mean, you know therapy sessions or whatever they would call it but just basically torture to these people. She ended up having almost kind of a psychotic break herself. She became anorexic and she failed her neurology exams and so she went into a really deep depression. She attempted to commit suicide that didn't work. She was admitted to the hospital to another hospital. UN Cameron came to visit her and he said, I think you should come back to the Allen Memorial not as a doctor but as a patient and let me treat you. So she ends up going back to the Allen Memorial as a patient and she thought to herself that it's going to be okay. They're not going to do the electric shock to me because you had to sign a consent form and you know for that to happen to you. You know, the people who are signing the consent forms, they don't know how bad it's actually going to be. They're just signing their name but she knows I haven't signed a consent form so they can't do that to me but it turns out in the time since she went to the hospital and came back they had stopped doing the consent forms and he would just do this on whoever. And so they ended up doing this electric shock treatment treatment on her and you know afterwards she would be babbling and continent couldn't put on her makeup or clothes or anything. Eventually, her, she would call her mother after some of these treatments and her mother knew something was going on because she just became more and more incoherent as time went on. So the mother sent Mary's sister Margaret in order to go to the Allen Memorial to basically bust her out of there. So the sister walked in the front door and said, I'm not leaving until I see Mary. You know, I'm going to call the police if you don't let me through. So eventually she goes to her sister's room, opens the door and Mary is sitting there just with wide buggies, you know, doesn't even recognize her sister. It takes several days for her to figure out where she actually is and then she gets busted out of there. So it's a very reversible in any way. In her case, I'm not exactly sure. She went on to have a little bit of a career but she eventually attempted to commit suicide later again. That was unsuccessful. Then her and several of the victims of UN Cameron's experiments in the 1980s they ended up suing the CIA for supporting UN Cameron. And during those lawsuits, the attorneys who are representing them, they took the depositions of several of the people who were involved in MK Ultra to try to use this during their trial. So they took the depositions of Sydney Gottlieb, Robert Lashbrooke, Richard Helms, the head of the CIA and many of the victims who were victims of all this. And that's basically the basis for my book. I found thousands of pages of these depositions. That's just verbatim transcript of these people talking about either what they did or what was done to them. And so I'm using that throughout the book to explain here's what they're doing and their own words or here's what was done to them and their own words. What was the result of the trial? Oh, well, so it was actually settled out of court before it went to trial. So the plaintiffs, the CIA, gave the plaintiffs $750,000 to be split among them. But after attorney's fees and everything, it doesn't really amount to much anyway. And so they settled out of court. They got a little bit of money but it never went to trial. So these depositions though, since it never went to trial, these were just in the papers of Joseph Rao, who's the main lawyer who was involved in this case. And when he passed away, his papers were donated to the Library of Congress that had all these thousands of pages of depositions in there, 823 pages of which are Sydney got the testifying about what he did in MKUltra. And so I was rooting around the Library of Congress and happened to find them. So that's how I found basically the basis for what this book is. Wow. Wow. I wonder how much of that woman's psychological breakdown had to do with the guilt of performing those experiments on people and realizing that it wasn't doing anything that you and Cameron thought it was going to do. In fact, it was destroying people's minds. Yeah, maybe some. I mean, it's just speculation because I'm not sure about it. Of course. That had to avoid on the consciences. You know, there's in what was called the sleep room, you and Cameron's sleep room. This is where they would do the chemical commas. So one of the nurses, I have kind of her diary entries basically describing what she was seeing. And she does seem to be pretty reluctant to have done what she was actually doing. And you and Cameron, she said, what often come over to her and pat her on the back and say, you know, you're helping these people. You're helping these people just trying to coax her along to go along with what he was telling her to do. You and Cameron some size like a complete madman. Like he was almost like too good to be true. Like, too, too good, but too, too, like mad scientist to be true. Was he on any sort of drugs? I mean, I've never seen anything to indicate that he was on drugs, but he definitely had a almost like a messiah complex. He thought I'm going to be the one to win the Nobel Prize in medicine because I'm going to cure all mental illness through this psychic driving or whatever it was. He was going to be the next segment Freud. He really had delusions of grandeur, just like I think jolly West did as well. And so I think that drove a lot of what he was doing. his patience were just a means to his own end. They're the guinea pigs that I can use to prove that these medical techniques actually work and therefore everyone's going to praise me because I've cured, you know, schizophrenia or whatever it is. I would just always suspicious of something that has that, someone has that kind of access to all sorts of compounds. And then you're experimenting on people and, you know, especially with things like amp vitamins which do tend to make people a little less empathetic, a little more driven. You know, I would be very curious to see if he was interested in anything like that. Yeah, I don't remember specifically for him in that case. I mean, many of the people who are either running the sub projects or approving them, like Sidney Gottlieb, Gottlieb took a lot of LSD. You know, he was when the CIA got LSD before it gave it to other people, the first thing they did was try it for themselves to see what actually happened. So Sidney Gottlieb took it multiple times before he ever even gave it to people to understand what it was like. Wow. And, you know, one of the physician who was the attending physician, the first time he took LSD, because they did it in kind of a controlled setting with several other people there, a guy named Harold Abramson. And for anyone listening who knows much about the Frank Olson incident, Frank Olson is a guy that would later be dosed with LSD, who would go out the hotel window in New York. And Harold Abramson is the guy who, Sidney Gottlieb and Robert Lashbrook, they took to New York to get treatment from Harold Abramson afterwards. So he had the CIA connection. Wow. The reason why I brought up in fetamines is because I feel like it might be one of the unheralded or undiscussed drivers in a lot of psychopathic behavior that we see in our culture. Okay. I think there's a lot of people in prescribed amphetamines that operate in a way that is very, very much like a functional method. You know what I mean? And I would wonder like if you were in charge of doing something, this evil, just running experiments where you're destroying people's minds and you're getting no positive results. None of it's working yet you continue to do it. And you even do it to people that used to be involved in the program with a poor woman. What's the psychological profile of that guy? Because he's obviously mentally ill, which is fascinating, right? It's fascinating that a mentally ill person is working on a mind experiment program. Because there's no way he's not mentally ill. Like to have no empathy to these people that you've tried all this stuff on and not only has it not been effective and not rid them of mental illness. It's made them far worse. Yeah. Yeah. For you and Cameron, he I feel like he definitely lacked empathy, whether that's some kind of medically medical thing or whatever. There are a couple people in a book I think who are like that. One of them is you and Cameron. Another is George White who is in charge of Operation Midnight Climax. He was in it just for the fun of it. He would he would dose his own friends with LSD just to see what would happen. You know, there's one story in the book. There was a woman who had gone over to a dinner party basically. She had actually gone over with her husband a few weeks before, but George White didn't dose them because the husband was there. The husband went away on a business trip. So the woman and her friend, they ended up going to see George White to hang out. And White dosed them with LSD. The woman had her one year old son there with her, but he still dosed them with LSD. She ends up basically going crazy. I mean, she, you know, she goes home. She ends up calling, you know, George White asking what's happening to me? What's going on? One of these women, she ended up being committed to a mental institution for basically the rest of her life after this happened to her. So she had some kind of like psychotic break after this unwitting, surpitious dose of LSD. Of course, she didn't know what was going on. So she thought her whole world was collapsing. Yeah, she lost her husband. It was said that she would cower in the corner of her parents, you know, a house before she went to this mental institution, convinced that an unidentified day was like looking after her trying to get her, you know, calling on the phone. None of this was happening, but she was just having these delusions that someone was out to get her. That's kind of a recurring theme that you see in these people who are unwittingly dosed. One of them, one of the saddest stories in the book is a guy named Wayne Ritchie and George White did the same thing to him. But Wayne Ritchie was this, he was a guard at Alcatraz for a while. This is in San Francisco. And he had gone to a Christmas party at the post office there in San Francisco just for, you know, he was a US marshal too. So just the US marshals, whatever. And that night he was drinking, you know, some of the punch at this party. And he started feeling very strange. He started seeing colors, the room started spinning around him. He ended up going upstairs to where his locker was and, you know, getting his things. And he wound up going home because he didn't, you know, know what was going on. When he got home, his girlfriend was upset at him. She said that, you know, I'm not happy here. I want to move to New York. And so when he's in this fog, he decides, I know how to sit my life on track. I'm going to grab a couple of my service revolver, revolvers. I'm going to go to a bar downtown. I'm going to rob it. I'm going to give the money to my girlfriend so she can go to New York and she'll be happy. And so she won't break up with me. So when he's in this fog, he ends up doing all this. He gets his revolvers. He goes to a bar downtown. He, you know, basically has a stick up, give me all the money in the till. A quick thinking patron who's sitting next to him basically gets the mug of beer and smashes it over his head. So he falls down. The cops come later. They arrest him. He's in jail. After a day or two, he kind of sobers up and kind of awakens from this fog. And he doesn't know what happened to him at that point. He ends up losing his job, losing his friends for the next 30, 40 years. He doesn't know what happened until in 1999, he was reading the Washington Post. And he saw an article describing MKUltra and two things in particular stuck out to him. One was George White, whom he knew back in the days when he was a U.S. Marshall. Marshall. And the other one was a description of LSD. And so Wayne Richie starts putting all this together and thinking, I think George White gave me LSD that night at the holiday party and sparked the punch bowl. And that's what happened. And it turns out you can see in this book in the photo section, the last photo in the photo section of my book, it's an image of George White's diary from the day that Wayne Richie went and sang. And it says, federal building Christmas party. So he was there at the Christmas party. Wow. Imagine being that guy reading that article 30 years later realizing this guy ruined my life for fun. So he ended up suing the CIA, but the judge said that he couldn't prove that he had been dose with drugs so they couldn't rule in his favor. And so that was it. Oh, Jesus. Yeah, but there are, I mean, there are dozens of stories like that. Fuck in psycho. Yeah. What a fucking psycho. He's dosing up the punch bowl, ruining lives. And he knows how messed up it is. By that point, he had done this to multiple people and called them and caused them to lose a lot. So he knew what he was doing at that point. God, yeah. This is just what happens with people when they have that kind of unchecked power and no oversight. Yeah. And the kind of psychopath that would be involved in this sort of experimentation in the first place. Yeah. No, so I think he's probably the most heinous of the individuals in this book. All of them are to a degree. Sidney Gottlieb, I think he I don't think he's had as heinous in the sense that he's like intentionally trying to harm people. He thinks he's doing this for a patriotic reason. He thinks MK Ultra is actually going to help us defend ourselves against the Soviet Union. There is some like moral justification at least he has for himself. So it's not all just, you know, whatever George White is doing. But at the same time, Sidney Gottlieb doesn't really take any responsibility for what happens to these people. Basically the way that MK Ultra was structured with these sub projects. Sidney Gottlieb wasn't running these experiments himself. What he would do is he would fund other people to do experiments. And most of the time these people were experts in their own field. So they were like reputable people. You and Cameron was the head of the American Psychiatric Association, the Canadian Psychiatric Association and the World Psychiatric Association. He was like the most famous psychiatrist in the world and he was being funded by this. So Sidney Gottlieb thought, well, if I can fund reputable psychiatrists or drug researchers to do these experiments, then it's up to them to provide the safety and the procedures, you know, to keep these patients safe. It's not my job. They're the ones who are conducting the experiments. That's how he justified it to himself. But that's how the structure of MK Ultra typically worked. So just a diffusion of response. Exactly. Gottlieb is funding people and he's not even funding them directly. In most cases what's happening is he's using cut out organizations. So he's giving them money to the one of them called the getchicker fund. One of them caused the national institutes of mental health. And then the CIA sets up its own cut out organization called the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology, which is just a, it's just a made up organization. But the CIA would transfer the funds to the society who would then transfer it to the researcher. In many cases, the researchers didn't even know they were being funded by the CIA. They just thought, oh, I got a grant from this organization. That's great. So they don't even know that their true patron is Sidney Gottlieb and MK Ultra. They just know, oh, they want me to do these experiments. And in many cases, they're allowed to still publish their work. So they're publishing this. Nothing's changed that much from what they were doing before. But it turns out their patron is actually the CIA who wants to make sure they continue doing these experiments just in case they find something that could be of use. Oh my God. What was your journey personally like both researching these subjects and then writing books about it? Because how was your opinion on all these things before this? And how much of it has shaped your worldview? So with the, probably the first book is more formative to the shaping of my worldview just because, you know, that was the first one I did. So what was your perspective before getting involved in any of this material? Well, I'm pretty much, I would consider myself a skeptic generally. So when stuff gets a little too outlandish, I am pretty skeptical. But of course that the existence of MK Ultra, and even in my first book, the Jourdy Tricks Department, there are some projects that are even more outlandish than some of this stuff I've been talking about with MK Ultra. And so that kind of lowered my barriers to thinking that, oh, people are crazy. You're like, oh, the government does actually perform these crazy, you know, projects. One of the, one of the ones that really lowered my barriers to that for the first book was called Operation Fantasia. And again, it's just a testament to the absurdity of some of the ideas that were happening in World War II and with just within the intelligence community. Operation Fantasia was the brainchild of this guy named Ed Salinger. And he had been a businessman who had done imports and exports with Tokyo and Tokyo. So he knew Japanese culture, he knew the language, he knew the religious beliefs. The OSS wanted to exploit that by trying to find a way we can, we can demoralize the Japanese. You know a lot about the Japanese psyche, the idea was Ed Salinger. So figure out a way we can do more lies to Japanese and make them basically give up this war because, you know, they're dug in, they're not giving up. We need to find a way that we can basically use psychological warfare on them. So his idea is that in the Shinto religion, there are these kind of mystical figures called Kit Suni. And in many cases, they take the form of like a fox, a glowing fox. And oftentimes they represent portents of doom. If you see one of these Kit Suni, it's an indication that something bad is about to happen. And so Salinger knew what if we can artificially create Kit Suni, spread them around Japan, then all these Japanese soldiers are going to see them and think, oh, that's a portent of doom. Surely it means we're going to lose the war. Therefore we might as well lay down our arms right now. And so Salinger, initially his idea is we're going to create whistles that can make fox sounds and we're going to distribute them across Japan to our agents there and they can blow these whistles like anyone would recognize a fox sound. He had the idea that we're going to create artificial fox odors and spread it around places and people are going to think that it's Kit Suni foxes that are walking around none of those ever materialized. But then he thought, what if we actually do it? What if we capture foxes from China and Australia, we paint them with glowing radioactive paint and then we drop them in Japan. Surely that's going to get a difference. So there are actually several experiments. Oh my god. So they captured foxes, the United States radium corporation produced a paint with radium, radioactive, but it's a loom from like dials of watch. Exactly. It's the same kind of thing. So they decided we're going to paint foxes with this, but they first needed to test whether it's possible to paint fur with this and it stay on. So they went to the Central Park Zoo and they got a raccoon and they painted it and kept it under lock and key. And it turns out after a few days of ordinary raccoon shenanigans, the paint stayed on. So they thought, okay, this might have something going for it. So then, Salinger decided we're going to paint these foxes, roll them out into the middle of the Chesapeake Bay and throw them overboard to see if they can actually swim to shore. Because if we're going to get these foxes to Japan, we're going to have to throw them off the coast and they're going to have to swim and then scare people. But can foxes even swim? He didn't know. So he gets these foxes. He paints them with this paint. He throws them in the middle of the Chesapeake Bay and it turns out they actually swim to shore. So that worked. However, by the time they had gone to shore, the paint had all washed off. And so it was in the water. So it's like we were to do this in Japan. The paint's, you see a fox. It's not a kitsune. It has to be a glowing fox. And so he decided, well, that's not going to work. So his next plan, this is one of the craziest things I found for my first book. The next plan was we are going to stuff a fox, a dead fox, just taxidermy it, have this fox body. We're going to paint it with this glowing paint. We can drape a cloth over it and paint glowing bones on it to make it look like a skeleton. And we're going to put a human skull over this fox head to make it look as if it's a human skull because apparently this was like an even more potent version of the kitsune myth that was going around in Japan. So we're going to put this human skull on this taxidermy glowing fox. We're going to have the jaw opening clothes as if it's talking and we're going to blast propaganda out of this skull and we're going to attach balloons to it so that it can fly over Japan. The Japanese are going to look up and see this flying glowing radioactive fox spreading this propaganda and they're apparently going to lay down their arms. I guess that was the plan. So that was his ultimate idea of what we can do to do. Did they launch that? That never actually made it about the time that he was writing all this up and doing these experiments. The Manhattan Project had performed the Trinity test and so it's like, well, we already have the weapon that's going to win the war. So we don't have the glowing foxes. Thank you very much. Wow. Do you know about the three teas of Thanksgiving turkey for eating table for gathering and touchdowns for winning with draft king sports book and official sports betting partner of the NFL. Every touchdown could bring you closer to cashing in before dessert with draft king sports book, all the actions in your hands. First touchdown, anytime TD live bets every play, every snap, every game counts, big plays, bold calls and bragging rights when the games get good, the bets get better. And here's the best part. New customers can bet just five bucks. And if your bet wins, you'll get $200 in bonus bets instantly when the touchdowns happen, we feast. Download the draft king sports book app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan, bet $5 and get $200 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with draft kings. The crown is yours gambling problem called 1 800 gambler in New York called 877 8 open wire text hope in Y 4 6 7 3 6 9 in Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called 8 8 8 7 8 9 7 7 7 7 7 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly on behalf of Budhok, asina when resorting Kansas has to have per wage or tax may apply in Illinois 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario restrictions apply bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in 7 a sin. A month on required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. Wow. Yeah. So when you when you research stuff like that, all of a sudden it's like, well, anything is kind of possible. The problem is most people haven't researched it. So when you're having conversations with people, like I've always been conspiratorially minded, but more in the fun side like Bigfoot, UFOs, dumb stuff as a distraction. Like I know what it is. I'm interested because it's silly, you know, and I just find it fun. Like the Bigfoot thing is my I watched a Bigfoot documentary the other night against my own better judgment. And now my YouTube algorithm is filled with Bigfoot stories. It's just the dumbest thing ever. Yeah. When I started doing the podcast, it slowly shifted my perspective of not only are there real conspiracies, but they're way more prevalent than you would ever think. And you almost have to get lucky to find out about them. You know, like one of the things from the book chaos was Tamilniel describing some of of the documents that were discovered in God of, I believe it was a storage unit that where they had some like the MK Ultra. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's a big part of my book. So in 1975 or so, really in 1974, there's something called the Rockefeller Commission. And that was an executive commission set up to investigate past abuses of the intelligence community. And that kind of led to the church committee in 1975 and also the pipe committee in the house. But after they published their final reports, those reports included things about MK Ultra that the US government had performed these secret drug experiments in the past. And that led a former State Department employee named John Marks to file a freedom of information act request basically for any and all documents related to these former drug experiments. And so, you know, not too long afterwards, this, the CIA, this guy named Frank Loughmanger, he was, he was working like the CIA archives, but he discovered these six or seven boxes of material that Sidney Gottlieb hadn't destroyed when he retired from the CIA because Gottlieb incinerated most of his files and so did Richard Helms. They were in on this together. But it turns out those boxes escaped the destruction because they had sent been sent to the CIA record center several years before Gottlieb and Helms retired. Therefore, they weren't incinerated in this purge and so they survived. So Marks filed that information request. These boxes were found and then they were released. And this was right around the time that there were a couple of subcommittee hearings on MK Ultra and that's right when all these documents came out too. So it became kind of a big deal. But so that's how thousands and thousands of documents have related to MK Ultra survived even though Gottlieb and Helms incinerated most of the files that they actually had. Which leads you to consider what would we know if those documents hadn't been discovered? Yeah, we would be decades behind on this. Yeah, they do reveal a lot of information. That said, we can actually kind of run this scenario because we do know what we kind of knew before those documents were released. So before those... Yeah, they do reveal a lot of information. That said, we can actually kind of run this scenario because we do know what we kind of knew before those documents were released. So before those documents were released, you still had the Rockefeller Commission in the church committee and a few other things. But so we would have known still because it came out before those documents about the Frank Olson incident. This guy was dosed with LSD at this place called Deep Creek and he ended up going out the window of the state of the hotel in New York. He died. We would have known about Operation Midnight climax, even though I don't know if that name was specifically used within these committee publications. So we would have known- No, that's great, man. Well, that's George White's doing. Sydney Gottlieb said he had a flare with a pin. Like he was a journalist before he- I like, oh. Yeah, he was. In fact, while we're on that topic, at the end of Operation Midnight climax, he wrote a letter to Sydney Gottlieb basically thanking him for supporting me for all these years. Out of all the MKUltra sub-projects, you know, a lot of them started in 1953. Many of them were done by 1963, but several continued into the late 60s. But he, after this was done, he wrote a letter to Sydney Gottlieb and in the depositions that I found, the attorneys confront Gottlieb about this and they ask him what was in that letter? And Gottlieb says, oh, you know, he had a flare for writing. You can't trust anything he said, but no, what was in it? Turns out what was in it. George White wrote, I toiled in the vineyards wholeheartedly because it was fun, fun, fun. Where else could a red-blooded American boy lie, cheat, steal, rape and pillage with a sanction and blessing of the all-highest? He wrote that down. Yeah. God. Yeah. So we would have known about the Frank Olson incident. We would have known about Operation Midnight climax, though maybe not that name. We would have known the broad outlines of MKUltra because that was already released before those files, but the files give us a really detailed view of what happened. But we don't know what was in the files that were incinerated. That's correct. Imagine that. Yeah. We, we kind of do know a little bit about what was in them because there was an investigation that was done afterwards because it was illegal for them to destroy these files, not that anything ever happened to them. They didn't face any consequences for it. However, Gottlieb's secretary, this woman who had only been working for him for a few weeks before he retired, he told her to basically incinerate these files, you know, to help him do this. So she didn't know it was against protocol or whatever. She was new to the job, but she was interviewed later as part of a CIA investigation into the destruction of the files. And she does say a little bit about what she thinks were in the files. She says it was some of his personal papers and there was secret and secret sensitive files in there. We don't have really have a great idea about what it could be. Although I do think a lot of the files were in the depositions that I found, George White or Sidney Gottlieb says that George White would write to him personal updates about the experiments that he was doing in these, you know, brothels basically. And so I'm assuming that a lot of those files consisted of George White's personal reports on what was going on. Now, when you get deeper and deeper into this stuff, how much has it shaped your worldview? A decent amount in the sense that just as I did for kind of the American public in general in the 1970s when this was coming out, it really led people to cast a skeptical eye toward the government and thinking, it's just assumed that the government is supposed to be the protector of civil liberties. But after Watergate, after MKUltra, after the Vietnam War, it starts to seem as if the government is infringing on the civil liberties, you know, instead of being the protector of it, in many cases it's infringing on them. Not that it doesn't protect civil liberties, but one of the main things that I came away after writing this book is the problem of oversight. You know, I think the constitutional system of government that we have is ingenious, the fact that we have checks and balances and these separate the separation of powers. However, you have to enable the separate branches of government to be able to check the other branches. For most of the Cold War, that external check on the executive branch, the Congress checking the executive, the president or the CIA didn't really exist. So, anytime that the CIA was doing an operation, I haven't chapped about this, but you know, sometimes CIA personnel would try to inform members of Congress of what they were doing. But one specific quote where a CIA guy walks up to a sitting senator and says, hey, let me tell you about what we're doing in Chile or whatever it is. And then he says, no, I don't want to hear it, don't tell me, just do what you're going to do. He doesn't even want to know. So it's like, how can you expect Congress to give oversight of the executive if they are completely unwilling to even know what the executive is doing? And, ultimately, in the aftermath of these revelations, there have been some programs or committees that are set up within Congress to provide that external check. However, it's not even clear how effective those are. One check on the executive after this is that the president now has to sign off basically on covert operations so that eliminates the president's plausible deniability. One of the main themes throughout this book is what I call the vicious cycle of secrecy. So, in organization like the CIA that has secrecy, that kind of leads to what I see as this vicious cycle. Secrecy leads to plausible deniability because if it's secret, nobody can know that I'm doing this. For, I'm not going to be blamed for it. So secrecy leads to plausible deniability. Plausible deniability leads to reckless behavior, like MK Ultra. If nobody's going to find out what I'm doing, therefore I'm incentivized to do some crazy stuff because I'm not going to be held accountable for it. So secrecy to plausible deniability, plausible deniability to reckless behavior, reckless behavior, and many instances leads to embarrassment. It's almost inevitable for many of these projects that they get found out. Someone leaks something to the press. This is how the family jewels at the CIA had that was like a compilation of all the illegal stuff that it had done over the past couple of decades. It eventually got leaked to Seymour Hersh who published it on the front page of the New York Times. So, reckless behavior leads to embarrassment, but embarrassment leads to secrecy because now that we've been found out, we got to make sure that never happens again. We need more secrecy in the vicious cycle to continue. So if you can break that vicious cycle by having some kind of external check, that's what you actually need, like an empowered Congress that is willing to check the executive. And then you realize who will, who's running against them? Who wants that job? Not a lot of impressive people. A lot of really driven, successful, intelligent people are involved in other activities that consume their time. They have families, they have careers, they have a lot. They don't have the desire to be a Congressperson. So you're not getting the cream of the crop. You're not even getting anything remotely similar to the cream of the crop. You're occasionally getting great people that really want to serve the country. But that is rare. That is like, I wouldn't say rare, but if 20% of the food you ate at a place was poison, would you go eat at that place? I know. You would not. You would say, I'm assuming there's fucking poison in that place. That's Congress. Yeah. And you know, that's elected officials. Yeah. And Andrew Yang has made this point before I know I've heard him say it that the, the reelection rate of Congress is super high. It's like 80, 90% whatever it is. The approval rating for Congress is like in the teens. So how is it we have such a divergence between the re-election rate and the approval rating? It has to do with the, the, the kind of electoral system, you know, the people who are incentivized to actually run for Congress. And in many cases, they're the most ideological on either side because the only race that matters is actually the primary because if you're in a, you know, a district that is 90% Trump voters, the Republican is going to win the general election. It doesn't matter who it is. So, you know, the, the primaries, the main election that happens in those districts. And if that's the case, well, the person who can win the primary is going to win the general. And who's going to win the primary? Well, it's going to win, it's going to be the person who can get 90% of Trump voters to be more interested in them than whoever the other Republican, you know, is. Right. In many cases, that drives ideological extremism because, you know, you're, you're already selecting a sample size of voters within the primary who are the most ideological extreme. And so they're going to elect basically whoever it is because the general election is a foregone conclusion. So if you can re-align the electoral system in a way to where, you know, I mean, I don't know the answer to this, but it would be some kind of open primaries or ranked voting or proportional representation, ending, gerrymandering, something like that, then you better incentivize Congress people to actually want the job or incentivize people who would be good at the job to engage in the job or to, to become Congress people because they actually have a clear path to doing it because they're not going to be blocked in the primary. So some kind of reform like that, I think, is how you better facilitate this check between the different branches. And, but even then, I don't know if it motivates the cream of the crop because I just, I think most people would rather be on the outside like most wealthy people that are successful. They'd rather fund a candidate that, you know, suits their needs. Yeah. That would be big money out of politics. That would be wonderful. That would be one, that would be the single probably biggest help. And then also getting out insider trading out of Congress make it less like when you're finding out that people are getting $170,000 a year and there were hundreds of millions of dollars and there's no investigation whatsoever like what did you do? What did you do and why you still working? If you're so good at trading, why are you working for $170,000 a year which is a great salary, don't get me wrong. I'd take it. Nothing wrong with $170,000 a year but when you have $400,000 million, like you couldn't get me to do a job for $170,000 a year. Like I don't have the time. You could get me to do it. Right. But you know what I'm saying? Like you can get Congress people to still show up and do that job. Is it because they care that much about the American people? Well, that doesn't really drive. It doesn't make sense because they seem completely full of ship when they give their speeches and they it's all canned and fake and instant seer and there's no you don't have any real connection with their words. So what are they? They're they're these weird people that have accepted this job that no one wants. It's critically important to the function of our government and you're getting really dull people that are taking this job. It's fascinating. One of the things that also was like so disheartening I had a rep Luna on the podcast. Who was great and she's very very interesting and we mostly we're talking about UFOs because that's the thing that she's involved in. But one of the things she said about certain issues is they don't want to solve these issues. Oh yeah. Because this is how they run. Yeah. They can fundraise off of them. Yeah, exactly. And I was like oh no. Yeah. Like just that trap. Like oh no. I didn't want to think that that is the case and she's like oh that's it. That's 100% it. Yeah. They don't want to fix it. I mean that makes me even more convinced though that a restructuring of the electoral system in a way that you know eliminates. I don't know that incentivizes basically better behavior whether that's through open primaries, ranked choice voting whatever. Yeah. That has to help in some way I would think so. Well there should also be some sort of a competency test if someone wants to take that position. Like if you want to be a lawyer you have to look at pork him Kardashian. She can't pass the bar. She's trying so hard. She keeps going to get him pass the bar. It's hard. It's hard to be a lawyer. I'm kind of skeptical of a competency test in a sense though because someone has to write the test. Well not not only that but are you watching them to the use chat GPT and we're living in a weird world right now. You know it's a very weird world of technology. Yeah. But it would be nice if you knew that this person was capable of doing the job. I mean I bring it back to the passing the bar thing because you know laws very complicated. One of the things that I found out really recently that is super disturbing was that you don't have to be a lawyer to be a judge. To be a judge. Interesting. Oh if you don't have to know anything. I guess you know anything. You can just become a judge. You can be a regular person and just now you're a judge. Yeah. I wonder what kind of judge that is because I know some judge positions. Yeah man I don't give a fuck if it's a judge a Dairy Queen. Like you. What are you talking about? You don't you don't have to be a lawyer to be a judge. That's insane. That's so insane. That's like you don't have to count to be a mathematician. Like what are you talking about? You're a judge. You don't have to be a lawyer to be a judge to me. It was like oh my god. State and federal courts most state and federal court in all federal judges must have a law degree. Some state. Plaque practice requirements. Many states required judges to have a certain number of years of experience as a practicing lawyer for their eligible for a judge ship. Makes sense. When a law degree may not be required. Limited court jurisdiction some states allowed non lawyers to become judges in specific lower level courts such as those that handle small claims, traffic violations or minor criminal state and local variations. The specific requirements may vary wildly by state even by the type of court within a state and training judges appointed from the non lawyer pool typically must compete complete specific training programs. What is the program? I wonder if that's a relic of like rural communities where maybe there isn't a lawyer but you need someone to act in that position. Right. Like you got to be a sheriff in this town. Instead of being like an MD doctor some people can practice medicine in rural communities they do without being a MD doctor. I forget the term of it. Okay. Whatever that term is. Because they don't have a doctor. Well yeah they don't have a doctor but you can you can you still have a degree not an MD but some kind of metal hole degree that maybe doesn't require as much time. Or you didn't complete your residence. So maybe it's a relic of that. Right. That makes sense. But point being that if Congress has oversight over these things well who are we talking about? This is the thing like if you are the CIA and you are running some program that you think is crucial to national security. And you have some fucking dangling from pick a state Virginia North Dakota whatever some dang dong that just happened to be able to get the right amount of votes because they have the the right color on their flag. And then all of a sudden they are in. And you have to talk to this fucking moron like get out of here. Like I'm not telling you shit you're going to hold back information you're going to come up with reasons why you have to redact files. Fuck off you'll be gone in two years. Yeah. This is the inherent tension within any intelligence community whether it's the CIA or the FBI. There are legitimate reasons to keep things secret. You have to keep secrets. 100%. But at the same time the fact that you're afforded that secrecy allows you to avoid accountability. 100%. It's a catch 22. You have to keep secrets. There's just no way around it. But at the same time how can I know that the secrets they're keeping is because it's in my interest or it's because it's in their interest. Oh 100% and then you find out the really crazy stuff that's happened in the past like like the demean Arkansas cocaine situation. I haven't heard that one. You didn't know about the Barry Seals story. No. They made a movie about it with Tom Cruise. In fact in the movie Tom Cruise actually gets arrested for smuggling cocaine and Bill Clinton gets him off. They call Bill Clinton. He gets arrested in Arkansas. They call Bill Clinton and they have him dead to rights and you know he's joking around with the cops saying I'd like to buy you guys all cattle acts and stuff like that. And they're like you're going to jail for the rest of your life. He goes no she's going to get a phone call and I'm going to walk right out of here. And it turned out to be exactly how it happened. Barry Seals was flying drugs from South America and dropping them off in mean of Arkansas and then they would go and pick them up in the woods. They had a drop point. Two kids were hanging out in the woods and they witnessed it accidentally. They were murdered. And then the official story was they had done drugs and they laid down fell asleep on train tracks. The parents funded in autopsy and the autopsy show that they'd been stabbed multiple times. So then there's an investigation comes through. And then it turns out that there's a long history of this guy Barry Seals was CIA operative who was flying in cocaine dropping off in mean of Arkansas all known about by the Clintons. Everybody was aware of it. He had been funneling this money and they were using it probably for black ops. Similar to what they did with the Contras in San Denise to you know the Sanchez versus the San Denise in Nicaragua. He winds up going to testify gets murdered on his way to the trial with George Bush's phone number in his pocket. The whole story is like completely crazy. Wow yeah. When did that happen? I hadn't heard of it. There's when Bill Clinton was a governor. So I believe it was the 80s. 86. I don't know. Yeah. Fuck you weren't alive then. That's hilarious. Um, fucking crazy story. But this is the CIA right when this is the same thing that they did. Um, I'm friends with Freeway Ricky Ross, you know who he is. Okay. Great story. So Rick Ross the rapper. Okay. He got his name from a very famous street hustler named Freeway Ricky. Okay. Rick Ross his name real name is Rick Ross. He's the real Rick Ross. Rick Ross was a guy who is a tennis player, a young tennis player who started selling cocaine. It was like super disciplined because he was tennis player. So it was funneling millions of dollars of cocaine. Had no idea he was getting his cocaine from the CIA. So he was getting cocaine selling it in the hood. They were getting the money and they were using it with this Oliver North thing. The conscious versus the San Denise does. All of this comes out in court and he wants up going to jail. He wants up going to jail for selling the cocaine. Doesn't know how to read. He's illiterate. Learn how to read in jail. Becomes a lawyer in jail. He goes over his trial and realizes that they had tried him on the three strikes law, which is supposed to be three different felonies at three different times, but they jammed them all together. And so he gets off. So he's free now and he sells legal marijuana in California. He's been on the podcast multiple times. But this was the CIA that was involved in all of this. This is how they were making money. They were selling cocaine. And one thing crazy just about not only that, but MK Ultra in general, it's against the CIA is charter to operate within the United States. You know, that should be a deal in there right there for whatever they're doing within the United States. It's just it's within it's against the charter. Yep. I mean, there's no more discussion. That's illegal. Watch this thing without oversight. There's cowboys. And there's also when you realize how much money is there to be made and that you could fund this funnel this money into oversee accounts that are in the anonymous and then you could eventually retire someday and get out of the game and be worth millions of dollars and live in Monaco or whatever the fuck you want to do. Like, and I think that's the dream for a lot of these guys. I think they get involved. They realize it's a completely corrupt system and it's corrupt from the top down and there's ways to make money. And there's a bunch of stuff going on where money's being funneled into these NGOs. and there's just so much opportunity for corruption and so little oversight and so much power and so much secrecy. And as you were talking about the importance and the necessity of secrecy for national security, which is a real thing, but also leads the corruption and it leads to people just doing wild things because there's no one watching. And they're in control. They're like it's so it must be so fun. Like, what's his name was talking about? George White? George White. Like, he was talking about like, like how much fun he had, which is so sick. Yeah. But that's the kind of people that want that kind of a job. And if you make that kind of a job available with no oversight, we know your counsel of elders. Like a wise counsel. You know, like, of like completely objective, brilliant people that oversee all these things that aren't ideologically captured. You know, they're financially independent. They don't need anything from you. I've mentioned external oversight like Congress checking the executive, but at the same time, one of the big problems with MKUltra or one of the problems that led to MKUltra without people even within the CIA questioning it. There are people in the CIA who know about it. Actually, not that many because it's very heavily compartmentalized, but some people still do know about it. So one of the questions I was asking myself throughout this book. Why aren't the people who were in the CIA and know about MKUltra? Why aren't they speaking up? Why don't they say pulled Sidney Gottlieb aside and just have a conversation with them? Do you think what you're doing here is all right? I think they're terrified about their career. That's exactly the thing. There's a specific person within the CIA during this time. That's his job, the Inspector General. So the Inspector General within the CIA, his job is to make sure there's nothing that goes against the CIA's charter or internal regulations or the U.S. law. But I found an interview that he did later. There's this guy named Lyman Kirkpatrick. He was the Inspector General during the 1950s when this was going on. And he did an investigation into MKUltra in 1957 as it was going on and it continued on after that. And so one of the things he talks about is why isn't the case that he tried, why didn't you try to shut this down? Like you obviously knew this was illegal. In fact, in 1963, a different CIA Inspector General named John Earman, did a separate investigation into MKUltra in his report that I quote in this book specifically says, what I think they're doing is quote, illegal and unethical. Those are his terms and he's the Inspector General. Yet in this later interview, Lyman Kirkpatrick talks about why didn't you tell them to stop? Why didn't you put an end to this? Why didn't you raise this to higher ups? Why didn't you do something? And he said, I was worried about bringing up anything that could cause me to lose my job. He knew that if he brought this up, he'd basically be retaliated against. And so that was it. So, you know, there's problems with external oversight, but also internal oversight. The internal oversight has to be able to bring that kind of stuff up. And another lack of internal oversight is the fact that Sydney got Lib and Richard Helms, they could destroy all these files with no repercussions. It's just completely illegal. It's against the CIA's own internal regulations. In fact, in these depositions that I found, some of the most colorful parts of the depositions happen with the lawyers. The lawyers just get into heated arguments back and forth. That makes the book really colorful. At certain times, they're, you know, Joseph Raus, this old civil rights, you know, he used to be the civil rights lawyer. He took on this case basically to fight against the CIA. At certain points, he basically says to the other lawyers representing the CIA, I'm going to punch you in the nose. And he says, I'm never giving this up. I'm going to mortgage my house if it means I have to keep on fighting you. But there's a certain point where he basically lays into Gottlieb asking him, why did you destroy the files? Why did you destroy the files? Sydney Gottlieb comes up with several excuses. One of those excuses at first is he says, the CIA was drowning in paper. We had so much paper, we couldn't move. So there was just an internal kind of drive to get rid of this paper so that we could walk around and figure out where stuff was. But he's just completely making this up. The Raoul Press is in again. Why did you destroy this stuff? Sydney Gottlieb, you know, and he does this to Richard Helms too. They both eventually say again, well, we wanted, you know, it's part of our job to protect sources and methods. And so we wanted to make sure that nobody would be able to know what our sources and methods were as part of this project. So we had to destroy the files. And Raoul was like, these files are secret. It's not like they're going to be released to the public. They're the CIA's files. How could, how could destroying them protect sources and methods any more than just not releasing them to the public? That's just a non-excuse. So eventually Raoul Press has got me more and he kind of breaks down during this interrogation. And he says, I was embarrassed by it. I was embarrassed by what I had done, basically, you know, ruined the lives of all these people, spent $10 million at all these different institutions for what? To ruin these lives and we didn't even learn that much out of it. And so he destroyed the files. Wow. So, and didn't face any repercussions. So in addition to external oversight, there's got to be some internal oversight that can provide a check and prevent that from happening or if it does happen, at least at least deter others from doing the same thing by holding them accountable. It's really fascinating that what we're experiencing is essentially 250 years after the founding fathers had already recognized these patterns of human behavior required oversight. They required checks and balances in order to have a government that doesn't sink into tyranny. You have to have all these things in place to make sure that no one person has the power to do anything that really fucks up the apple cart. And they knew that this was a, and they really painstakingly structured this system of government that they thought would protect against it. Just they didn't factor into account special interest groups and the stock market and money and they just didn't factor into, I mean, you expanded exponentially into so many different factions and so many different influencing bodies that it's almost completely out of control. Essentially, they knew what could happen that has proven to be accurate, which is really kind of fascinating. It is. It's a brilliant system and I quote James Madison actually when I talk about oversight because his specific verbiage is, you know, auxiliary cautions are auxiliary precautions. You know, humans, he says, man, men aren't angels. Therefore auxiliary precautions are necessary to keep their ambitions in check, which means external oversight, which is exactly right. This is exactly what you need. He's exactly right. You know, I wonder like where this goes because it's going in the wrong direction from the founding fathers to today. It's going in the wrong direction. It's like I think most people agree that the lack of oversight and secrecy is a gigantic problem with not just the stuff that we've already discussed with them, Kaltre and the CIA and the cocaine and all these different things. But virtually everything that gets decided upon in our government that affects daily lives of people. There's so many different influences that aren't based on the greater good of the American people. It's based on financial interests. And that's sort of overwhelmed all of our policies, overwhelmed all of our systems of government. And then you have all of these social issues that they never really want to fix because they can't paint fun against them, which is what we're talking about before. So this is this constant psychological game. There's a game of us versus them. There's a game of certain key points whether it is abortion or gun rights or immigration or whatever it is. Like nothing ever gets solved. These are the beach balls that they throw up in the air at the concert and they keep getting bounced around. And we're just a little dumb monkeys that are giving up our tax dollar so they can keep running this giant Ponzi scheme. Yeah. I will say a counterintuitive point that I think is important to also make though is Daniel Shaw was a CBS News correspondent. And he's the guy who initially broke the story on CIA assassination tips on foreign leaders. And he has this quote about how the US has a pendulum that swings between security and liberty. The more security you have, the more liberty basically you have to take away. You can be infinitely secure but that means that the government would be inside your house and know everything about you and prevent you from doing anything. But nothing bad would happen. At least you wouldn't be able to do anything bad because there would be a policeman in every bedroom basically. On the opposite side, you know, the pendulum swings too far, the opposite way, complete liberty. Well, you have no security because anyone could do anything. So there's this constant tension between security and liberty that swings throughout American history. And an important thing to keep in mind is that I don't think you want that pendulum to stop. You actually want a little bit of tension between that. In other words, you want the press and Congress to be exposing abuses. because human nature is not going to change. People are going to try to abuse the system and whatever it is. That's not going to stop. However, if the press and Congress aren't exposing these abuses, you might think that there are no abuses happening, but they're going to be happening. So I think it's actually good. The fact that this pendulum is swinging a little bit, the fact that there is a little bit of tension in the fact that there are being abuses being exposed. I wish the abuses didn't happen, but at the same time, the abuses are going to happen no matter what. Therefore, the exposure of the abuses is a good sign. It's a sign that the system is actually working as intended because the abuses are being exposed. You know, one of the points I make in this book is, Dread the Day when the press sings nothing but the praises of those in power. And Congress says that there are no abuses to investigate. It might seem like that's utopia, but that's the day that you have lost all of your liberties. That's a very good point. That's a very good point. And well said. I think this is what we're seeing now with independent journalism. And that these, a lot of these issues that get raised are coming from independent journalists first. And then they ultimately have to be recognized when they reach the zeitgeist. They ultimately have to be recognized by the New York Times or by the that raised are coming from independent journalists first. And then they ultimately have to be recognized when they reach the zeitgeist. They ultimately have to be recognized by the New York Times or by mainstream media publications. But they're not the ones who break a lot of these stories. A lot of these stories are broken by the Glenn Green Walts and the Matt Tei-Bees and the genuine independent journalists who initially worked for an organization and then found there's some sort of an ideological blockade or some certain subjects that they couldn't breach or certain things that they were told that they couldn't publish. And they were like, I'm out. And then they started doing it on their own. And then also social media. This is the new function that social media has where you have these accounts that break new stories all the time. And interestingly enough, some of them are very reliable and those ones wind up becoming the ones that people share. And they get a tremendous amount of followers. And then they are more trustworthy, oftentimes, than corporate media, which is really kind of scary, but also fascinating. Like there's a need for it. There's a recognition. There's a distribution of information that lets you to see. See all of this corruption and all of this chaos. And like what's at the root of it and why is in this being discussed in the New York Times? And then all of a sudden someone puts up this 10 Twitter post of all these different links and shows you this is the history of the story of it. And then a month later, it's in the Washington Post. And it's interesting. It's interesting. It's almost like this need exists. It's not being fulfilled by mainstream media because mainstream media is captured by corporate interests. So in order to have this information comes out, the world gives us this new platform and that's social media. And social media distributes all this stuff. And then you go have to sort through what's real, what's foreign governments making up big stories. You'll have to be able to see other side of it. But the algorithm can push something. But it doesn't necessarily push truth. It might just push engagement. And it's that's the case. And how do you know community notes? Yeah, yeah, something like that. Well, that's the beautiful thing about Twitter. And when Elon solved that issue with community and I don't necessarily say solve. It's not solved. But it's certainly made it a lot easier to understand what's going on. Because there's oftentimes there's some outrageous video clip. Like, oh my God, can you believe the Democrats are doing this? And then it turns out, no, that's actually from a movie. Or that's actually AI. Or that's actually from 2016. And it's in Poland. Or you know what I mean? There's a lot of that stuff happens. Where people get outraged and someone posts something. And then I always go to the original account that posts it. And how many times have gone there? I'm going, oh, you're not a real person. Most of the time I go and look at all the posts that they have. I'm like, well, this is either a bot or this is a foreign government running one of these like puppet accounts. Yeah. You might like being a historian. Because it sounds like that's very similar to what I do in the historical record, not on social media. But most, a lot of what I'm doing is following this source, that's this source, that's that source, that's that source. And it's like, where's the origin of this thing? And you can see the, it's a game of telephone. You can see the transformation along the way. One of my favorite examples comes from my first book. I was writing about William Donovan, who was the head of the OSS. And he was this really, you know, larger life than life individual, a World War I war hero. He had a middle of honor and all kinds of stuff. And there was this really great quote in a book. And it was describing Donovan basically as that. He was the kind of guy that would dance on the roof of the hotel and he would, you know, you know, he would destroy these planes and whatever. And I thought, man, that's such a like exciting quote to encapsulate who he is. So I was reading this book and I kind of, okay, I'm going to mark that quote. I'm going to come back and see where does he, what source is this from? So I can use that in my book. So I go to the source. It turns out it's sites another book. And it's like, okay, I've got to get that book. So I go to the library. I was teaching at Louisiana Tech at the time. Go to Louisiana Tech library, get that book. Open it to the page that it says, find the quote, go, okay, here's where it is. Now go to the back of the book, see the note. The note, site's another book. It turns out I had that book. I owned that book. So I went back home, go to that book, do the same thing, look for the source of this quote. It turns out it was a book I didn't have in the library didn't have. So I had to put an interlibrary loan in you. So I had to basically request that my library and get the book from a different library. That was going to take several weeks. So, okay, now I've got to wait. In the meantime, I go into Google Books. I start searching this quote for other books. It turns out they basically cite the books that I had already consulted. So that's a dead end there. After wait for this other book to come in. And in the meantime, I'm thinking to myself, that quote sounds awfully familiar. What do I know that from? It turns out I had already used that quote in my book, but it was from a different context. It wasn't talking about William Donovan. It was talking about just people in the OSS in general. And the quote was different. It wasn't like the same quote, but it had many of the keywords. And you could tell that it was the same thing, but somebody had changed it. So now I'm thinking, did I use like a fake quote? You know, in this book. So I got to figure out in my manuscript where I got this. It turns out I got it from this book called Wander by this guy named Sterling Hayden, the actor later in actor. He was in the OSS. And he had used the quote because he was quoting, he was talking about when he was in Europe after he ended the war. He told someone he was in the OSS and they said, oh, the OSS guys are the kind of guys who blah, blah, blah, and I thought, okay, well, he's recalling this from memory. So this must be the origin of the quote. Then what are all these other books quoting? So finally, that interlibrary loan comes in and I get it. And it basically says the quote, but it's a little bit different. And it's referring to Donovan again, and not just OSS guys in general. And it doesn't side a source. So I thought, okay, what happened is the guy who wrote that book, he had read Sterling Hayden's book. He had taken the quote and he liked it, but he wanted to apply it to Donovan. So we switched the subject and he changed the quote a little bit and everyone after that, dozens of different books have cited that as their original source. And it was about the wrong person and not even the right quote. Wow. So that's for one code in my book. That's the amount of work you have to do. Well, kudos to you for doing that work. Right, that's why people like you are so important. That you chased that whole story down to the end. If anyone is interested in that though, in my book, I cite the original book, obviously, because that's what, but next to what I said, also see Joseph Percicco blah, blah, blah, the original book. So that's the book that I originally found the quote in. So if they want to go down the rabbit hole, they can follow his book to that book, to that book, to that book. Wow. Wow. It's a lot of rabbit holes going down, even just to find origins of things. Well, and then apply that to religion. You know, like stories. Oh, oh, yeah. You know, like game of telephone. Oh, my God. You know, what was the original story? Yeah, it's a lot of this stuff, the secrecy, MK Ultra, all the stuff we're talking about, about oversight. It all relays to the way the human mind works, like that the human mind, in this instance, would take a quote and for its own convenience, apply it to a different person and change it a little bit. It's like we're constantly dealing with all of these factors that are in motion with human intelligence, with ego, with reputation, embarrassment, the ambition, power, control. And one thing I especially noticed in doing this too, is the ability for humans to rationalize anything to agree with what they already think is true is almost limitless. I give an example in this book of a psychologist named Leon Festeringer. He wrote this book called When Prophecy Fails. And it's a really fascinating story, where he was looking at a newspaper, and he saw an announcement for the end of the world. There was this cult called The Seeker's Cult, and they had said basically on December 21st, 1953, I think it was, it's gonna be the end of the world. There's gonna be a massive flood, join us, and so we can get whisked away on the spaceship before the end of the world happens. Festeringer sees this, and he thinks, this is a great psychological experiment, because they are making a specific prediction. On this day, this is gonna happen. What happens when it doesn't happen? So he decides to embed himself in this cult, basically, they knew he was a psychologist, but they said, yeah, sure, come on by. So him and some of his researchers, they just sit with the cult on the day that the world is supposed to end, because they wanna know, how are they gonna deal with the fact that the world doesn't actually end? So, obviously, there wasn't even a light rain, there was like no flood. And so the world doesn't end. Some people actually do end up leaving the cult afterwards, but many people stay, especially the people who had sunk many costs into the cult. They had abandoned their families to join this, they had donated lots of money, they had quit their jobs basically to be in this cult, because they thought the world was gonna end, what do we need money for? And so those people stayed, and now, Festeringer coined the term cognitive dissonance. So the idea that you're holding two irreconcilable views and your mind at the same time. So one of their views is we predicted, because we had received revelations from God, basically, that the world was going to end on this day, that's one position they're holding. The other position is the world didn't end on that day. So these are cognitive dissonance. How do we reconcile the fact that these two things contradict each other, but we have to believe both of them? So Festeringer was interested in how they would do this. There were a couple rationalizations originally. One was, well, maybe God minute in a figurative sense, not a literal sense. Maybe it was a figurative flood that was going to cleanse our minds of something, not like a literal flood that was going to kill everyone. But then they said, no, and we actually thought it was going to be a literal flood. So he's in the middle of their discussions when they're rationalizing this, and they eventually come upon the conclusion, God was going to destroy the world. We were right to believe that he was going to do that, but because he saw how fervently we believed in him, and how fervently we believed that the world was going to be destroyed, he decided to have mercy on us and didn't destroy the world. So the fact that we believed that the world was going to be destroyed is the reason why the world wasn't destroyed. So the evidence against them becomes evidence for them. We know we are right because the world wasn't destroyed, because that proves that God was taking mercy on us. So this is how they rationalize it. So this is non-fulsifiable, something that there's no way you could prove it wrong. This is an indication of a bad theory of its non-fulsifiable. It's not tethered to reality. It's a gold medal meant to do it now. Exactly. If something's non-fulsifiable, the classic example for me of non-fulsifiability is the concept of last Thursdayism. So it's the idea that God created the universe last Thursday. Now, how could I prove that wrong? I asked my students this and many of them say, well, I remember last Wednesday. I remember time before last Thursday, but of course you remember that, but God created you and your memories last Thursday. So of course you would think that there was time before last Thursday because God implanted those memories in you last Thursday. In other words, this is just a non-fulsifiable belief. You can't prove it wrong, but that doesn't mean it's right. So the capacity for humans to rationalize things, if you start from a false premise, we can rationalize a world to make sure that we believe in that false premise. Yes. Yes. Well, we do that with everything. We do that with religion. We do that with ideologies. We do that with everything. And it's not, it's, you know, people typically associate rationalization with religion or this kind of cult behavior like this group I explained. But actually, I'm a historian of science. And actually plays an important role in science itself, like the method of science, how science works. If you don't mind, if I can break it, describe the philosophy of Thomas Kuhn, he's this famous philosopher of science. He wrote this the most influential book in the philosophy of science called the structure of scientific revolutions. Basically explaining how does science change or progress over time? His concept was that scientists operate within a paradigm, you know, a worldview. So we believe in Newtonian, you know, gravity. or we have the worldview of, you know, the germ theory of disease or whatever it is. So this is our paradigm, whatever group of scientists we are. Within that paradigm, we do normal science. He says puzzle solving. We do experiments to try to prove our paradigm right. So if my paradigm is, you know, if I'm a follower of Ptolemy, and I believe in the geocentric universe, I'm gonna be observing the way that the, you know, the planets and the stars are moving across the sky to try to prove Ptolemy right. I'm gonna try to prove that his predictions actually come true. So this is just called puzzle solving. What scientists actually do, Thomas Kuhn says many of them, they just puzzle solve. They just try to prove the paradigm right. In the process of doing that, they uncover occasionally and anomaly. And anomaly is something that seems to contradict the paradigm. Like, okay, I told him he makes this prediction about where the planet should be, but it turns out the planet's actually not there. It's a little bit off. That's an anomaly. And Kuhn says, what do scientists do with anomalies? Do they throw out their theory? No, he says they either ignore it or they find a way to rationalize it. Well, Ptolemy made that prediction, but it's close enough to where it's, you know, his theory still works for most of the observations we're making. So scientists usually ignore or rationalize the anomaly. But over time, as they do more and more puzzle solving, normal science, more and more anomalies crop up. To the point where we just can't ignore them anymore. There are just too many anomalies. At a certain point, we realize that our worldview, our paradigm must be wrong. And Kuhn says this allows for a crisis within a scientific community. The group of scientists within this paradigm, they enter a crisis period, and it's during that crisis period when someone can put forward an alternative paradigm that accounts for all those anomalies. And then we accept that as our new paradigm. So what it counts for all the things that the previous paradigm could do in addition to all the anomalies that the previous paradigm couldn't account for. Now we're in a new paradigm. And what do we do? We do puzzle solving. We try to prove our paradigm right. And in the process, we uncover anomalies. Oh, and we rationalize them away. But the reason I raise this point is because one of the integral parts to the progression of science says Thomas Kuhn is the fact that scientists are stubborn. The fact that contrary to popular belief, we typically think of scientists as people who are really open to changing their minds. They're confronted by evidence. And so, OK, they're willing to accept this evidence. Thomas Kuhn says, if you actually look at the history of science closely, that does happen. But what also happens in a lot of instances is scientists are stubborn and they don't want to change their minds. They're stuck on their paradigm. And so they rationalize away the anomalies. So the same kind of rationalizing that you have within the seeker's cult about their belief system is very similar to the kind of rationalizing that scientists are doing when they refuse to throw out their paradigm because they've uncovered these anomalies. But surely there's a way we can make those anomalies fit with our paradigm instead and they don't. So this isn't to say that scientists are members of a cult or anything like that. In fact, there's there are good reasons to maybe elevate the predictions of scientists over those of these cult members. Because there are structures in place within the scientific community to prevent some of the more egregious biases that they have. However, really what I consider Kuhn as, it's a commentary on human psychology. Kuhn basically figured out cognitive dissonance before Leon Festerger. But Kuhn didn't have that terminology. Festerger is describing cognitive dissonance as these cult members. Kuhn is describing it in scientists. He just doesn't have that terminology, but that's just what it is. And Kuhn says that's why science progresses. It's necessary for those people to ignore that evidence because it enables them to keep uncovering more anomalies that eventually leads to the revolution. So it's like it's an ironic thing that our ability to rationalize is what allows us to progress in the future. Wow. Wow. This is the perfect point to take a break because I just take a leak. So this is awesome. We'll be right back. Sorry about that. But I'm glad we took a break right after that epic rant. That was so good. I mean, would you just nailed it? It's so perfect that this is bizarre psychological dance when it comes to human beings, even scientists. Yeah. You know, the main point to make is that it's not, the main point is just that human psychology is human psychology. Just because you're a scientist or a cult member or whatever, it's not as if you're immune to any of these tendencies. Anyone is subject to them. It's just human psychology. So I tend to think of Thomas Kuhn in terms of psychology instead of philosophy. Yeah. Well, it's brilliant. And it's just it also all that understanding of human psychology is really what leads us to even begin to wonder what is going on with the human body. How do you exploit it? What can you do? And then you get people like said he got lead who make a fucking career out of it. Like, yeah, they just they realize like we're like these very bizarre complicated thinking apes. And we have tendencies. And we have these things that we do that protect ourselves. And we have these desires. And we have these motivations. And how do we exploit that? How do we do that for air quotes, national security interests? Yeah. And one of the ironic things is I don't think Sydney Gottlieb is particularly successful in creating like a Manchurian candidate and controlling someone like a Mary Annette and getting them to commit an assassination or something like that. However, there are ways to manipulate people into influence them to behave in certain ways. And there are the typical ways that we associate with like cult behavior. There's a guy named Steven Hassen and he he's. Yeah, I've had him on. Oh, have you okay? Yeah. His bite model behavior information thought emotion. I think that's a very good model for understanding how actual mind control actually takes place. You know behavior being like controlling where someone can go, what they can do, what they can eat, when they can sleep, information being restricting someone from accessing outside sources of information. But if they do teaching them to distrust that information, even if they do access it, well, he was actually in a cult. Oh, yeah. Yeah, he was in the moonies. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Thought control is like reinforcing previous patterns of thought. So saying mantras, reciting prayers, creating an us versus them mentality. And then emotion is control is like instantly someone certain emotions to make them behold into the culture to whatever it is guilt, fear, shame, anger, loyalty, dependence, that kind of thing. And so a combination of these four factors is I think the real mind control, how people actually manipulate people, how especially cults are able to manipulate their members to do all kinds of really insane things, like cut off their genitals or commit murders or anything like that. I think it's much more influenced by those four factors than it is some kind of LSD, mind control, Sydney got Liam and K. Ultra type thing. Are you aware of the cult that existed in Austin, there's a documentary called Holy Hell? I don't think so. No. What are you in? When was that? Really interesting. I believe it took place here in the 90s, the cult, it's called the Bodhi tree, I believe. OK. And originally they started in West Hollywood. And this is a great story. It was a guy who is a gay porn star in a hypnotist. It was also a yoga instructor. So he starts this cult. He would have liked this book, I bet. Yeah, I believe his name was Jaime Gomez. And he changed his name a couple of times. One of them was Michelle. And I think the other one was Andreas. And so when the cult awareness network started looking in the cults right after Waco. And Jali West started that, right? The cult awareness network. Yes. So this guy leaves West Hollywood and moves to Austin. And has his followers build him a theater that he can dance for them in front of them? That was the point so that he could like show off. Yes, it's a beautiful theater. I almost bought it. Oh really? Yeah, we were the original comedy mothership was going to be at this cult. Is it downtown or? No, no, it's West Austin. That's on B.K.V.'s Road. OK, yeah. And it's still there. It's a beautiful theater. And the reason why I was going to buy it was for sale, first of all, it was a beautiful theater. And we wanted a place to put a comedy club. And Ron White, my dear friend, had performed there. And he told me how great it was. He's like, some cult owned it or something. So I was like, all right, cool. And I went to check it out. I'm like, this is great. And then I get a phone call for my friend Adam. He goes, hey, man, have you seen the documentary on this cult? And I'm like, oh, fuck. There's a documentary. And the documentary is terrible. It's horrible. However, there's one fascinating aspect of it. OK, so this guy, he had sex with all these people. He made them pay money so that he can have sex with them. Like they would do therapy. And he was having sex with all these guys. And they were straight. And it was like they felt terrible about it. And after it was over, like one guy had sent a mass email. Like, hey, this guy has been hypnotizing me and fucking me for the past 10 years. And everybody's like, I thought it was just me. The entire cult falls apart. But here's the point. This guy had this thing that he would do to them called the knowing. And they would have to qualify for the knowing. They'd have to be ready for it. And only he could decide if they were ready. When they were ready, they would have the ceremony, this huge thing. And then he would put his hands on them. They would like, they would kneel there and acceptance of the knowing. And he would put his hands on them. And they would have this profound psychedelic experience. So through the power of suggestion, through the placebo effect, whatever it is, they genuinely have this profound psychedelic experience, this connection to God, this feeling of all oneness, to a person, everyone who left the cult, who talked about what a terrible guy he was, talked about how he sexually exploited them and abused them and took their money. And they wasted 20 years of their life with this guy. But that day when they got the knowing was the most profound day of their lives. Even after their alcohols, even after they were out of the cults. People weeping about what he did to them. Still talked about that experience as being the most profound moment of their life. Which is like this guy, because he was a hypnotist and because he was also a megalomoniacal. Carries and gnars and shes did. Oh, beautiful man, like gorgeous man, like six pack, ripped body. And it got weird at the end because later in his life, he started getting plastic surgery because he was getting older. And so his looks were going. So he was like, he's got a whole bunch of stuff. And everybody was like, what are you doing? Like, what are you doing? And he would deny doing anything. But it was like so obvious and he had face lifts. And he just went crazy. But the point is it's like, he figured out how to not just manipulate these people like all cult leaders do. But have this one experience that apparently was a real experience for these people for some way. Able to insect like some kind of stuff. Yeah, idea into them. Yeah. If they could just get out then. Like I got it. Thank you. I want to go get a regular job now. But in order to have that, I'm sure you have to go through the whole experience because it builds up some tension or resentment or something. Of course. Human psychology has to have gone through that in order to maybe reach that. Well, it's just spectacular that he was able to understand that you had to hold it back from them for so long. And like some of them in the film would be, they were complaining that I'm ready for it. He won't give it to me. I want it. I want it so badly. Michelle got it. Now she's enlightened. I'm just sitting here on earth eating carrots. This is bullshit. And it's really weird. Because one of the things about these cult documentaries is every time you watch one, like for me at least in the beginning, I'm like, that looks like fun. Yeah. And the beginning looks great. They're all having dinner together. They're all like, it's a community that can be out there. Everyone loves community. They're all being accepted. They're all like working in the garden together. Oh, this looks great. It looks great. And then it always descends into one guy fucks everybody. One guy takes all the money. Right. One guy. One guy wants to be known as the living God. Yeah. It's just these patterns are so weird. They're so weird because they're so similar. Yeah. It's the same basic human psychology operating under different circumstances. It leads to, I mean, there's a classic phrase, history repeats itself or history doesn't repeat, but it does rhyme. But it's because human share of psychology, so of course there are going to be similar actions. That reminds me kind of this concept of like accepting something into someone or making them feel this. Were you, this is a little bit before my time, but did you experience the satanic panic in the sense that were you keeping up with it when that was happening in the 1980s? I wasn't. I was very busy during that time. But I peripherally remember it. And then later on, we examined it and looked into it. And you know, we've done a few episodes where we went over it. But it was, you know, legitimately kind of crazy. Yeah. Because there's a connection between that and some of the, what I would say, are MKUltra kind of conspiracies. There are a lot of true things about MKUltra that are just crazy, but there are also some things that people propose that I don't think actually happened. You know, there are some people who say for instance that MKUltra was it was like getting young women to run around these military compounds where they would be hunted for sport. And it was saying like, you know, there was a vice president who activated a hologram around his body to make this woman think that she had turned into a lizard, to make her think that lizard people actually exist. Like, you know, she was saying that the CIA personnel would impregnate her and abort the fetuses and eat the fetuses and sell some of the body parts in their inner state occult body part business and all this stuff, which I don't think any of that happened. However, there's a connection between, you know, the people who are making these assertions and the satanic panic, a lot of the people who make these assertions say that they recovered their memories through hypnotism. And that is a lot of what was going on during the satanic panic. You had to be recovering memories through hypnotism about being involved in this ritualistic satanic abuse. And in fact, there was, there was a group called the International Society for the Study of Dissociation. And a lot of the members were kind of responsible for propagating many of these satanic panic conspiracy theories. The president of that organization, I got a minute Braun, he was sued by a former patient for falsely convincing her that she had engaged in cannibalism and infanticide and all this stuff that she didn't do. And he lost his medical license and she was awarded $10 million in this lawsuit. But it turns out that many of the people, one in particular of the kind of prominent MK Ultra conspiracy theorists, her husband who did this hypnotism on her to recover her memories, he said he learned how to recover memories from Bennett Braun himself. And he was a part of this International Society for the Study of Dissociation. So it's like the same techniques that were being used during the satanic panic to so-called recover these memories. It's the same thing in many of these MK Ultra, what I would say are conspiracy theorists who are propagating these misinformation about MK Ultra because they supposedly recovered these memories about how these jelly beans were used to control their behavior or something. But it's the same kind of techniques that are being used in both instances. Hypnotic regression in particular is very odd because a lot of is dependent upon the questions that are asked while the person's under. Like that you can lead someone to believe something happen that didn't happen. This is what Jelly West was, some of the stuff that he was doing. This is what's really, you know, John Mack is. John Mack. John Mack was, I believe he was a psychiatrist at Harvard. He got really obsessed with alien abduction stories. And he wrote a book called abduction. And it was all Hypnotic regressions of people that had been abducted by aliens allegedly. And they all had very similar stories. But the real controversy from skeptics has always been like what were these sessions like? Did you lead in questions? Yes, yes. Did you lead them to believe? And also there was a precedent. So do you know the Betty and Barney Hill story? Okay, Betty and Barney Hill were an interracial couple in New Hampshire, I believe, in the 1950s with a very first UFO abduction story. And they had an experience on a highway, they saw a thing, they lost time, and then they couldn't sleep dead. All these real problems. And they both wound up going to a hypnotist and separately had the same story. Separately are the same story about being taking a border craft and being manipulated. The problem is then that story gets out into this like, guys. Yeah. And then you have Hypnotic regression where people tell very similar versions of that story. And it becomes a thing where like, even if the original Betty and Barney Hill story was real, now that becomes a possibility in your mind that could have happened to you. And then you get hypnotized. And someone says, do you see any beings in the room with you? Yes, I do. Do they, are they short with large heads and large black eyes? They are. Like what are the questions? Like how did you lead them into this Hypnotic regression of alien abduction? And I think a very similar thing took place during the European kind of witch craze in the 17th century. These preachers would go around to different communities talking about witches and demons. And so as soon as they left in the weeks following, there's a huge uptick in witch accusations in supposed to be the money possession. It's like a coincidence that right after there, as soon as it's brought to your consciousness, oh, I think you might be a witch or all these accusations starts farting around. Obviously it's like a suggested thing that they picked up from attending these religious rallies. Of course. Did you know that when the printing press was first created, some of the first in most popular books were all about how to spot witches? Oh yeah. Yeah, like Heinrich Kramer, and then the hammer of witches. You would think, no, no, no. But now we have a printing press. It's just all about philosophy. And you know, it's gonna give you the print to Bible and mathematics. Oh, no, no, no, no, no. It's a pleaser. But now we have a printing press. It's just all about philosophy and you know It's gonna give you a print to Bible and mathematics. Oh, no, no, no, no, no If it bleeds, you know if it leave it leads it's like people are attracted to sensational stories. Yes No, it's the same thing about human psychology They're just the same psychology as us today and if we're interested in learning these sensational stories of course They want to too. It was their version of what I'm obsessed with Bigfoot Same thing just nonsense. Yeah funny anecdote kind of related to that a teacher course on Isaac Newton And he writes this big book the Principia. It's like the most famous book in the history of science And it goes off to the publisher in the publisher, you know He's publishing this book and right after the Principia has published the publisher gets arrested for publishing pornography So it's like there's this image of this publishing house where the Principia the most important book in the history of science is there and right next to it Is all this smut that he's secretly doing Wow God human psychology such a trip. We're so weird. We're such weird animals and it makes it so hard because we're so weird to find the truth Yeah, especially when you when you're talking about like suggested Memories or something like that there are a few studies. I don't remember them, you know like perfectly But there there's one study that I talk about in this book where This is right after the challenger explosion So the spatial has exploded and there were two psychologists. I think they're at Emory University and they decide We are gonna have all of our students like 200 students write down Exactly where they were when they heard about this because obviously they're all gonna remember This is like the next day where were you what were you doing? Who told you about the explosion? And so they got a copies, you know of these questionnaires basically from a hundred how many students? Four years later. I think it was they tracked down I don't know what it was 40 or 80 of these students and had them do the same questionnaire when the challenger Exploded where were you who were you with what did you know what did you learn blah blah blah blah They took the exact same questionnaire and the majority of the students got a majority of the questions wrong And that sense that they put down something completely different than they did the first time. Yeah It's like nobody was even manipulating them. That was just their own memory that you know the majority got the majority of these important details wrong there's another Intriguing kind of humorous psychological study. I don't know how big the sample size was on this But it was to determine how powerful our Memory is in the sense that if you just suggests that someone did something Is it possible that they actually think they actually did so the suggestion was they took a bunch of students to some vending machines And they either had them proposed to the vending machine something that surely you would remember or they would suggest to them that they Had proposed to the vending machine so they you know some students would actually propose and other students They would just tell them oh, you know imagine yourself proposing to this vending machine and afterwards I don't remember what the percentage was but it's a decent amount of percentage of the students who were only told to Invision proposing actually thought they had proposed and so the power of suggestion is very strong so strong and the memory is so fallible like I have a pretty good memory for like hard facts like like Information that I know is true, but my memory of my own life is basically like weird blurry snapshots that I can recall and oftentimes what I'm recalling is the Memory of my recounting of my memory. It's not really my memory. Yeah, I get off the story I told yourself I watched an episode of news radio the other day There was a sitcom that I was on in the 1990s. I didn't remember it at all I didn't remember the plot. I didn't remember the lines that I had I didn't remember like if it was fake if someone created during AI I would have no idea whether it was an AI version of news radio or whether unless it was an episode that I really remember like oh That was a really funny one. I didn't I didn't remember this at all. Yeah, and it was me. I lived it I was on TV right so it was like probably a big moment for me at the time gone It doesn't exist. I feel like I it's ironic. I'm a historian, but I feel like my memory is not that good either I don't think anybody's no it can't be you know, there's certain people like you know that woman that was on taxi Really pretty redhead lady that sitcom taxi from the 1970s God I forget her name is famous actress Mary Lou Tenor Mary Lou tenor photo graphic memory. Hener Mary Lou Hener. Yeah, sorry. Sorry Mary Lou I used to be in love with her when I was kid. She has a photographic memory like she can remember that it was a Tuesday in 1983 like this lady is an incredible memory highly superior Autobiographical memory a rare condition in which people can remember nearly every day of their lives with precise detail I wonder if that would be good to that have or bad to have she seems very happy Okay, cuz I show a picture of her when she was young. Oh, she was all I can imagine Having a negative experience or a bad memory and then dwelling on that and knowing every single detail of that and having to Relive that like in photographic detail every time you think of it I'm sure that couldn't be a pleasant experience But that one right above go to the one the right above there right there. No right there. Bam. That was her Smokeshow that was your younger. Oh my goodness. Yeah, she was so pretty and also photographic memory so you can't lie to her I Was an amazing person, but that's got to be I would imagine it's not bird I would I would take that over not taking that like if someone gave me the option would you rather have an absolute photographic memory or Be like not really sure. Oh fucking know what happens, you know Yeah, I would take I would take the photographic memory. I think the burden. I think would be worth it I think I'd handle it even if me for questions like you know if you ask me How did you come to write this book like you asked me? How did you become interested in this topic? When I was thinking about the answer to that question I mean what I said is factual in the sense that I was doing a dissertation on scientists in the intelligence community and this But is that really like how I came to this topic? I might have read some other book that I read the name Sydney Gottlieb and that got me interested and you know Even even when I'm talking to you about my own autobiographical experience to me. It's like I Mean what I'm saying is true But is it like literally true in the sense that I know with precision that how I came to this topic because I was doing my dissertation on this It might have been you know, I kind of remember reading Tim Weener's book Legacy of Ashes and it briefly mentioned Sydney Gottlieb in there. Maybe I read that and it like oh, who's this guy? You know right so there's a classic joke about how there's a guy looking for his keys on the parking lot and There's a it's night and there's a lamp post right above him and a police officer walks by and the police officers It says sir. What are you doing? And he says oh I'm looking for my keys on the ground They they must be somewhere around here And the officer says oh well, did you drop him right here and the guy says no, I dropped him in the bush over there But this is where the light is so this is where I'm looking That's amazing Well, when I remember my own autobiographical experience Am I remembering it how it's convenient to memor it? Yeah, no, no, remember it or You know often times the often time and that's the human tendency, right? I know for a fact when I really got into conspiracies because I have a Moment connected to it that was a bad experience so when I was in my early 20s This guy there was a friend of mine that was in a band had read this book called Best Evidence by David Lifton David Lifton was an accountant and I forget what his assignment was but it had something to do with the Warren Commission So he goes over the Warren Commission report and he actually read the whole thing so it's a huge volume and He reads all this and he finds so many contradictions and so many things that are wrong with it that He starts investigating the Kennedy assassination and he writes this book called Best Evidence and the book is basically saying There's no way the official stories true and I read this while it was a comedian on the road So I was in Philadelphia and I was doing stand up and I had a show on Friday night And I spent the whole day in my hotel room reading this book freaking out Going oh my god, I killed it so then I go on stage first show and fucking bomb And I had done really good the night before JFK or did you already have the second team? No, I had my set but I was like completely freaked out by the fact They killed the president and then I apologize to the manager. I said I'm so sorry. I read this book on JFK I'm super bummed out. I'll be over by the second show. I promise you and then that they were like you better be You know, I promise I'm good at this. I know what I'm doing and the second show was great And they they like don't do that again. I'm like I won't I won't do it again But I genuinely freaked out so I remember Very specifically because it was a you know, it was a big moment for me I was on the road and I ate shit comedy club So like that thing is in my head forever But that book was that was my first step because I was like I'm like is it if this is a true story I mean if this is this book is accurate like Someone killed the president and they got away with it and it wasn't just Lee Harvey Oswald even if he was involved It was and it was there was a conspiracy to Distort the evidence of of the assassination in terms of like the difference in the discrepancies between the report at Dallas When they first received his body to Bethesda Maryland There's a bullet hole wound that they describe in the Dallas where they call it a tracheotomy hole in Bethesda Maryland they're manipulating the narrative to incorporate the single gunman theory. Yeah Have you ever had Gerald Posner on I have not okay because I know he I haven't gone really down the JFK rabbit holes I don't know that much about it, but I know he wrote the book case clothes. Yeah, that book sucks You need to get him together with all over stone and he'll take that book apart Okay I bring him up just because I follow him on Twitter Yeah, and he was posting recently about the I think he posted about the tracheotomy thing and so but I don't really just the magic bullet theory alone is Complete utter nonsense to anybody's ever shot anything with a bullet when bullets hit bone and shatter bone first of all There's the fact that there was more bullet fragments and Connolly's wrist than we're missing from this magic bullet This magic bullet was only Used as a tool because they had to account for a bullet that hit the underpass So there was a guy standing under the underpass he got hit with a ricochet so they're like well definitely that bullet hit here So we have to tribute all these wounds to one bullet so that to go through Kennedy Bounce around come out of him hit Connolly go through him go through his wrist and then they magically find this bullet in the Gurney when they're bringing in the body like or or When they're bringing in Connolly to get a medical assistance they supposedly magically find this bullet this bullet is clearly been shot in the water This bullet is either water or pillows this bullet has no deformations It's pristine. It's not missing any fragments So it doesn't account for the fragments in the wrist. It's a total horseshit idea And then there's the back to the left when you see this a pruder film where it's head explodes It's all the people that we're talking about the shots coming from the grassy knoll It's the fact that so many of the witnesses died in mysterious circumstances They died from car accidents. They died from suicide. They died from crime. They died from random acts of violence Like they did a calculation of what are the odds that all these witnesses would wind up dying the way they did it It's like some spectacular number. They fucking killed a bunch of people that were there I'm sure you know this but Vincent Boulio see wrote like I think what might be the longest nonfiction single volume book ever written on Kennedy assassination Remembering history or something like that It's like 1500 this is Boulio see that was involved in the madness. Yeah Book about the JFK assassination and if you read Tom O'Neill's book it calls him. Yes, please charlotte. Yes Yeah, crazy person, but yeah, I mean if anyone has seen that book in person It it really is like 1500 pages of like the densest Tiniest little print and it was so long that it came with a CD of the notes that were like a thousand additional pages They couldn't fit in the volume and I think like a physical CD you had to put in your computer to see the notes Oh my god. That's so crazy I think it I think that could be like the longest single volume nonfiction book that I've ever seen I Would love to get Gerald Posner in a room with Oliver stone because Oliver stone Even at his advanced age. He's so smart and he's his recall is incredible For dates and times and people that were involved. I don't think lee Harvey Oswald was innocent. I think lee Harvey Oswald was definitely an intelligence agent I think lee Harvey Oswald the fact that he lived in Russia that affected he came back to America married a Russian woman He seems to have like just very bizarre access to I think he was an intelligence agent I think he probably was involved in the whole thing But the calmness in which he describes the fact that he's a patsy after he's been arrested for killing the president Like to me just that that guy's involved in some shit That's not how a normal person reacts when you get accused of killing the president if you're innocent You go I'm innocent. I don't know. I mean I think they're doing this. I don't know why they have me You'd be freaking the fuck out. He's like, I'm just a patsy. Oh Are you really like I think you're probably an intelligence agent? There's probably something creepy about you, but if anyone could get them to talk I'm sure it's you I think there was a lot of people involved in the Kennedy assassination I think there was multiple shooters and I think it was very coordinated and it was probably it probably involved our government it might have involved the Mafia might have involved other governments Some people thinking that's something to do with Israel because Israel Kennedy did not want to give Israel nuclear weapons There's a there's a ton of stuff that's attached to that assassination, but this idea of case closed Fuck you. There's no case closed in this this this is one of the craziest conspiracies of all time because it seems to be That they killed the president and got away with it That's what it seems to be and then the jolly West connection to jack Ruby So jack Ruby goes in and kills Lee Harvey Oswald then in jail jolly West visits him and he goes completely fucking insane Completely insane. Looses is mine. Thanks. He's in hell. This fire the Jews are all burning like he's like going nuts Right after the guy was in charge of all these LSD studies visits him. How continue one thing do you it's been I don't know five years and whenever I read Tom and his book when it came out the first time So I don't remember that will but one thing because I have a chapter on jolly West and One thing that stuck out to me especially is One of the main crusades he had in his life was against the death penalty You know, he he writes a lot about how it's completely immoral this thing he doesn't like so to me Especially there's an earlier case called this Jimmy shaver case about this guy who abused and killed this little girl That jolly West was involved into It seems to me the possibility is also open that jolly West might also have had an incentive to dose these people with LSD if he did to prevent them from getting the Desonants because if they could you know appear insane maybe they would not get the death penalty instead Why was he so obsessed about the death sentence? I don't know. I think he just considered it immoral And what a fascinating thing that a guy would ruin people's lives would consider just ending them to be immoral Yeah, we're a lot of those people wind up killing themselves because of his actions. Yeah, and he ended up killing himself too Well, I mean it was an assisted suicide with his son his son he son later wrote a book about this but his son basically jolly West had gotten cancer that had metastasized throughout his entire body and he was about to die and he didn't really want to go through the remaining months or whatever he had left in agony and so he got his son to Stockpile a bunch of pills and feed him to him when he basically became unable to move for himself And so that happened to jolly West then the son did that to jolly West's wife his own mother later when I don't know exactly If she had a medical issue or something, but he helped her commit assistance suicide The son wrote a book about it and then he later committed suicide as well. Oh boy Man, it's just so strange how so much so many bad things Can have come from just a few people Just a few people in these terrible ideas and this complete lack of oversight. It's so much evil Including the Manson family like because We've talked about it the tombo-neal book. Please folks if you're listening to this read that book It's one of the craziest books of all time by a man completely obsessed with the story that literally chased down nothing But that story for 20 years one of the one of the parts of the book that I really enjoyed is the writing style is kind of like a gunzo Journey like he's part of the story, you know, you're following on him on the journey to discover this stuff for me That was the exciting part of the ride. It's like oh, it's it's not just telling you the story It's like we're figuring out how a historian or a journalist actually works. He's telling you now I've got this interview and I'm gonna go do this I'm gonna go find these documents I didn't write this book in that style because I just wanted to stick to a description of MK Ultra But there is something tempting about One of the exciting things about history is doing the history and no one really sees that process You know how I was describing going down the rabbit hole to find the origin of that quote there are a million stories like that about how it's so create you know for example there was there was this guy named Vannevar Bush He was president Roosevelt's unofficial official really science advisor during World War II and Some people say van of our Bush, but it's actually as he connected to the bushes. No, no, no, no different But it's Vannevar Bush Bush himself says that it rhymes with beaver his name. So it's Vannevar but He was writing his autobiography he was in charge of like coordinating scientific research during World War II and When he was writing his autobiography He did this series of interviews that were like a thousand pages long so that he could kind of Talk about his life and he would use chunks of that and as part of the autobiography Well, I wanted to get that because for my first book Vannevar Bush plays an important role because he's the guy who Get Stanley level the job in the OSS and Stanley levels my main character So it's like oh Vannevar Bush is like one of the main guys who is you know playing a role in this story so I go There are a couple different archives that have this Thousand page interview that Vannevar Bush did and every single page is there and one of the versions Except two pages that talk about Stanley level in the OSS and I thought that's the exact thing I need Like how is it out of a thousand pages? The one thing that's missing is the two pages and so I finally eventually find out that there's another another copy of This interview at a different repository like at George Georgetown University or MIT I forget which one it was So I get them to send me a photocopy of every single page and it turns out that had the two missing pages So it's like oh my gosh now I can actually use that information because but they didn't have the two pages out of a thousand that I actually needed they were missing and you know so there are like a thousand stories about these crazy coincidences that happen one of them again for my first book um Was about Stanley level, you know, he's this chemist in the OSS creating all these ingenious like gadgets and whatever He talks in his memoir about his wartime experience about being on this biological warfare committee where they were discussing the possibility of using anthrax and Tula Remia and tuberculosis and you know distributing this to across towns and just just discussing what would happen What would what would we need to be able to do this? What would have to happen for us to engage in biological warfare? But he talks about this in his memoir, but I had never seen you know a copy of that Minutes of that meeting or anything he said that this this group this biological warfare committee It was part of the National Academy of Sciences and I thought okay Well, that's interesting But you know, I can't hardly put it in the book if I don't actually have the minutes in the meeting where they're talking about this Costanley level was known to exaggerate to say the least some of the stuff that he was up to during the war But then I thought to myself I kind of remember Several years earlier when I was writing my dissertation before this book I had gone to the National Academy of Sciences because I was working on you know some scientists in government and I ended up taking It just a bunch of pictures of a lot of the materials they had in their archives And I went back through the material that I already had and it turns out I had taken pictures of the minutes of the very Meeting Stanley level was talking about in his memoir. It was already in my possession. I didn't have to go there I already had it. It's just a crazy coincidence that I already had the thing exact thing I needed Wow So they're there the process of making history is sometimes even more exciting than the story itself Well the process it seems like it takes a very dedicated person to chase down that process Like all this thing all the things you're saying about finding those two pages the quote like there's so many versions of you Wanting to absolutely be sure which is so critical and I'm so glad that you did that You just down those things because a lot of lazy people wouldn't have gone that far, right? Yeah, yeah, no one's watching. Yeah, but you know, yeah books you could cite like oh it says here's the quote Yeah, but for me that's the the enjoyment of it, you know, I enjoy doing I like going to the archives I like finding things I feel like a detective, you know, I'm in the archive and I'm looking at these documents and oh I find this guy's name is mentioned here. I know okay, so to me it's exciting. It's like a treasure hunt So that's that's the fun part of it. You know do you have a hard time Communicating with people that aren't familiar with all this stuff in terms of like this Subject gets discussed and someone brings it up. They start asking questions. Do you have do you have a hard time of not looking crazy? Do you know to me because there's like there's a lot of people that are like very intelligent very educated people that have not just No information about this or no knowledge of this but in a version. Yeah, yeah It's an actually a thing that you would assume could not have taken place, but it's not just that It's like there's an aversion to even rationally discussing it. Like I don't I am not the type of person It's gonna sit here and do conspiracies with you. I've had a few conversations like that with people that do not believe in conspiracies and They always fall apart and I'm scrutiny They owe it that that that narrative falls apart. Well, you don't think they exist which ones don't you think exist? Well a conspiracy I mean to me a conspiracy is just a secret plot to do something there are a lot of secret plots of course Yeah, oh throughout history now I mean there are conspiracy theories in the sense that there are stuff that people make up and isn't actually true But to say conspiracies themselves are necessarily false. Well any secret plot is a conspiracy Not just that I think we live in a day and age where there's a lot of fake conspiracies that are thrown in to muddy the water Oh, yeah, yeah, you know in fact that actually ties in at the end of this book I talk about a little bit about kind of the What's kind of called censorship through noise the idea that we can put so much noise out there that no one's really gonna know what to trust and so I give an example of the idea that AIDS was created in a government laboratory like Fort D. Dr. And then in the really 1980s there was a Soviet kind of propaganda mouthpiece newspaper in India called the Patriot and this would just publish like KGB propaganda Wow and India in India yeah, and one of the stories in that newspaper was Basically saying AIDS was created in the government government laboratory But it doesn't just say that in order to get there it first said did you know that the CIA was involved in dosing people with drugs Which is completely true did you know that the military was involved in and Spring certain germs over cities to you know determine the distribution of the air currents to see if we were attacked by in biological warfare Situation how the air currents would spread these germs. They were just spraying like yeast and stuff over but you know It's bacteria So did you know that this did you know that they've performed experiments on these drug addicts and this and that and this and also Did you know that in Fort Dietrich they created a biological weapon called AIDS? So it's you know it's the the lie is made more potent because it's sandwiched in between all these truths and so This newspaper the Patriot published this article Basically saying all these true things and then one thing at the end that they were actually pushing But if you knew that all these other things were true you might assume that that final thing is true as well and other countries around the world Where they had these front newspapers? They would also publish the same kind of story did you know and then AIDS was created in this government laboratory and then those Newspapers would cite the Indian newspaper the Patriot as evidence that other independent newspapers that also come to this conclusion It if many independent sources are coming to this surely it means that it's got some credibility to it Not knowing that the actual connection the KGB is just sponsoring all this you know So that it's a yeah censorship through noise the idea that there's certain things We don't want people to know or maybe we do not want people to know but not understand or something And so we're gonna flood the zone with all this you know crap basically Maybe nobody's gonna know what to believe maybe it is the case that the CIA created AIDS in Fort Dietrich or whatever It is so that's a one tactic that I talked about at the very end It's also a great way to minimize the impact of all the things that actually are true on that list because you attach Something that's completely cookie if you do that enough times you can muddy the waters on basically every subject there is Yeah, so it can go with both ways in the sense that fake stories can De-legitimize true stories, but true stories legitimize fake stories right both ways and then you have the social media impact of bots which is just Really unstudied we don't really know the numbers that we've talked about this before, but there was a former FBI analyst before the purchase of Twitter They he was looking at and he thinks it's 80% bots 80% of the discourse 80% of the traffic is not human or people that are being paid to do it It's like some government entity wanted to do this to so confusion or there's a lot of different factors There's us there's them there's everybody there's in NGOs There's different packs and they all have like you can go online. There's companies that will fund a social campaign for you like so imagine if you wanted to go online and Attack people over a certain issue They're like say if you're trying to get a bill passed and you want to attack people over a certain issue You can fund a campaign using bots to promote your position And it could give the illusion of some sort of Some agreement online or disagreement online or maybe you could take a thing that's a very reasonable position and make it seem Completely ridiculous and then also seem like there's a bunch of support that it's completely ridiculous Like a lot of people believe and they start citing things that aren't true and quotes that aren't true and you could just completely screw up the idea of What the truth is yeah, I know The Russian government had I think it was called like the internet research agency something Yeah, yeah, and there's there's a book called active measure measures by Thomas Rid and he kind of chronicles What they were doing it basically young people would be hired to pose as whoever anyone wanted to be posed as I guess the Russian government to spread certain amounts of disinformation to certain communities Say they would just create fake profiles and your whole job at work would be to cycle through these different profiles and comment on people's posts and post your own and then Boost the post of your fellow disinformation actors in this minare so that their posts would be seen by more people. Yep. There's a whole there's a whole organization or a whole you know Whatever it is what was the woman's name that came on to talk about that? Renee du resta that's right. Yeah, she was saying how like she had a study all these memes and so many of them were really funny and like these people that were in charge of What they wanted to do was make sure the people online in America were arguing about everything and the more you could get people at each other's throats the more you could destroy their democracy. This is part of the idea of it just just to have another element that people have to deal with and that they were organizing Texas separatist meetings Directly across the street from these Muslim meetings. Are they doing in a purpose? Yeah We're trying to get people to argue with each other trying to get people to be in conflict with each other. Yeah And I mean one of the things now with social media, but just in a globalized world any amount of conflict is Kind of available for anyone to see so you know The worst thing in the world that happens today you're probably going to learn about it You're going to know about it. Which that can't be good for your mental health. It's a constantly be bombarded by this negative stuff It's not that in the past all this negative stuff didn't happen It's just that in the past you are probably more focused on your community because it's not like you're got constant access to what's going on And me and more at the second or whatever right? So the fact that you're constantly able to see the worst thing happening in the world world, that cannot be good just for your mentality. It's definitely not good, but it's also a social experiment because we didn't know what would happen when you get all this bad news from all over the world. It's never happened before. So there's never been a device that you carry in your pocket that gives you the worst news of the day all day long. It's totally new. So anybody growing up today is bombarded, which is why it has to account for some of the anxiety that kids face to because you see heightened levels of anxiety, heightened levels of fear about climate or anything that they tell you that's the thing that you really need to freak out about. You're being inundated and you don't have a chance to just enjoy the moment that you're in because everything is like this total existential crisis that's going to destroy humanity. If you don't act now, oh God, there's a genocide going on. It's like no matter what it is, it's like you're being bombarded by everything. The economy is a crash. No kings. Oh, ice is coming. Jeez. Do you have a lot of nostalgia for the pre-internet days? Because I don't remember that. No. Fuck those times. That was stupid. Droll, ah! Do you have a lot of nostalgia for the pre-internet days? Because I don't remember that. No. No. No, fuck those times. That was stupid. I think with the internet with all his flaws, his way better. It's way better than the government being in control of the narrative. And now we know intelligence agencies absolutely in control what's distributed in mainstream news. Like the idea that the mainstream news back then was independent and free and they were the press like, No. The government agencies and intelligence agencies have been involved in propaganda from the jump. And it's way better now. You have more access to information. It's way more complicated. It's way more complicated to live your life. It's way more psychologically complicated to be in the moment and to be present and to just enjoy your life. It's harder. It's much harder because you are constantly being informed and there's the addiction aspect of it. You know, the addiction to being informed, the addiction to seeing what people are saying and seeing the, Oh, what did this guy do? He stole all this money. Like we were in the green room last night with the we're reading the story about this Congress person who stole money and how they did it and then they bought a giant diamond ring. Where this giant three-carat diamond ring on $100,000 a year salary like, what are you doing? You fucking crazy person. But it's like that that's what you're does where you're taking in all day instead of your friends instead of your life and just having an experience in your neighborhood. No, you're just you're constantly looking at all the problems that are happening all over the world, all the time. Yeah. And you don't get a break. But it's better than being ignorant. It's just so you have to you have to find a way to whether whatever that psychological storm is and seek shelter and don't always just stay out there in it and just get bombarded by psychological hail. That's kind of what it is. You're going to have a strong roof and stay inside sometimes. Yeah. This is a weird transition, but you said psychological hail. It made me think of this project during World War II. The OSS did call the bat bomb. Have you are you familiar with it? No. No. This is maybe think of these things kind of raining down. But I read about this in the dirty tricks department. But during World War II, there was this concept of how can we better target cities or buildings with our incendiary explosives? We can drop bombs, but I mean those aren't targeted. They're just going to fall where they fall. And if the winds go in the wrong way, they're not even going to hit the target that we want them to. So this guy named Little Adams, he was working with the OSS, he had the idea. He had just gone to Carl's bad caverns. What if we get bats and we attach napalm to them? And then we release these over Japanese cities, the bats are going to roost into the buildings in these cities. And then we can have the napalm time delayed so that it'll explode after a certain amount of time that we release them. And it'll set fires to all these buildings. So we have like targeted in cindy areas instead of just random bombs falling. So it sounds like kind of a crazy idea. But he happened to be friends with Eleanor Roosevelt because he had phone planes before and he had given her a ride in his plane and they kind of knew each other. So he sent this kind of report on the bat bomb to Eleanor Roosevelt. She gave it to her husband, President Roosevelt, who gave it to William Donovan, the head of the OSS. And with a note attached to the thing that he gave to Donovan, it said this, this man is not a nut, you know, take this seriously. So Donovan, of course, he gives this to the research and development branch, Stanley Lovell, that I write about in my first book. And it becomes this bat bomb project that now he's in love. It feels obligated to do it because the president's saying we need to research this. So they end up going to Carl's bad caverns and to some caverns here in Texas. And they scoop up a bunch of bats and they they do a few tests with them. They actually get a guy named Lewis Pfizer who invented napalm to create tiny little incindy areas that you could strap to bats. This is a little bit of a digression, but Pfizer had been at Harvard. He was a chemist there. And when he was inventing napalm, he it was like a jelly gasoline. He would do the tests on the soccer field at Harvard, just like in the middle of the campus. That's where napalm was invented. Just like in the middle of Harvard's campus, these bombs would be exploding. And people would get mad at him. People would get mad, not because he was detonating these bombs, but because he was hogging the soccer fields and the drill sergeant needed it for practice. And so there's like these disputes. But so he was hired by the OSS to create these tiny little incindiaries to strap to these bats. So the OSS did a few experiments with this. Before the insindiaries were strapped, they put like fake insindiaries on them. The idea was to cool down these bats. We're going to fly them in a plane over the desert like out in Utah or somewhere. And we're going to drop these bats and see if they actually kind of disperse. It turns out that they were using Mexican free-tailed bats, which I don't think actually hibernate, but they travel south for the winter. And so they cooled down these bats in this like artificial refrigerator. But apparently they had cooled them down too much. So when they dropped them from the plane, they just like fell straight down to the ground and never woke up. And so they just flattered across the desert. So that was one of the tests. Another of the tests, they wanted to do a live experiment where they had an actual bat and with an actual napalm bomb attached to it to see if it could like fly off to see if it would actually like carry this weight. But they had it in like somewhat of a controlled environment. They cooled this bat down, put it in artificial hibernation. And then they were taking pictures of it, you know, to see how everything operated. But then the bat started kind of waking up and it flew off before they could grab it and it actually flew into a control tower and it burst into flame and the whole thing caught on fire and burned down. So it turned out this thing actually worked. But again, it was never deployed against Japan. This is right at the end of World War II. And you know, they're already the Manhattan Project was kind of successful at that point. So there was no need for the bat bomb. But if people weren't interested in that kind of story and how crazy that can get, that's in these books too. Do you know about the proposal for the gay bomb? That sounds familiar about like releasing some kind of chemical that distracts people, they'll be so infatuated with each other, these soldiers that we can go. Not just that, but then somehow another it would demoralize them and make them easy to conquer. Which didn't make any sense, especially historically when you considered the Spartan. You know, they were all gay. They were the craziest force ever. That's not going to stop people. Well, you know, that's actually one of the big inspirations for MK Ultra, not the gay bomb, but the idea that we could use chemicals to defeat an enemy army. So Sidney got me before he was really running MK Ultra experiments. He had attended a few conferences where some people would talk this guy named Luther Green who was part of the army. And Luther Green was in charge of like developing and experimenting with nerve agents, you know, that could incapacitate. These are like some of the most pro potent agents that have ever been created. A fraction of an ounce applied to your skin can be lethal. So he wanted to find a substance green did that could mimic the effects of a nerve agent like incapacitate someone without actually killing them. His idea was that if we could get the substance and we can drop it over enemy territory, it could incapacitate these soldiers just through chemical warfare, but we wouldn't actually have to kill them. They'll be incapacitated for a certain amount of time. And then we could send them reans in and they could gather up all these people and we can we can conquer this territory. We can defeat this enemy army without actually having to kill anyone or for any of our people to be killed. So Stanley level was really interested in this concept. You know, war without death was what they were talking about. War without death, we should use chemical weapons that just incapacitate people. So one of the things that got, I should say Sidney Gottlieb, interested in investigating LSD was the fact that maybe this could be an incapacitant that we could use to basically eliminate an enemy army for the time being. And then we could go and conquer them without actually having to kill them ourselves. So it was it was trying to use it almost as a more ethical form of warfare where, you know, instead of killing someone, you just incapacitate them. Wow. Um, I think we covered it all. You booked some amazing. I'm really excited that you put in the time to ride it and I can't wait to see what David Chase does with it. Um, and when it when it happens, let's do this again. I'd love to. I feel like we could talk about this stuff for hours and hours and hours. There's a lot of stuff to go into. Oh, there's, is there an audio book over this? There is an audiobook. Yes. Did you read it? I didn't read it. They got a, they got a professional for that. Oh, man, you would kill it. You have a great voice. Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. But the nice thing is, it's the same narrator who did both my first and second books. There's some kind of continuity between that. Okay. So you're happy with it. Yeah. Yeah. It turned out really. He did a really good job. So in the other book is the dirty tricks department, Stanley Lovaal, the OSS and the masterminds of World War II secret warfare. I appreciate it. Thank you. It was awesome. I really appreciate it. It was really fun. Bye, brother.