Joe Roman, find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast, by night, all day. Oh, that's you. Good to see you again. We were just talking about, was that the first time we ever spoke? Or was the first time we spoke at SpaceX? SpaceX. SpaceX is the first time. When you were giving Elon that crazy AI chip. Right, did you export? Yeah, that was a big moment. That was huge. That felt crazy to be there. I was watching these wizards of tech, like exchange information and you're giving him this crazy device. And then the other time was I was shooting arrows in my backyard and randomly get this call from Trump and he's hanging out with you. President Trump caught and I called you. Yeah, it's just we were talking about you. He's just talking about you. He was talking about the UFC thing he was going to do in his front yard. Yeah. And he pulls out. Jackson, look at this design. He's so proud of it. And I go, you're going to have a fight in the front lawn in the White House. He goes, yeah, yeah, you're going to come. This is going to be awesome. And he's showing his design and how beautiful it is. And he goes, and somehow your name comes up. He goes, do you know Joe? I said, yeah, I'm going to be honest podcast. He's, let's call him. He's like a kid. I know, let's call him. He's a style child. He's something incredible. Yeah, he's an odd guy. Just very different. You know, like the, what you'd expect from him, very different than what people think of him. And also just very different as a president. Like I would just call his, your texture out of the blue. Also he makes when you text you, you have an android. So it won't go through with you. But with my iPhone, he makes the text go big. Like, you know, right. say he's respected again like all caps and makes the text in large it's kind of ridiculous well the one on one trump president trump is very different he surprised me first of all he's an incredibly good listener almost everything i've ever said to him he's remembered yeah people don't they only want to look at negative stories about him or negative narratives you know you can catch anybody on a bad day like there's a lot of things he does why i don't think you should do i don't think he should say to report reporter quiet piggy like that's pretty ridiculous also objectively funny i mean it's unfortunate that it happened to her i wouldn't want that to happen to her but it was funny just ridiculous that the president does that i wish he didn't do that but other than that like he's an interesting guy like he's a lot of different things wrapped up in one person you know you know part of part of his charm or part of his genius is yes he says what's on his mind yes and that's just like an anti-pilot issue yeah right so you know what's on this mind is really what's on his mind which and he's telling you what he works i i do i love some people some people rather be lied to yeah but but i i like the fact that he's telling you what's on his mind almost every time he explains something he says something he starts with his you could tell his love for america what he wants to do for america and everything that he thinks through is very practical and very common sense and you know it's very logical and i still remember the first time i met him and so this was i never known him never met him before and secretary let me called and we met right before right at the beginning of the administration he said he told me what was important to present trump that that you know the state's manufacturers on shore and that was really important to him because because it's important to national security he wants to make sure that the important critical technology of our nation is built in the United States and that we reindustrialize and get good at manufacturing again because it's important for jobs it just seems like common sense right incredible common sense and almost like literally the first conversation i had with secretary muttonic and and he was talking about how how that he started he started our conversation with a gents and this is secretary muttonic and i just want to let you know that you're a national treasure and videos a national treasure and whenever you need access to the president the administration you call us we're always going to be available to you literally that was the first sentence that's pretty nice and it was completely true every single time i called if i needed something i want to get something off my chest express some concern they're always available incredible it's just unfortunate we live in such a politically polarized society that you can't recognize good common sense things if they're coming from a person that you object to and that i think is what's going on here i think most people generally as a country you know as a giant community which we are it just only makes sense that we have manufacturing in america that they're especially critical technology like you're talking about like it's kind of insane that we buy so much technology from other countries if united states doesn't grow we will have no prosperity we can invest in anything domestically or otherwise we can't fix any of our problems if we don't have energy growth we can't have industrial growth if we don't have industrial growth we can't have job growth these it's a simple as that right and the fact that the fact that he came into office in the first thing that he said was drill baby drill his point is we need energy growth without energy growth we can have no industrial growth and that was it's saved the a i industry got i got to tell you flat out if not for his pro growth energy policy we would not be able to build factories for a i not be able to build chip factories won't surely surely won't be able to build super computer factories none of that stuff would be possible without all of that construction jobs would be challenged right electrical in electrician jobs all of these jobs that are now flourishing would be challenged and so i think he's got a right we need energy growth we want to reindustrial as the United States we need to be back in manufacturing every successful person doesn't need to have a phd every successful person doesn't have to have gone to Stanford or MIT and I think I think that that that you know that sensibility is spot on now when we're talking about technology growth and energy growth there's a lot of people that go oh no that's not what we need we need to you know simplify our lives and get back but the real issue is that we're in the middle of a giant technology race and whether people are aware of it or not whether they like it or not it's happening and it's a really important race because whoever gets to whatever the event horizon of artificial intelligence is whoever gets their first has massive advantages in a huge way if you agree with that well first the part I will say that we are in a technology race and we are always in a technology race we've been in a technology race with somebody forever right right since the industrial revolution we've been in a technology yeah or you know even going back to the discovery of energy right the United Kingdom was where the industrial revolution was if you were invented when they realized that they can turn steam and such into energy and electricity all of that was invented largely in Europe and United States capitalized on it we were the ones that learned from it we industrialized it we diffused it faster than anybody in Europe they were all stuck in discussions about policy and jobs and disruptions meanwhile the United States was forming we just took the technology and ran with it and so I think we were always in a bit of a technology race what were two it was a technology race man in project was a technology race we've been in the technology race ever since during the Covid war I think we're still in a technology race it is probably the single most important race it is the technology is it gives you superpowers you know whether it's information superpowers or energy superpowers or military superpowers is all founded in technology and so technology leadership is really important well the problem is if somebody else has superior technology right yeah that's the issue it's right it seems like with the AI race people are very nervous about it like you know Elon has famously said that it's like 80% chance it's awesome 20% chance we're in trouble and people are worried about that 20% rightly so you know if you had 10 bullets in a revolver and you know you took out eight of them you still have to want to in there and you spin it you're not going to feel real comfortable when you pull that trigger it's terrifying right and when you were working towards this ultimate goal of AI it's just it's impossible to imagine that it wouldn't be of national security interest to get there first we should the question is what's there that's the that was the part that is there yeah I'm not sure that's the company I don't think anybody's really knows that's crazy though if I ask you yeah you're the head of Nvidia yeah you don't know yeah what's there who knows yeah I I think it's probably going to be much more gradual than we think is well it won't be a moment it won't be it won't be as if somebody arrived and nobody else has I don't think it's going to be like that I think it's going to be things that just get better and better and better just like technology so you are rosy about the future you're you're very optimistic about what's going to happen with AI obviously will you make the best AI chips in the world probably better be I if history is a guide we were always concerned about new technology humanity has always been concerned about new technology there always somebody who's thinking there always a lot of people who are quite concerned were quite concerned and and and so if history is a guide it is the case that all of this concern is channeled into making the technology safer and so for example in the last several years I would say AI technology has increased probably in the last two years alone maybe a hundred acts let's just give it a number okay it's like a car two years ago was a hundred times slower so AI is a hundred times more capable today now how did we channel that technology how do we channel all of that power we directed it to causing the AI to be able to think meaning that it can take a problem that we give it break it down step by step it does research before it answers and so it grounds it on truth it'll reflect on that answer ask itself is it the best you know answer that I can give you am I certain about this answer if it's not certain about the answer or highly confident about the answer you'll go back and do more research it might actually even use a tool because that tool provides a better solution than it could hallucinate itself as a result we took all of that computing capability and we channeled it into having it produce a safer result safer answer a more truthful answer because as you know one of the greatest criticisms of AI in the beginning was that hallucinate right and so if you look at the reason why people use AI so much today is because the amount of hallucination has reduced you know I use it almost I I use the whole trip over here and so so I think the the the capability most people think about power and they think about you know maybe as an explosion power but the technology power most of it is channeled toward safety a car today is more powerful but it's safer to drive a lot of that power goes towards better handling you know I'd rather have a well you have a thousand horsepower truck I think 500 horsepower is pretty good now I thousand better I think a thousand is better I don't know what better but it's definitely faster yeah no I think it's better you get out of trouble faster I enjoyed my 599 more than my 612 it was I think it was a better better and more horsepower is better my 459 is better in my 430 more horsepower is better I think more horsepower is better I think it's better handling it's better control in the case of in the case of technology it's also very similar in that way you know and so if you if you look at what you're going to do with the next thousand times of performance in AI a lot of it is going to be channeled towards more reflection more research thinking about the answer more deeply so when you're defining safety you're defining it as accuracy functionality functionality okay it it does what you expect it to do and then you take the all the the the technology and horsepower you put guardrails on just like our cars we've got a lot of technology in a car today a lot of it is goes towards for example ABS ABS is great and so attraction control that's fantastic without us without a computer in the car how would you do any of that right and that little computer the computers that you have doing your traction control is more powerful than the computer that went to Apollo 11 and so you want that technology channel it towards safety channel it towards functionality and so when people talk about power the advancement of technology oftentimes I feel what they're thinking and what we're actually doing is very different what do you think they're thinking well they're thinking somehow that this this AI is being powerful and they're their mind probably goes towards a sci-fi movie the definition of power you know oftentimes the definition definition of power is military power or physical power but in the case of technology power when we translate all of those operations it's towards more refined thinking you know more reflection more planning more options I think the big fears that people have is one a big fear is military applications yes that's a big yeah because people are very concerned that you're going to have AI systems that make decisions that maybe an ethical person wouldn't make or a moral person wouldn't make based on achieving an objective versus based on you know how it's going to look to people well I'm happy that that our military is going to use AI technology for defense and I think that that uh and rural building military technology I'm happy to hear that I'm happy to see all these tech startups now channeling their technology capabilities towards defense and military applications I think it needs to do that yeah we had Palmer lucky on the podcast news down straighting some of the stuff that was helmet on and we showed some videos how you could see behind walls and stuff like it's nuts he's he's actually the perfect guide to go start that company 100% yeah 100% like he's born for that yeah he came in here with a copper jacket on he's a freak it's awesome he's awesome but it's also it's a you know an unusual intellect channeled into that very bizarre field is what you need and I think it's it's uh I think I'm happy that we're making it so more socially acceptable you know there was a time where when somebody wanted to channel their technology capability and their intellect into defense technology somehow they're vilified um but we need people like that we need people who enjoyed enjoyed that part of uh application of technology well people are terrified of war you know so well the best best way to avoid it has excessive military might do you think that's absolutely the best way not not diplomacy work and stuff out all of it all of it yeah you have to have military might get people to sit down right exactly all of it otherwise it's just invade that's right why ask for permission again like you said it history go back and look at history that's um when you look at the future of AI and and you just said that no one really knows what's happening right do you ever sit down and ponder scenarios like what do you think is like best case scenario for AI over the next two decades um the best case scenario is that AI diffuses into everything that we do and uh our everything's more efficient but the threat of war remains a threat of war uh cybersecurity remains a super difficult challenge somebody is going to try to breach your security you're going to have thousands of millions of AI agents protecting you from that threat your technology is going to get better their technology is going to get better just like cybersecurity right now while we speak we're being we're seeing cyber attacks all over the planet on just about every front door you can imagine and and yet you and I said you're talking and so the reason for that is because we know that there's a whole bunch of cybersecurity technology in defense and so we just have to keep amping that up keep stepping that up this episode brought to you by visible when your phone plans as good as visible you've got to tell your people it's the ultimate wireless hack to save money and still get great coverage and a reliable connection get one line wireless with unlimited data and hotspot for 25 dollars a month taxes and fees included all un-varised in 5G network plus now for a limited time new members can get the visible plan for just 19 dollars a month for the first 26 months use promo code switch 26 and save beyond the season it's a deal so good you're going to want to tell your people switch now at visible dot com slash rogan terms apply limited time offers subject to change see visible dot com for plan features and network management details that's a big issue with people is the with the worry that technology is going to get to a point where encryption is going to be obsolete encryption is just it's no longer going to protect data it's no longer going to protect systems do you anticipate that ever being an issue or do you think there's it's as the defense grows the threat grows the defense grows and it just keeps going on and on and they'll always be able to fight off any sort of intrusions not forever some intrusion will get in and they will all learn from it and you know the reason why cybersecurity works is because of of course the technology of defense is advancing very quickly the technology offense is advancing very quickly however the benefit of the cybersecurity defense is that socially the community all of our companies work together as one most people don't realise this there's a whole community of cybersecurity experts we exchange ideas we exchange best practices we exchange what we detect the moment something has been breached or maybe there's a loophole or whatever it is it is shared by everybody the patches are shared with everybody that's interesting yeah most people don't realize no no no idea I've assumed that it would just be competitive like everything else we work together all of us yeah is that always been the case I and surely has been the case for about about 15 years it might not have been the case long ago but this this what do you think started off that cooperation people recognizing it's a challenge and no company can stand alone and the same thing is going to happen with AI I think we all have to decide work working together to stay out of harm's way is is our best chance for defense then it's basically everybody against the threat and it also seems like you'd be way better at detecting where these threats are coming from and neutralizing exactly because the moment you detect it somewhere right you're going to find out right away it'll be really hard to hide that's right yeah that's how it works that's the reason why it's safe that's why I'm sitting here right now instead of you know locking everything down in video it's not only am I watching my own back I've got everybody watching my back and I'm watching everybody else's back it's a bizarre world isn't it when you think about that cyber this idea about cybersecurity is unknown to the people who are talking about AI threats they're I think when they think about AI threats and AI cybersecurity threats they have to also think about how we deal with it today now there's no question that AI is a new technology and it's a new type of software in the end of software it just is a new type of software and so it's going to have new capabilities but so what the defense you know where you use the same AI technology to go defend against it so you do anticipate a time ever in the future where it's going to be impossible where there's not going to be any secrets where the bottleneck between the technology that we have and the information that we have the information is just all a bunch of ones and zeros it's out there on hard drives and the technology has more and more access to that information is it ever going to get to a point in time where there's no way to keep a secret I don't this seems like that's where everything is kind of headed I don't think so I think the quantum computers were supposed to write all yeah quantum computers will make it possible we'll make it so that the previous quantum previous encryption technology is obsolete but that's the reason why the entire industry is working on post quantum encryption technology well that looked like new algorithms and the crazy thing is when you hear about the kind of computation that quantum computing can do yeah in the the power that it has yeah we're you know you're looking at all the super computers in the world take billions of years and it takes them a few minutes to solve these operations like how do you make encryption for something that can do that I'm not sure but I've got a bunch of scientists who are working on that but yeah I'll figure it out yeah we got a bunch of scientists who are exporting that and the ultimate fear that it can't be breached that quantum computing will always be able to to decrypt all other quantum computing encryption I don't that it just gets to some point where it's like stop playing the stupid game we know everything I don't think so no because I'm you know history is guide history is a guy before AI came around that's my worry my worry is this is a total you know it's like history was one thing and then nuclear weapons kind of changed all of our thoughts on war and mutually sure destruction came Cape got everybody to stop using nuclear bombs yeah my worry is that the thing is Joe is that that AI is not going to it's not like we're cavemen and then all of a sudden one day AI shows up every single day we're getting better and smarter because we have AI and so we're stepping on our own AI's shoulders so when when that whatever that AI threat comes it's a click ahead it's not a galaxy ahead you know it's just a a click ahead and so so I think I think the the idea that somehow this AI is going to pop out of nowhere and somehow think in a way that we can't even imagine thinking and do something that we can't possibly imagine I think is far fetched and the reason for that is because we're all have we all have AI's and you know there's a whole bunch of AI's being in development we know what they are and then we're using it and so every single day we're getting close we're close to each other but don't they do things that are very surprising yeah but so you have an AI that does something surprising I'm going to have an AI right my AI looks at your AI goes that's not that's surprising the fear for the layperson let myself is that AI becomes sentient and makes its own decisions and then ultimately decides to just govern the world do it its own way they like you guys yet a good run but we're taking over now yeah but my my AI is going to take care of me so that's the this is the cybersecurity argument yes you have an AI and it's super smart but my AI's super smart too and and maybe your AI let's pretend let's pretend for a second that we understand what consciousness is and we understand what sentence is and that and we really are just pretending okay let's just pretend for a second yeah we believe that I don't believe actually I don't actually don't believe that but nonetheless we let's pretend we believe that so your your your AI's conscious of my AI's conscious and and let's say your AI is you know wants to I don't know do something surprising my AI is so smart that it won't it might be surprising to me but it probably won't be surprising to my AI and so maybe my AI thinks it's surprising as well but it's so smart the moment it sees it the first time it's not gonna be surprised the second time just like us and so I feel like I think the idea that that only one person has AI and that one person's AI is compares everybody else's AI is Neanderthal is probably unlikely I think it's much more like cybersecurity interesting I think the fear is not that your AI is going to battle with somebody else's AI the fear is that AI is no one are gonna listen to you that's the fear is that human beings won't have control over it after a certain point if it achieves sentience and then it has the ability to be autonomous that there's one AI well they just combine yeah becomes one AI that it's a life form yeah but that's the there's arguments about that right that we're dealing with some sort of synthetic biology that it's not as simple as new technology that you're creating a life form if it's like life form let's go along with that for a while I think if it's like life form as you know all life forms don't agree and so I'm gonna have to go with your life form in my life form I'm gonna agree because my life form is gonna want to be the super life form and and now that now that we have disagreeing life forms we're back back again to where we are well they would probably cooperate with each other it would just the reason why we don't cooperate with each other is we're territorial primates but AI wouldn't be a territorial primate it relies to folly in that sort of thinking and it would say listen there's plenty of energy for everybody we don't need to dominate we don't need we're not trying to acquire resources and take over the world we're not looking to find a good breeding partner we're just existing as a new super life form that these cute monkeys created for us okay well that would be a that would be a super power with no ego right and and it has no ego why would have to ego to do any harm to us well I don't assume that it would do harm to us but the fear would be that it we would no longer have control and that we would no longer be apex species on the planet this thing that we created would now be is that funny no I just it's not gonna happen I know you think it's not gonna happen but it could right it could here's the thing it's like if we're racing towards could yeah and could could be the end of human beings being control of our own destiny I just think it's extremely unlikely yeah that's what they said in the Terminator movie and it hasn't happened no not yet but you guys are working towards it um the the thing about you're saying about That's what they said in the Terminator movie and it hasn't happened. No, not yet, but you guys are working towards it. The thing about you're saying about conscience and sentience that you don't think that AI will achieve consciousness or the consciousness of the decision? What's the definition? What is the definition to you? Consciousness, I guess, first of all, you need to know by your own existence. You have to have experience not just knowledge and intelligence. The concept of a machine having an experience, I'm not, well, first of all, I don't know what defines experience, why we have experiences and why this microphone doesn't. And so I think I know what consciousness is. The sense of experience, the ability to know self versus versus the ability to be able to reflect, know our own self, the sense of ego. I think all of those human experiences probably is what consciousness is. But why it exists versus the concept of knowledge and intelligence, which is what AI is defined by today. It has knowledge, it has intelligence, artificial intelligence. We don't call it artificial consciousness. Artificial intelligence, the ability to perceive, recognize, understand, plan, perform tasks. Those things are foundations of intelligence to know things, knowledge, I don't, it's clearly different than consciousness. But consciousness is so loosely defined. How can we say that? I mean, doesn't a dog have consciousness? Yeah. Dogs seem to be pretty conscious. That's right. Yeah. And that's a lower level consciousness than a human being's consciousness. I'm not sure. Yeah. Right. Well, the question is what? Lower level intelligence. Yes. It's lower level intelligence. Yes. But I don't know that's lower level consciousness. That's a good point. Yeah. Because I believe my dogs feel as much as I feel. Yeah, they feel a lot. Yeah. Right. Yeah. They get attached to you. That's right. They get depressed if you're not there. That's right. Exactly. Yeah. There's definitely that. Yeah. The concept of experience. Right. But isn't AI interacting with society. So it doesn't, it acquire experience through that interaction. If you're, I don't think interactions is experience. Experience is a collection of feelings, I think. You're aware that AI, I forget which one where they gave it some false information about one of the programmers having an affair with his wife just to see how it would respond to it. And then when they said they were going to shut it down, it threatened a black male and reveal his affair. And it was like, whoa, like it's conniving. Like if that's not learning from experience and being aware that you're about to be shut down, which would imply at least some kind of consciousness or you could kind of define it as consciousness if you're very loose with the term. And if you imagine that this is going to exponentially become more powerful, wouldn't that ultimately lead to a different kind of consciousness than we're defining from biology? Well, first of all, let's just break down what it probably did. Probably read somewhere. There's probably text that that in these consequences, certain people did that. I could imagine a novel. Right. Having those words related. Sure. And so inside, it realizes the strategy for survival is just a bunch of numbers. It's just a bunch of numbers that, that in the, in the collection of numbers that relates to a husband cheating on a wife, has subsequently a bunch of numbers that relates to black male and such things. However, whatever the revenge was. Right. And so it has spewed it out. And so it's just like, you know, it's just as if I'm asking it to write me a poem in Shakespeare. It's just whatever the words are. And the word in that dimensionality, this dimensionality is all these vectors in multi-dimensional space. These words that were in the prompt that described the affair, subsequently led to one word after another, led to, you know, some revenge and something. But it's not because it had consciousness or, you know, it just spewed out those words, generated those words. I understand what you're saying. Yeah. That is not in front of patterns that human beings exhibited both in literature and in real life. That's exactly right. But it at a certain point in time, one would say, okay, well, it couldn't do this two years ago. And it couldn't do this four years ago. Like when we were looking towards the future, like at what point in time when it can do everything a person does, what point in time do we decide that it's conscious? If it absolutely mimics all human thinking and behavior patterns, that doesn't make a conscious. It becomes indescernible. It's aware, it can communicate with you the exact same way a person can. Like is consciousness, are we putting too much weight on that concept? Because it seems like it's a version of a kind of consciousness. It's a version of imitation. Imitation consciousness, right. But if it perfectly imitates it, I still think it's an example of imitation. So it's like a fake Rolex when they 3D print them and make them work in the form. The question is what's the definition consciousness? Yeah. That's the question. And I don't think anybody's really clearly defined that. That's where it gets weird. And that's where the real doomsday people are worried that you are creating a form of consciousness that you can't control. I believe it is possible to create a machine that imitates human intelligence and has the ability to understand information, understand instructions. Break the problem down, solve problems and perform tasks. I believe that completely. I believe that we could have a computer that has a vast amount of knowledge. Some of it true, some of it not true. Some of it generated by humans, some of it generated synthetically. And more and more of knowledge in the world will be generated synthetically going forward. You know, until now, the knowledge that we have, our knowledge that we generate and we propagate and we send to each other and we amplify it and we add to it and we modify it. We change it. In the future, in a couple of years, maybe two or three years, 90% of the world's knowledge will likely be generated by AI. That's crazy. I know, but it's just fine. But it's just... I know. And the reason for that is this. Let me tell you why. It's because what difference is it makes to me that I am learning from a textbook that was generated by a bunch of people I didn't know or written by a book that, you know, from somebody I don't know to knowledge generated by AI computers that are simulating all of these and resynthesizing things. To me, I don't think there's a whole lot of difference. We still have to... We still have to fact check it. We still have to make sure that it's, you know, based on fundamental first principles and we still have to do all of that just like we do today. Is this taking into account the kind of AI that exists currently and do you anticipate that just like we could have never really believed that AI would be, at least a person like myself would never believe AI would be as... So ubiquitous and so worth... It's so powerful today and so important today. We never thought that 10 years ago. Never thought that. Right. Imagine like what are we looking at 10 years from now. I think that if you reflect back 10 years from now, you would say the same thing that we would have never believed that. But in a different direction. Right. But if you go for it nine years from now and then ask yourself what's going to happen 10 years from now, I think it would be quite gradual. One of the things that Elon said that makes me happy is that he believes that we're going to get to a point where it's not necessary for people to work. And not meaning that you're going to have no purpose in life. But you will have in his words universal high income because so much revenue is generated by AI that it will take away this need for people to do things that they don't really have to do. things that they don't really enjoy doing just for money. And I think a lot of people have a problem with that because their entire identity and how they think of themselves and how they fit in a community is what they do. Like this is Mike. He's an amazing mechanic. Go to Mike and Mike takes care of things. But there's going to come a point in time where AI is going to be able to do all those things much better than people do. And people will just be able to receive money. But then what does Mike do? Mike is really loves being the best mechanic around. What does the guy who codes? What does he do? When AI can code infinitely faster with zero errors? Like what happens with all those people? And that is where it gets weird because we've sort of wrapped our identity as human beings around what we do for a living. When you meet someone, one of the first things you meet somebody at a party, Hi Joe, what's your name? Mike, what do you do, Mike? And Mike's like, oh, I'm a lawyer. Oh, what kind of law? And you have a conversation. When Mike is like, I get money from the government, I play video games. It gets weird. And I think the concept sounds great until you take into account human nature. And human nature is that we like to have puzzles to solve and things to do. And an identity is wrapped around our idea that we're very good at this thing that we do for a living. Yeah, I think, let's see. Let me start with the more mundane. Okay. Okay. I'll work backwards. Okay. Work forward. So one of the predictions from Jeff Hinton, who started the whole deep learning phenomenon, deep learning technology trend, and incredible, incredible researcher. Professor at University of Toronto, he invented, discovered, and invented the idea of back propagation, which allows the neural network to learn. And as you know, for the audience, software, historically, was humans applying first principles and our thinking to describe an algorithm that is then codified, just like a recipe that's codified in software. It looks just like a recipe, how to cook something. Looks exactly the same, just in a slightly different language. We call it Python or C or C++ or whatever it is. In the case of deep learning, this invention of artificial intelligence, we put a structure of a whole bunch of neural networks and a whole bunch of math units. And we make this large structure. It's like a switchboard of little mathematical units. And we connect it all together. And we give it the input that the software would eventually receive. And we just let it randomly guess what the output is. And so we say, for example, the input could be a picture of a cat. And one of the outputs of the switchboard is where the cat signal is supposed to show up. And all of the other signals, the other ones, a dog, the other ones, an elephant, the other ones, a tiger. And all of the other signals are supposed to be zero when I show it a cat. And the one that is a cat should be one. And I show it a cat through this big, huge network of switchboards and math units. And they're just doing multiply and adds, multiplies and adds. And this thing, the switchboard is gigantic. The more information you're going to give it, the bigger the switchboard has to be. And what Jeff Hinton discovered was invented was a way for you to guess that put the cat signal in, put the cat image in. And that cat image could be a million numbers because it's a megapixel image, for example. And it's just a whole bunch of numbers and somehow from those numbers, it has to light up the cat signal. Okay, that's the bottom line. And if it, the first time you do it, it just comes up with garbage. And so it says, the right answer is cat. And so you need to increase this signal and decrease all of the other and back propagates the outcome through the entire network. And then you show it in another, now it's an image of a dog. And it guesses it, takes a swing at it. And it comes up with a bunch of garbage and you say, no, no, no, the answer is, this is a dog. I want you to produce dog. And all of the other, all the other outputs have to be zero. And I want to back propagate that. And just do it over and over and over again. It's just like showing a kid, this is an apple. This is a dog. This is a cat and just keep showing it to him until they eventually get it. Okay, one of the ways that big invention is deep learning. That's the foundation of artificial intelligence, a piece of software that learns from examples. That's basically machine learning, a machine that learns. And so one of the big first applications was image recognition. And one of the most important image recognition applications is radiology. And so he predicted about five years ago that in five years time, the world won't need any radiologists because AI would have swept the whole field. Well, it turns out AI has swept the whole field. That is completely true. Today, just about every radiologist is using AI in some way. And what's ironic though, what's interesting is that the number of radiologists has actually grown. And so the question is why? That's kind of interesting, right? And so the prediction was in fact that 30 million radiologists will be wiped out. But as it turns out, we need it more. And the reason for that is because the purpose of a radiologist is the diagnosed disease. Not the study, the image. The image studying is simply a task to in service of diagnosing the disease. And so now the fact that you could study the images more quickly and more precisely without ever making a mistake and never gets tired. You could study more images. You could study it in 3D form instead of 2D because the AI doesn't care whether it's studies images in 3D or 2D. You could study it in 4D. And so now you could study images in a way that radiologists can't easily do. And you could study a lot more of it. And so the number of tests that people are able to do increases. And because they're able to serve more patients, the hospital does better. They have more clients, more patients as a result. They have better economics. When they have better economics, they hire more radiologists because their purpose is not to study the images, their purpose is to diagnose disease. And so the question is that what I'm leading up to is ultimately what is the purpose? What is the purpose of the lawyer? And has the purpose changed? What is the purpose? One of the examples that I gave is that I would give this. For example, if my car became self-driving, well all show furs be out of jobs, the answer probably is not. Because for some show furs, for some people who are driving you, they could be protectors. Some people, they're part of the experience, part of the service. So when you get there, they could take care of things for you. And so for a lot of different reasons, not all show furs would lose their jobs. Some show furs would lose their jobs. And many show furs would change their jobs. And the type of applications of autonomous vehicles will probably increase. The usage of the technology within find new homes. And so I think you have to go back to what is the purpose of a job? Like for example, if AI comes along, I actually don't believe I'm going to lose my job because my purpose isn't to. I have to look at a lot of documents. I study a lot of emails. I look at a bunch of diagrams. The question is what is the job? And the purpose of somebody probably hasn't changed. A lawyer for example, help people that probably hasn't changed. Studying legal documents, generating documents, it's part of the job, not the job. But don't you think there's many jobs that AI will replace? If your job is the passion, if your job is the task. So automation. If your job is the task. It could be a lot of people, but it will probably generate, like for example, let's say I'm super excited about the robots Elon is working on. It's still a few years away. When it happens, when it happens, there's a whole new industry of technicians and people who have to manufacture the robots. And so that job never existed. And so you're going to have a whole industry of people taking care of, like for example, all the mechanics and all the people who are building things for cars, super charging cars. That didn't exist before cars. And now we're going to have robots. You're going to have robot apparel. So a whole industry of, right, doesn't that right? Because I want my robot to look different than your robot. And so you're going to have a whole apparel industry for robots. You're going to have mechanics for robots. And you have people who come to maintain your robots. No, you don't think so? Not all of them. Not all of them. Not all of them are robots. Eventually, and then there'll be something else. So you think ultimately people just adapt, except if you are the task, which is a large percentage of the workforce. If your job is just the chopped vegetables, Cuisinart's going to replace you. Yeah. So people have to find meaning in other things. Your job has to be more than the task. What do you think about Elon's belief that this universal basic income thing will eventually become necessary? Many people think that. Andrew Yang thinks that. Yes, of course. He was one of the first people that sort of sound that alarm during the 2020 election. Yeah, I guess both ideas probably won't exist at the same time. And as in life, things will probably be in the middle. One idea, of course, is that there will be so much abundance of resource that nobody needs a job, and we'll all be wealthy. On the other hand, we're going to need universal basic income. Both ideas don't exist at the same time. Right. And so we're either going to be all wealthy, or we're going to be all existing. How could everybody be wealthy though? Well, because they're an area of... Wealthy, not because you have a lot of dollars, wealthy, because there's a lot of abundance. Like for example, today, we're wealthy of information. You know, this is a concept several thousand years ago. Only a few people have. And so today we have wealth of a whole bunch of things, resources that history point. Yeah. Yeah. And so we're going to have wealth of resources. Things that we think are valuable today. That in the future is just not that valuable. And so it's automated. And so I think the question maybe partly... It's hard to answer partly because it's hard to talk about infinity. It's hard to talk about a long time from now. And the reason for that is because there's just too many scenarios to consider. But I think in the next several years, call it five to ten years. There are several things that I believe in hope. And I say hope because I'm not sure. One of the things that I believe is that the technology divide will be substantially collapsed. And of course, the alternative viewpoint is that AI is going to increase the technology divide. Now the reason why I believe AI is going to reduce the technology divide is because we have proof. The evidence is that AI is the easiest application in the world to use. CHATCHEPT has grown to almost a billion users, frankly, practically overnight. And if you're not exactly sure how to use... Everybody knows how to use CHATCHEPT. Just say something to it. If you're not sure how to use CHATCHEPT, you ask CHATCHEPT how to use it. No tool in history has ever had this capability. A quiz in art. If you don't know how to use it, you're kind of screwed. You're not walk up to it and say how do you use a quiz in art. You're going to have to find somebody else. And so, but in AI, we'll just tell you exactly how to do it. Anybody could do this. They'll speak to you in any language. And if it doesn't know your language, you'll speak it in that language. And it'll probably figure out that it doesn't completely understand your language. Go and learn it instantly and comes back and talk to you. And so, I think the technology divide has a real chance, finally, that you don't have to speak Python or C++ or Fortran. You can just speak human. And whatever form of human you like. And so, I think that that has a real chance of closing the technology divide. Now, of course, the counter narrative would say that AI is only going to be available for the nations and the countries that have a vast amount of resources because AI takes energy. And AI takes a lot of GPUs and factories to be able to produce the AI. No doubt at the scale that we would like to do in the United States. But the fact that it matters, your phone is going to run AI just fine all by itself in a few years. Today, it already does it fairly decently. And so, the fact that in every country, every nation, every society will have to benefit of very good AI. It might not be tomorrow's AI. It might be yesterday's AI. But yesterday's AI is freaking amazing. In 10 years time, nine-year-old AI is going to be amazing. You don't need a 10-year-old AI. You don't need frontier AI. Like, we need frontier AI because we want to be the world leader. But for every single country, everybody, I think the capability to elevate everybody's knowledge and capability and intelligence. That day is coming. The Octagon isn't just in Las Vegas anymore. It's right in your hands with Draft King Sportsbook, the official sports betting partner of UFC. Get ready because when Duavashwili and Yann face off again at UFC 323, every punch, every takedown, every finish, it all has the potential to pay off in real time. New customers bet just $5.00. And if you're bet wins, you get paid $200 in bonus bets. And hey, Missouri, the weight is over. Draft King Sportsbook is now live in the Show Me State. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use promo code Rogan. That's code Rogan to turn $5 into $200 in bonus bets if you're bet wins. In partnership with Draft King's, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-Gambler in New York called 877-8 Open Wire. Text Hope in Y-467-369. In Connecticut, help is available for a problem gambling call 888-789-7777. Or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhoe Casino and Resorting Kansas, past through a per-way-dirt tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over, age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario. Restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in 7-A. Cinema Moms required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co-slash-audio. Limited Time Offer. And also energy production, which is the real bottleneck when it comes to third-world countries. That's right. The electricity and all the resources that we take for granted. Almost everything is going to be energy constrained. And so if you take a look at one of the most important technology advances in history is this idea called Moore's Law. Moore's Law was the started basically in my generation. And my generation is the generation of computers. I graduated in 1984 and that was basically at the very beginning of the PC Revolution and the microprocessor. And every single year it approximately doubled. And we describe it as every single year we double the performance. But what really means is that every single year the cost of computing halved. And so the cost of computing in a course of five years reduced by factor of 10, the amount of energy necessary to do computing to do any task reduced by factor of 10, every single 10 years, 100, 1000, 10,000, 100,000, so on and so forth. And so each one of the clicks of Moore's Law, the amount of energy necessary to do any computing reduced. That's the reason why you have a laptop today. When back in 1984 it sat on the desk, you got a plug in, it wasn't that fast, and it consumed a lot of power. Today, you know, it was only a few watts. And so Moore's Law is the fundamental technology, the fundamental technology trend that made it possible. Well what's going on in AI? The reason why Nvidia is here is because we invented this new way of doing computing. We call it accelerated computing. We started it 33 years ago. It took us about 30 years to really made it a huge breakthrough. In that 30 years or so, we took computing, you know, probably a factor of, well let me just take it in the last 10 years. The last 10 years, we improved the performance of computing by 100,000 times. Whoa. Imagine a car over the course of 10 years, it became 100,000 times faster. Or at the same speed, 100,000 times cheaper. Or at the same speed, 100,000 times less energy. If your car did that, it had an energy at all. What I mean, what I'm trying to say is that in 10 years time. It's less energy. If your car did that, it on the energy at all. What I mean, what I'm trying to say is that in 10 years time, the amount of energy necessary for artificial intelligence for most people will be miniscule, utterly miniscule. And so we'll have AI running in all kinds of things in all the time because it doesn't consume that much energy. So if you're a nation that uses AI for almost everything in your social fabric, of course you're going to need these AI factories. But for a lot of countries, I think you're going to have excellent AI and you're not going to need as much energy. Everybody will be able to come along. It's my point. So currently that is a big bottleneck, right? It is the bottleneck. The bottleneck. So was it Google that is making nuclear power plants to operate one of its AI factors? I haven't heard that. But I think in the next six, seven years I think you're going to see a whole bunch of small nuclear reactors. And by small and complicated talking about hundreds of megawatts. And that these will be local to the two. That's for specific company they have. That's right. We'll all be power generators. You know just like somebody's farm. It's probably the smartest way to do it, right? And it takes the burden off the grid. It takes the sound. And you could build as much as you need. And you can contribute back to the grid. It's a really important point that I think you just made about Moore's Law and the relationship to pricing. Because you know a laptop today, like you can get one of those little MacBook Airs. They're incredible. It's incredible. Unbelievably powerful battery life is very. We never have to charge it. Yeah. That's crazy. And it's not that expensive. That's relatively speaking. It's something like that. I remember when that's just Moore's Law. Then there's the Nvidia Law. Oh. Just right. The Law I was talking to you about. Yeah. It's computing that we invented. Right. The reason why we're here. This new way of doing computing is like Moore's Law on energy drinks. I mean, it's like Moore's Law. It's like Moore's Law on Joe Rogan. Wow. That's interesting. Yeah. That's us. So explain that. This chip that you brought to Elon, what's the significance of this? Why is it so superior? So in 2012, Jeff Hinton's lab, this gentleman I was talking about, Ilya Susskeber, Alex Kershevsky, they made a breakthrough in computer vision. And literally creating a piece of software called AlexNet. And its job was to recognize images. And it recognized images at a level computer vision, which is fundamental to intelligence. If you can't perceive, you can't. It's hard to have intelligence. And so computer vision is a fundamental pillar of, not the only, but fundamental pillar of. And so breaking computer vision, we're breaking through in computer vision, is pretty foundational to almost everything that everybody wants to do in AI. And so in 2012, their lab in Toronto made this breakthrough called AlexNet. And AlexNet was able to recognize images so much better than any human created computer vision algorithm. And the 30 years prior. So all of these people, all these scientists, and we had many too, working on computer vision algorithms. And these two kids, Ilya and Alex, under the under, under Jeff Hinton, took a giant leap above it. And it was based on this thing called AlexNet, this neural network. And the way it ran, the way they made it work was literally buying two NVIDIA graphics cards. Because NVIDIA's GPUs, we've been working on this new way of doing computing. And our GPUs application, and it's basically a supercomputing application to back in 1984, in order to process computer games. And what you have in your racing simulator, that is called an image generator supercomputer. And so NVIDIA started our first application was computer graphics. And we applied this new way of doing computing where we do things in parallel instead of sequentially. A CPU does things sequentially. Step one, step two, step three. In our case, we break the problem down and we give it to thousands of processors. And so our way of doing computation is much more complicated. But if you're able to formulate the problem in the way that we create a kuta, this is the invention of our company. If you could formulate it in that way, we could process everything simultaneously. Now in the case of computer graphics, it's easier to do because every single pixel on your screen is not related to every other pixel. And so I could render multiple parts of the screen at the same time. Not completely true because maybe the way lighting works, there's a way shadow works, there's a lot of dependency and such. But computer graphics, with all the pixels, I should be able to process everything simultaneously. And so we took this embarrassingly parallel problem called computer graphics, and we applied it to this new way of doing computing. NVIDIA's accelerated computing. We put it in all of our graphics cards. Kids were buying it to play games. You probably don't know this, but we're the largest gaming platform in the world today. Oh, I know that. Oh, okay. I used to make my own computers. I used to buy your graphics cards. Oh, that's super cool. Yeah. Set up SLI. That's super cool. Oh, yeah, man. I used to be a quick junkie. Oh, that's cool. Yeah. Okay. So SLI, I'll tell you the story in just a second. And how I would let the Elon, I'm going to see why I'm answering the question. And so anyways, these two kids trained this model using the technique I described earlier on our GPUs, because our GPUs could process things in parallel. It's essentially a super computer in a PC. The reason why you used it for Quake is because it is the first consumer super computer. Okay. And so anyways, they made that breakthrough. We were working on computer vision at the time. It caught my attention. And so we went to learn about it simultaneously. This deep learning phenomenon was happening all over the country. Universities after another recognized the importance of deep learning. And all of this work was happening at Stanford at Harvard at Berkeley. Just all over the place. New York University, Lonnie Jung-Lakun, Andrew Yang at Stanford. So many different places. And I see a cropping up everywhere. And so my curiosity asked, you know, what is so special about this form of machine learning? And we've known about machine learning for a very long time. We've known about AI for a very long time. We've known about neural networks for a very long time. What makes now the moment? And so we realized that this architecture for deep neural networks, back propagation, the way deep neural networks were. created. We could probably scale this problem, scale the solution to solve many problems. That is essentially a universal function approximator. Meaning, you know, back when you're in school, you have a box inside of it as a function. You give it an input. It gives you an output. And the reason why I call it universal function approximator is that this computer is a you describing the function, a function could be a new in-s equation, F equals M. A. That's a function. You write the function in software. You give it input, math, acceleration. It'll tell you the force. Okay? And the way this computer works is really interesting. You give it a universal function. It's not F equals M. A. Just a universal function. It's a big, huge deep neural network. And instead of describing the inside, you give it examples of input and output. And it figures out the inside. So you give it input and output and it figures out the inside. A universal function approximator. Today, it could be new in-s equation. Tomorrow, it could be Maxwell's equation. It could be Coulomb's law. It could be thermal dynamics equation. It could be, you know, Schoenger's equation for quantum physics. And so you could put any, you could have this describe almost anything. So long as you have the input and the output. So long as you have the input and the output. Or it could learn the input and output. And so we took a step back and we said, Hang on second. This isn't just for computer vision. Deep learning could solve any problem. All the problems that are interesting. So long as we have input and output. Now what has input and output? Well, what the world? The world hasn't put an output. And so we could have a computer that could learn almost anything. Machine learning artificial intelligence. And so we reasoned that maybe this is the fundamental breakthrough that we needed. There were a couple of things that had to be solved. For example, we had to believe that you could actually scale this up to giant systems. It was running in a, they had two graphics cards, two GTX 580s. Which by the way is exactly your SLI configuration. Yeah. Okay. So that GTX 580 SLI was the revolutionary computer that put deep learning on the map. Wow. It was 2018 and you were using it to play quick. Wow. That's crazy. That was the moment. That was the big bang of modern AI. We were lucky because we were inventing this technology. This computing approach. We were lucky that they found it. Turns out they were gamers and it was lucky they found it. And it was lucky that we paid attention to that moment. It was a little bit like that Star Trek, you know, first contact. The Vulcans had to have seen the warp drive at that very moment. If they didn't witness the warp drive, you know, they would have never come to Earth. And everything would have never happened. It's a little bit like if I hadn't paid attention to that moment, that flash, that flash didn't last long. If I hadn't paid attention, that flash, or our company didn't pay attention to it. Who knows what would have happened. But we saw that and we reasoned our way into this is a universal function approximator. This is not just a computer vision approximator. We could use this for all kinds of things. If we could solve two problems. The first problem is that we have to prove to ourselves it could scale. The second problem we had to wait for, I guess, contribute to and wait for is the world will never have enough data on input and output, where we could supervise the AI to learn everything. For example, if we have to supervise our children on everything they learned, the amount of information they can learn is limited. We need the AI, we need the computer to have a method of learning without supervision. And that's where we had to wait a few more years, but unsupervised AI learning is now here. And so the AI could learn by itself. And the reason why the AI could learn by itself is because we have many examples of right answers. Like for example, if I want to teach an AI how to predict the next word, I could just grab a whole bunch of texts that we already have, mask out the last word and make it try and try again until it predicts the next one. Or I mask out random words inside the text and I make it try and try and try and tell it predicts it. You know, like Mary goes down to the bank. Is it a river bank or a money bank? Well, if you're going to go down to the bank, it's probably a river bank. And it might not be obvious even from that. It might need and cut a fish. Okay, now you know it must be the river bank. And so you give these AI a whole bunch of these examples and you mask out the words, it'll predict the next one. Okay, and so unsupervised learning came along. These two ideas, the fact that it's scalable and unsupervised learning came along, we were convinced that we had to put everything into this and help create this industry because we're going to solve a whole bunch of interesting problems. And that was in 2012. By 2016, I had built this computer called the DGX1. The one that you saw me give to Elon is called DGX Spark. The DGX1 was $300,000. It costs and video a few billion dollars to make the first one. And instead of two chips SLI, we connected eight chips with a technology called NVLink. But it's basically SLI supercharged. Okay, and so we connected eight of these chips together instead of just two. And all of them work together just like your Quake Rig did to solve this deep learning problem to train this model. And so I created this thing. I announced it at GTC and at one of our annual events. And I described this deep learning thing, computer vision thing. And this computer called DGX1, the audience was like completely silent. They had no idea what I was talking about. And I was lucky because I had known Elon. And I helped them build the first computer for Model 3, the Model S. And when he wanted to start working on autonomous vehicle, I helped them build the computer that went into the Model S AV system. His full self-driving system. We were basically the FSD computer version one. And so we're already working together. And when I announced this thing, nobody in the world wanted it. I had no purchase orders, not one. Nobody wanted to buy it. Nobody wanted to be part of it. Except for Elon, he goes, he was at the event. And we were doing a fireside chat about the future of self-driving cars. I think it's like 2016. Maybe at that time it was 2015. And he goes, you know what? I have a company that could really use this. And I said, wow, my first customer. And so I was pretty excited about it. And he goes, yeah, we have this company. It's a nonprofit company. And all the blood drained out of my face. I just spent a few billion dollars building this thing. It costs $300,000. And the chances of a nonprofit being able to pay for this thing is to rock me at zero. And he goes, you know, this is an AI company. And it's a nonprofit. And we could really use one of these supercomputers. And so I picked it up. I built the first one for ourselves. We're using it inside the company. I boxed one up. I drove it up to San Francisco. And I delivered an Elon in 2016. A bunch of researchers were there. Peter Beal was there. Eli, I was scared. There were a bunch of people there. And I walked up to the second floor where they were all kind of in a room. It's smaller than your place here. And that place turned out to have been open AI. 2016. Wow. Just a bunch of people sitting in a room. It's not really a nonprofit anymore though. They're not nonprofit anymore. Where do that works? Yeah. Yeah. But anyhow, Eli was there. Yeah. It was really a great moment. Oh, yeah. There you go. Yeah. That's it. Look at your bro, same jacket. Look at that. I haven't aged. Not a look of black hair though. The size of it is significantly smaller. That was the other day. Okay. So there you go. Yeah. Look at the difference. Exactly. The same industrial design. He's holding it in his hand. Here's the amazing thing. DJX1 was one petaflops. Nine years later. Wow. The same amount of computing horsepower. And a much shrunken down. Yeah. And instead of $300,000, it's now $4,000. And it's the size of a small book. Cravo. Crazy. Yeah. That's how technology moves. Anyways, that's the reason why I wanted to give him the first one. It's because I gave him the first one in 2016. Yeah. And instead of $300,000, it's now $4,000. And it's the size of a small book. Cravo. Crazy. Yeah. That's how technology moves. Anyways, that's the reason why I wanted to give him the first one. If you wanted to make a story for a film, I mean, that would be the story that like, what better scenario, if it really does become a digital life form, how funny would it be that it is birthed out of the desire for computer graphics for video games? Exactly. It's kind of crazy. It's kind of crazy when you think about it that way. Because it's a perfect origin story. Computer graphics was one of the hardest computer, supercomputer problems generating reality. And also one of the most profitable to solve because computer games are so popular. When Nvidia started in 1993, we were trying to create this new computing approach. The question is what's the killer app? And the problem we wanted, the company wanted to create a new type of computing computing architecture, a new type of computer that can solve problems that normal computers can't solve. Well, the applications that existed in the industry in 1993 are applications that normal computers can solve because if the normal computers can't solve them, why would the application exist? And so we had a mission statement for a company that has no chance of success in the 1993. It just sounded like a good idea. And so if we created this thing, that can solve problems, you know, it's like you actually have to go create the problem. And so that's what we did. In 1993, there was no quake. John Carmack hadn't even reduced due to it, released Doom yet. You probably remember that. Sure. Yeah. And there were no applications for it. And so I went to Japan because the arcade industry had this at the time of Sega, if you remember, sure, the arcade machines, they came out with 3D arcade systems, virtual fighter, Daytona, virtual cop. All of those arcade games were in 3D for the very first time. And the technology they were using was from Martin Marietta, the flight simulators, they took the guts out of a flight simulator, and I put it into an arcade machine. The system that you have over here, it's got to be a million times more powerful than that arcade machine. And that was a flight simulator for NASA. Whoa. And so they took the guts out of that. And Sega had this brilliant computer developer, his name was Yu Suzuki. Yu Suzuki and Miyamoto, Sega and Nintendo, these were the incredible pioneers, the visionaries, the incredible artists, and they're both very, very technical. They were the origins, really, of the gaming industry. And Yu Suzuki pioneered 3D graphics gaming. And so I went, we created this company and there were no apps. And we were spending all of our afternoons. We told our family were going to work, but it was just the three of us, who was going to know. And so we went to Curtis as one of the founders, went to Curtis as townhouse. And Chris and I were married. We have kids already had Spencer and Madison. They were probably two years old. And Chris's kids are about the same age as ours. And we would go to work in this townhouse. But when you're a startup, and the mission statement is the way we described, you're not going to have too many customers calling you. And so we had really nothing to do. And so after lunch, we would always have a great lunch. After lunch, we would go to the arcades and play the Sega Virtuoflighter and Daytona and all those games. And analyze how they're doing it, trying to figure out how they were doing that. And so we decided, let's just go to Japan and let's convince Sega to move those applications into the PC. And we would start the PC gaming, the 3D gaming industry, partnering with Sega. That's how an NVIDIA start. Wow. And so in exchange for them, developing their games for our computers in the PC, we would build a chip for their game console. That was the partnership. I built a chip for your game console. You port the Sega games to us. And then they paid us at the time quite a significant amount of money to build that game console. And that was kind of the beginning of NVIDIA getting started. And we thought we're on our way. And so I started with a business plan and mission statement that was impossible. We lucked into the Sega partnership. We started taking off, started building our game console. And about a couple of years into it, we discovered our first technology didn't work. It would have been a flaw. It would have been a flaw. It was a flaw. And all of the technology ideas that we had, the architecture concepts were sound. But the way we were doing computer graphics was exactly backwards. Instead of, I won't bore you with the technology, but instead of inverse texture mapping, we were doing forward texture mapping. Instead of triangles, we did curve surfaces. So other people did it flat. We did it round. Other technology, the technology that ultimately won, the technology we use today, has Z buffers. It automatically sorted. We had an architecture with no Z buffers. The application had to sort it. So we chose a bunch of technology approaches that three major technology choices, all three choices were wrong. Okay, so this is how incredibly smart we were. And so 1995, 1995, we realized we were going down the wrong path. Meanwhile, the Silicon Valley was packed with 3D graphics startups, because it was the most exciting technology of that time. And so 3D effects and rendition and Silicon graphics was coming in and Intel was already in there. And gosh, what added up eventually to 100 different startups we had to compete against. everybody had chosen the right technology approach, and we chose the wrong one. And so we were the first company to start. We found ourselves essentially dead last with the wrong answer. And so the company was in trouble. And ultimately we have to make several decisions. The first decision is, well, if we change now, we will be the last company. And even if we changed into the technology that we believe to be right, we'd still be dead. And so that argument, do we change and therefore be dead? Don't change and make this technology work somehow, or go do something completely different. That question stirred the company strategically and was a hard question. I eventually advocated for it. We don't know what the right strategy is, but we know what the wrong technology is. So let's stop doing it the wrong way. And let's give ourselves a chance to go figure out what the strategy is. The second thing, the second problem we had was our company was running on a money. And I was in a contract with Sega. And I owed them this game console. And if that contract would have been canceled, we'd be dead. We would have vaporized instantly. And so I went to Japan and I explained to the CEO of Sega, Erie Monterey. Really great man. He was the former CEO of Honda USA, went back to Sega to run Sega. I went back to Japan and run Sega. And I explained to him that I guess that was what 33 years old. When I was 33 years old, I still had acne. And I was this Chinese kid, I was super skinny. And he was already kind of elder. And I went to him and I said, I said, listen, I've got some bad news for you. And first, the technology that we promised you doesn't work. And second, we shouldn't finish your contract because we'd waste all your money and you would have something that doesn't work. And I recommend you find another partner to build your game console. And so I'm terribly sorry that we've set you back in your product roadmap. And third, even though you're going to, I'm asking you to let me out of the contract, I still need the money because if you didn't give me the money, we'd vaporize overnight. And so I explained it to him humbly, honestly, I gave him the background. I explained to him why the technology doesn't work. Why we thought it was going to work, why it doesn't work. And I asked him to convert the last $5 million that they were going to complete the contract. So. to convert the last $5 million that they were going to complete the contract to give us that money as an investment instead and he said, but it's very likely your company will go out of business even with my investment and it was completely true back then 1995 $5 million was a lot of money it's a lot of money today, $5 million was a lot of money and here's a pile of competitors doing it right what are the chances that giving a video $5 million that we would develop the right strategy that he would get a return on that $5 million or even get it back zero percent you do the math as zero percent if I were sitting there right there I wouldn't have done it $5 million was a amount of money to say it at the time and so I told him that that if you invested that $5 million in us it is most likely to be lost but if you didn't invest that money we'd be out of business and we would have no chance and I told him that I don't even know exactly what I said in the end but I told him that I would understand if he decided not to but it would make the world to me if he did he went off and thought about it for a couple of days and came back and said we'll do it every monetary strategy into how to correct what it was doing wrong oh wait an idea oh man wait until I tell you the rest of it's it's scary even scarier oh no and so so uh so what he what he decided was was a uh Jensen was a young man he liked that's it wow to this day that's nuts I was boy you put the world over that guy no doubt right like what he he saw he celebrated today in Japan and if he were to keep that five the the investment I think it'd be worth probably about a trillion dollars today I know but the moment we went public they sold it they goes wow that's a miracle and so they sold it yeah they sold it at Nvidia valuation about 300 million that's our IPO valuation 300 million wow and so so anyhow I was incredibly grateful um and then now we have to figure out what to do because we still were doing the wrong strategy wrong technology so unfortunately we had to lay off most of the company we shrunk the company all back all the people working on the game console you know we had to shrunk it all bit shrink it all back and um and then and then somebody told me that but Jensen we've never built it this way before we've never built it the right way before we've only know how to build it the wrong way and so nobody in the company knew how to build this supercomputing image generator 3D graphics thing that silicon graphics did and so so uh I said okay hard hard can it be you got all these 30 companies you know 50 companies doing it how hard can it be and so luckily there was a textbook written by the company silicon graphics and so I went down to the store I had 200 bucks in my pocket and I bought three textbooks only three they had $60 a piece I bought the three textbooks I brought it back and I gave one to each one of the architects and I said read that and let's go save the company and so they read this textbook learn from the giant at the time silicon graphics about how to do 3D graphics but the thing that was amazing and what makes them video special today is that the people that are there are able to start from first principles learn best known art but re-implemented in a way that's never been done before and so when we re-imagine the technology of 3D graphics we re-imagine it in a way that manifests today the modern 3D graphics we really invented modern 3D graphics but we learned from previous known arts and we implemented fundamentally differently what did you do that changed it well you know that ultimately ultimately the the simple the simple answer is that the way silicon graphics works the geometry engine is a bunch of software running on processors we took that and eliminated all the generality the general purposeness of it and we reduced it down into the most essential part of 3D graphics and we hard coded it into the chip and so instead of something general purpose we hard coded it very specifically into just the limited applications limited functionality necessary for video games and that capability that's super and because we reinvented a whole bunch of stuff it's super charged the capability that one little chip and our one little chip was generating images us fast as a one million dollar image generator that was the big breakthrough we took a million dollar thing and we put it into the graphics card that you now put into your gaming PC and that was our big invention and then and of course the question is is how do you compete against these 30 other companies doing what they were doing and and there we did we did several things one uh instead of building a 3D graphics chip for every 3D graphics application we decided to build a 3D graphics chip for one application we bet the farm on video games the needs of video games are very different than the needs per CAD needs for flight simulators they're related but not the same and so we narrowly focused our problem statement so I could reject all of the other complexities and we shrunk it down into this one little focus and then we supercharged it for gamers and the second thing that we did was we created a whole ecosystem of working with game developers and getting their games ported and adapted to our silicon so that we could get turned essentially what is a technology business into a platform business into a game platform business so we you know g4 is really today it's also the most advanced 3D graphics technology in the world but a long time ago g4 is really the game console inside your PC it's you know it runs windows it runs accelerant's powerpoint of course those are easy things but it's fundamental purpose was simply to turn your PC into a game console so we we were the first technology company to build all of this incredible technology in service of one audience gamers now of course in 1993 the gaming industry didn't exist but by the time that John Carmack came along and the doom phenomenon happened and then quake came out as you know that entire community boom took off do you know where the name doom came from it came from this there's a scene in the movie the color of money where Tom Cruz who's this elite pool player shows up at this pool hall and this local hustler says what he got in the case and he opens up this case he has a special pool queue goes in here and he opens it up he goes doom and that's where it came exactly yeah because Carmack said that's what they wanted to do to the gaming industry doom that when doom came out it would just be everybody be like oh we're fucked oh this is doom that's awesome and then amazing that's amazing because it's the perfect name for the game yeah and yeah the name came out of that scene in that movie that's right well and then of course Tim Sweeney and epic games and and the 3d gaming genre took off yes and so if you just kind of in the beginning was no gaming industry we had no choice but to focus the company on one thing that one thing it's a really incredible origin story oh it's it's amazing like you must be like start a disaster is what $5 billion that pivot with that conversation with that gentleman if he did not agree to that if he did not like you what would the world look like today that's crazy then then our entire life hung on another gentleman and so so now here we are we built so before g4 so it was reverb 128 reverb 128 saved the company revolutionized computer graphics the performance cost performance ratio of 3d graphics for gaming was off the charts amazing and we're getting ready to ship it get what we're building it but we're so as you know $5 million doesn't last long and so every single month every single month we were drawing down you have to build it prototype it you have to design it prototype it get the silicon back which costs a lot of money test it with software because without the software testing the chip you don't know the chip works and then you're going to find a bug probably because every time you test something you find bugs which means you have to tape it out again which is more time more money and so we did the math there was no chance somebody was going to survive it we didn't have that much time to tape out a chip send it to a foundry TSMC get the silicon back test it send it back out again there was no no shot no hope and so the math the spreadsheet doesn't allow us to do that and so I heard about this company and this company built this machine and this machine is an emulator you could take your design all of the software that describes the chip and you could put it into this machine and this machine will pretend it's our chip so I don't have to send it to the fab wait until the fab sends it back test I could have this machine pretend it's our chip and I could put all of the software on top of this machine called an emulator and test all of the software on this pretend chip and I could fix it all before I send it to the fab and if I could do that when I send it to the fab it should work nobody knows but it should work and so we came to the conclusion that let's take half of the money we had left in the bank at the time it was about a million dollars take half of that money and go buy this machine so instead of keeping the money to stay alive I took half of the money to go buy this machine while I call this guy up this company called icos called this company up and I said hey listen I heard about this machine I like to buy one and they go oh that's terrific but we're out of business I said what you're out of business he goes yeah we have no customers that's wait hang on see so you never made the machine they guess no no we made the machine we have one in inventory if you want it but we're out of business so I bought one out of inventory okay after I bought it they went out of business I bought it out of inventory and on this machine we put Nvidia's chip into it and we tested all of the software on top and at this point we were on fumes but we convinced ourselves that chip is going to be great and so I had to call some other gentleman so I called TSMC and I told TSMC that listen TSMC is the world's largest founder today at the time there was just a few hundred million dollars large tiny little company and I explained to them what we were doing and I explained to my I told them I had a lot of customers I had one you know diamond multimedia probably one of the companies you bought the graphics card from back in the old days and I said you know we have a lot of customers and the bands really great and we're going to tape out a chip to you and I like to go directly to production because I know it works and they said nobody has ever done that before nobody has ever taped out a chip that worked the first time and nobody starts out production without looking at it but I knew that if I didn't start the production I'd be out of business anyways and if I could start the production I might have a chance and so TSMC decided to support me and this gentleman named Morris Chang. Morris Chang is the father of the Foundry industry the founder of TSMC really great man he decided to support our company I explained to them everything he decided to support us frankly probably because they didn't have that many other customers anyhow but they were grateful and I was immensely grateful and as we were starting the production Morris Lutea United States and he didn't so many words asked me so but he asked me a whole lot of questions that was trying to tease out do I have any money but he didn't directly ask me that you know and so the truth is that we didn't have all the money but we had a strong PO from the customer and if it didn't work some way first would have been lost and I'm you know I'm not exactly sure what would have happened but we were to come short it would have been it would have been rough but they supported us with all of that risk involved we launched this chip turns out to have been completely revolutionary knocked the ball out of the park we became the fastest growing technology company in history to go from zero to one billion dollars so wild that you didn't test the chip I go we tested afterwards yeah we tested afterwards afterwards but it didn't give a doctor but by the way by the way that methodology that we developed to save the company is used throughout the world today that's amazing yeah we changed we changed the whole world's methodology of designing chips the whole world's rhythm of designing chips we changed everything how well did you sleep those days it must have been so much stress you know what what is that feeling where the world just kind of feels like it's flying it you have this what do you call that feeling you can't you can't stop the feeling that everything's moving super fast and you know you're laying in your laying in bed and the world just feels like you know you feel deeply anxious completely out of control I've felt that probably a couple of times in my life it's during that time yeah it was incredible what an incredible success but I learned I learned a lot I learned I learned about I learned several things I learned I learned how to develop strategies I learned how to and when I when I mean you know our company learned how to develop strategies what are winning strategies we learned how to create a market we created the modern 3D gaming market we learned how and and so that exact same skill is how we create the modern AI market it's exactly the same yeah exactly the same skill exactly the same blueprint and we learned how to deal with crisis how to stay calm how to think through things systematically we learned how to remove all waste in the company and work from first principles and doing only the things that are essential everything else is waste because we have no money for it to live on fumes at all times and the feeling no different than the feeling I had this morning when I woke up that you're going to be out of business and that you're you know the phrase 30 days from going on a business I've used for 33 years but you still feel oh yeah oh yeah every morning every morning but but you guys are one of the biggest companies on planet earth but it the the feeling doesn't change wow the the sense of vulnerability the sense of uncertainty the sense of insecurity it doesn't leave you that's crazy we were you know we had nothing we had nothing we were dealing with China oh yeah oh yeah every day every moment do you think that fuels you is that part of the reason why the company so successful that you have that hungry mentality that you've never rest you're never sitting on your laurels you're always on the edge I have a greater drive from not wanting to fail than to drive of wanting to succeed is that like I think I coach is to tell you that's the world is just heard me say that for out loud for a first time but but it's true well this is fear of failure drives me more than than the the greed or whatever it is well ultimately that's probably a more healthy approach nothing I'm thinking about it because like the fear I'm not ambitious for example you know I just want to stay alive Joe I want the company to thrive you know I want us to make an impact that's interesting yeah well maybe that's why you're so humble that's what maybe that's what keeps you grounded you know because with the kind of spectacular success the companies achieved do it be easy to get a big head no right but this is not interesting it's like though if you were the guy that your main focus is just success you probably would go well made it nailed it in the man dropped the money it's that you wake up you're like I can't fuck this up no exactly every morning every morning no every moment you know that's good every day before I go to bed well listen if I was a major investor in your company that's why I'd want running it I'm not a guy who's like yeah that's what I work that's why I work seven days a week every moment I'm awake you work every moment I'm awake wow I'm thinking about solving a problem I'm thinking about how can I keep this up I don't know but could be next week it is exhausting it is sounds completely exhausting always in a state of anxiety wow yeah always in a state of anxiety well kudos to you for admitting that I think that's important for a lot of people to hear because you know there's probably some young people out there that are in a similar position to where you were when you were starting out that just feel like all those people that have made it they're just smarter than me and they had more opportunities than me and it's just like it was handed to them or they're just in the right place the right time and Joe I just described to you somebody who didn't know what was going on actually did it wrong yeah yeah and the ultimate diving catch like two or three times crazy yeah the ultimate diving catch is the perfect way to put it you know it's just like the edge of your glove it probably bounced off of somebody's helmet and land it that's incredible it's incredible but it's also it's really cool that you have this perspective that you look at it that way because you know a lot of people that have delusions for grandeur they have you know and they're in their rewriting of history oftentimes had them somehow extraordinarily smart and they were geniuses and they knew all along and they were they were spot on the business plan was exactly what they thought and they destroyed the competition and you know and they emerged victorious me while you're like I'm scared every day exactly it's so funny oh my god that's amazing it's so true though it's amazing it's so true it's amazing well but I think there's nothing inconsistent with being a leader and being vulnerable you know the company doesn't need me to be a genius right all along right all the time absolutely certain about what I'm trying to do and what I'm doing the company doesn't need that the company wants me to succeed you know the thing that and what we started out today talking about President Trump and I was about to say something and listen he is my president he is our president we should all and we're talking about just because it's President Trump we all want him to be wrong I think the United States we all have to realize he is our president we want him to succeed because no matter who's president that's right yeah that's right yeah we want him to succeed we need to help him succeed because it helps everybody all of us succeed and I'm lucky that I work in a company where I have 40,000 people who wants me to succeed they want me to succeed and I can tell and there are all every single day to help me overcome these challenges trying to realize realize what I described to be our strategy doing their best and if it's somehow wrong or not perfectly right to tell me so that we could pivot and the more vulnerable we are as a leader the more able other people are able to tell you you know that Jensen that's not exactly right or right have you considered this information or and the more vulnerable we are the more able we're actually able to pivot if we put ourselves into the superhuman capability then it's hard for us to pivot strategy because we were supposed to be right all along and so if you're always right how can you possibly pivot because pivoting requires you to be wrong and so I've got no trouble with being wrong I just have to make sure that I stay alert that I reason about things from first principles all the time always break things down to first principles understand why it's happening reassess continuously the reassessing continuously is kind of partly what causes continuous anxiety you know because you're asking yourself were you wrong yesterday are you still right is this the same has that changed has that condition is that worse than you thought because that mindset is perfect for your business though because this business is ever changing all the time and competition coming from every direction so much of it is kind of up in the air who and you have to invent a future where 100 variables are included and there's no way you could be right on all of them and so you have to be you have to surf wow you have to surf that's a good way to put it you have to surf yeah you're surfing waves of technology and innovation that's right you can't predict the waves you got a deal with it once you have wow and but skill matters and oh I've been doing this for 30 I'm the longest running takes the year on the world is that true congratulations that's amazing and you know people ask me how is one don't get fired I'll stop assured I hope and then two don't get bored yeah well how do you maintain your enthusiasm oh the honor truth is it's not always enthusiasm it's you know sometimes it's enthusiasm sometimes it's just good old-fashioned fear and then sometimes you know a healthy dose of frustration you know it's whatever keeps you moving yeah just all the emotions I think you know CEOs we have all the emotions right you know and so probably probably jacked up to the maximum because you're you're kind of feeling it on behalf of the whole company I'm feeling it on behalf of everybody at the same time and it kind of you know encapsulates into into somebody and so I have to be mindful that the past have to be mindful that the present I've got to be mindful that the future and you know it can't it's not without emotion it's not it's it's not just a job let's just put it that way mm it doesn't seem like it at all I would imagine one of the more difficult aspects of your job currently now that the company is massively successful is anticipating where technology is headed and where the applications are going to be yeah so how do you try to map that out yeah they're um there there's a whole bunch of ways and and it takes it takes a whole bunch of things but let me just start uh you have to be surrounded by amazing people and and video is now you know if you look at look at look at the large tech companies in the world today most of them have a business in advertising or social media or you know content distribution and at the core of it is really fundamental computer science and so the company's business is not computers the company's business is not technology technology drives the company and video is the only company in the world that's large whose only business is technology we only build technology we don't advertise the only way that we make money is to create amazing technology and sell it and so to be that to be in video today you're the number one thing you're surrounded by the finest computer scientists in the world and that's my gift my gift is that we've created a company's culture a condition by which the world's greatest computer scientists want to be part of it because they get to do their lives work and a company's culture, a condition by which the world's greatest computer scientist want to be part of it. Because they get to do their lives work and create the next thing. Because that's what they want to do. Because maybe they're not... They don't want to be in service of another business. They want to be in service of the technology itself. And we're the largest form of its kind in history of the world. Wow. I know, it's pretty amazing. Wow. And so, one, we have a great condition. We have a great culture. We have great people. And now the question is how do you systematically be able to see the future, stay alert of it, and reduce the likelihood of missing something or being wrong. And so, there's a lot of different ways you can do that. For example, we have great partnerships. We have a fundamental research. We have a great research lab. One of the largest industrial research labs in the world today. And we partner with a whole bunch of universities and other scientists. We do a lot of open collaboration. And so, I'm constantly working with researchers outside the company. We have the benefit of having amazing customers. And so, I've the benefit of working with Elon and others in the industry. And we have the benefit of being the only pure-play technology company that can serve a consumer Internet, industrial manufacturing, scientific computing, healthcare, financial services, all the industries that were in, they're all signals to me. And so, they all have mathematicians and scientists. And so, because I have the benefit now of a radar system, that is the most broad of any company in the world. Working across every single industry, from agriculture to energy, to video games. And so, the ability for us to have this vantage point. One, doing fundamental research ourselves. And then two, working with all the great researchers, working with all the great industries. The feedback system is incredible. And then finally, you just have to have a culture of staying super alert. There's no easy way of being alert, except for paying attention. I haven't found a single way of being able to stay alert without paying attention. And so, you know, I probably read several thousand emails a day. How? How do you have a time for that? I wake up early this morning. I was up at four o'clock. How much do you sleep? Six, six, seven hours. Yeah. And then you're up at four, reading emails for a few hours. Yeah. Where you get going. That's right. Yeah. Every day, every single day, not one day missed. Including Thanksgiving Christmas. Do you ever take a vacation? Yeah, but my definition of a vacation is when I'm with my family. And so, if I'm with my family, I'm very happy. I don't care where we are. And you don't work then? Or do you work a little? No, no, I work a lot. He put on you like if you go on a trip somewhere. Oh, sure. Still working. Oh, sure. Oh, sure. Wow. Every day. But my kids work every day. You make me tired to say in this. My kids work every day. Both of my kids work in the video. They work every day. Wow. Yeah, I'm very lucky. Wow. Yeah. It's brutal now because, you know, it's just me working every day. Now we have three people working every day. And they want to work with me every day. And so it's a lot of work. Well, you've obviously imparted that ethic into them. They work incredibly hard. I mean, it's not unbelievable. But my parents work incredibly hard. Yeah. I was born with the work gene, the suffering gene. Well, listen, man. It has paid off. What a crazy story. It was just, it's really an amazing origin story. It really, I mean, it has to be kind of surreal to be in the position that you're in now when you look back at how many times that it could have fallen apart and humble beginnings. But, yeah, this is a great country. I'm an immigrant. My parents sent my older brother in my hair first. We're in Thailand. I was born in Taiwan. But my dad had a job in Thailand. He was a chemical and instrumentation engineer, incredible engineer. And his job was to go start an oil refinery. And so we moved to Thailand, lived in Bangkok. And in 1973, 1974, timeframe, you know, Thailand, every so often, they wouldn't just have a coup. You know, the military would have an uprising. And all of a sudden, one day there were tanks and soldiers in the streets. And my parents thought, you know, probably isn't safe for the kids to be here. And so they contacted my uncle. My uncle lives in Tacoma, Washington. And we had never met him. And my parents sent us to him. How old are you? I was about to turn nine. And my older brother almost turned 11. And so the two of us came to United States. And we stayed with our uncle for a little bit while he looked for a school for us. And my parents didn't have very much money. And they never been to United States. My father was, I'll tell you that story in a second. And so my uncle found a school that would accept foreign students. And affordable enough for my parents. And that school turned out to have been in O'Nida, Kentucky. Clark County, Kentucky, the epicenter of the Opio crisis today. Coal country. Clark County, Kentucky is, was the poorest county in America when I showed up. It is the poorest county in America today. And so we went to the school. It's a great school. O'Nida Baptist Institute. In a town of a few hundred, I think it was 600 at the time that we showed up. No traffic light. And I think it was 600 today. It's kind of amazing feed, actually. The ability to hold your population for. What is 600 people? It's quite a magic. Quite a magical thing. However, they did it. And so the school had a mission of being an open school for any children who would like to come. And what that basically means is that if you're a trouble student, if you have a trouble family, if you're, you know, whatever your background, you're welcome to come to O'Nida Baptist Institute, including kids from international who would like to stay there. Did you speak English at the time? Okay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. And so we showed up. And my first, my first thought was, gosh, there are a lot of cigarette butts on the ground. A hundred percent of the kids smoked. So right away, you know, there's not a normal school. Nine-year-old? No. I was the youngest kid. Eleven-year-olds. So my roommate was 17 years old. Yeah, he just turned 17. And he was jacked. And, and I don't know where he is now. I know his name, but I don't know where he is now. But anyways, that night we got, and the second thing I noticed when you walk into the, into your dorm room is that there are no drawers and no closet doors, just like a prison. There are no locks so that people could check, check up on you. And so I go into my room and he's 17 and, you know, get ready for bed. And he had all this tape all over his body and turned out he wasn't a knife fight. And he's been stabbed all over his body and these were just fresh wounds. And the other kids were hurt much worse. And so he was my roommate, the toughest kid in school. And I was the youngest kid in school. It was a, it was a junior high, but they took me anyways because if I walked about a mile across the Kentucky River, the swing bridge, the other side is a middle school that I could go to. And then I can go to that school and I come back and then I stay in the dorm. And so basically, I need a Baptist Institute was my dorm when I went to this other school. My older brother went to the junior high. And so we were there for a couple of years. Every kid had, every kid had chores. My older brother's chore was to work in the tobacco form. You know, so, they raised tobacco so they could raise some extra money for the school. Kind of like a penitentiary. And my job was just to clean the dorm. And so I was nine years old. I was cleaning toilets and for a dorm of a hundred boys, I clean more bathrooms than anybody. And I just wish that everybody was a little bit more careful. I know. But anyways, I was the youngest kid in school. My memories of it was really good. But it was a pretty, it was a tough town. Sounds like. Yeah, town kids, they all carried, everybody had knives. Every smoked. Everybody had a zip-o-lighter. I smoked for a week. Did you? Oh yeah, sure. How old are you? I was nine. When you nine, you're nine, you tried smoking. Yeah, I got myself a packet cigarette, everybody else did. Did you get sick? I got used to it. Yeah. And I learned how to blow smoke rings and, you know, you know, breathe out in my nose, you know, take it an out of it through my nose. It was a call. All the different things that you learned. Yeah. At nine. Yeah. Why? You just did it to fit in or look cool? Yeah, because everybody else did it. Right. Yeah. And then I did it for a couple of weeks, I guess. And I just rather have, I had a quarter, you know, I had a quarter a month or something like that. I just rather buy popsicles and fudge sickles with it. I was nine, you know, that's right. I chose the better path. Wow. That was our school. And then my parents came to United States two years later. And we met them in Tacoma, Washington. That's wild. It was a really crazy experience. Wow. Strange formative experience. Yeah. Tough kids. Thailand to one of the poorest places in America. Where if not the poorest as a nine year old. Yeah, it was my first experience. Yeah. With your brother. Wow. Yeah. I used to work. And what breaks my heart probably the only thing that really breaks my heart about that experience was so we didn't have enough money to make, you know, international phone calls every week. And so my parents gave us this tape deck. This Iowa tape deck and a tape. And so every month we would sit in front of that tape deck and my older brother, Jeff and I, the two of us would just tell them what we did the whole month. Wow. And we would send that tape by mail. And my parents would take that tape and record back on top of it and send it back to us. Could you imagine it for two years? Wow. Is that tape still existed of these two kids just describing their first experience with United States? Like I remember telling my parents that that I had to say, I joined the swim team and my roommate was really buff. And so every day we spent a lot of time in the gym. And so every night, 100 pushups, 100 set ups, every day in the gym. So I was nine years old. I was getting, I was pretty buff. And I'm pretty fit. And so I joined the soccer team. I joined the swim team because if you join the team, they take you to meet. And then afterwards you get to go to a nice restaurant. And that nice restaurant was McDonald's. And I recorded this thing. I said, Mom and Dad, we went to the most amazing restaurant today. This whole place is lit up. It's like the future. And the food comes in a box. And the food is incredible. The hamburgers incredible is McDonald's. But anyhow, it wouldn't be amazing. Oh my God. Two years. Yeah. Two years. Yeah. What a crazy connection to your parents to just sending it to them, sending you one back and the same way of communicating for two years. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. Now my parents are incredible actually. They just, they grew up really poor. And when they came to United States, they had almost no money. Probably one of the most impactful memories I have is, we came and we were staying in a apartment complex. And they had, they had just rent back and I guess people still do rent, rent a bunch of furniture. And we were messing around. And we bumped into the coffee table and crushed it. It was made out of particle wood. And we crushed it. And I just still remember the look of my mom's face, you know, because they didn't have any money. And she didn't know how she was going to pay it back. And, but anyhow, that kind of tells you how hard it was for them to come here. But they, they left everything behind. And all they had was their suitcase and the money had, they had their, and their pocket and they came to United States. How all the food that are in the drink of dream. They were in their 40s. Wow. Yeah. Late, late 30s. Pursue the American dream. This is, this is the American dream. I'm the first generation of the American dream. Wow. Yeah. It's hard not to love this country. That's, it's hard not to be romantic about this country. That is a romantic story. That's an amazing story. Yeah. And my dad found his job literally in the newspaper, you know, the ads. And he calls people, got a job. What did he do? He was a consulting engineer. And a consulting firm. And they helped people build oil refineries, paper mills, and fabs. And that's what he did. He was an, he's really good at factory design, instrumentation engineer. And so he's, he's brilliant at that. And so he did that. And my mom worked as a maid. And they found a way to raise us. That's an incredible story, Jensen. It really is. Every, all of it from your childhood to the perils of the, in video, almost falling. It's really incredible, man. It's a great story. Yeah. I've lived a great life. You really have. And it's a great story for other people to hear too. It really is. You don't, you don't have to go to Ivy Leaks to listen to succeed. This country creates opportunities. It has opportunities for all of us. You do have to strive. You have to claw your way here. Yeah. But if you put in the work, you can succeed. Nobody works a lot. It's a lot of luck and a lot of. A lot of good decision making. And the good graces of others. Yes. That's really important. Yeah. You and I spoke about two, two people who are very dear to me. But the list goes on. The people, the people at NVIDIA who have helped me, many friends that are on the board, the decisions, you know, them giving me the opportunity. Like when we were inventing this new computing approach, I tanked our stock price because we added this thing called kuda to the chip. We had this big idea. We added this thing called kuda to the chip. But nobody paid for it. But our cost doubled. And so we had this graphics chip company. And we invented GPUs. We invented programmable shaders. We invented everything modern computer graphics. We invented real-time ray tracing. That's why it went from GTX to RTX. We invented all this stuff. But every time we invented something, the market doesn't know how to appreciate it, but the cost went way up. And in the case of kuda, the enabled AI, the cost increased a lot. But I really believed it. And so if you believe in the future, and you don't do anything about it, you're going to regret it for your life. And so we always tell the team, do you believe this or not? And if you believe it, and grounded on first principles, not random, you know, here say, and we believe it, we owe it to ourselves to go pursue it. If we're the right people to go do it, if it's really, really hard to do, it's worth doing, and we believe it. Let's go pursue it. Well, we pursued it. We launched the product. Nobody knew it was exactly like when I launched JX1 and the entire audience was like, complete silence. When I launched kuda, the audience was complete silence. No customer wanted it. Nobody asked for it. Nobody understood it. And video was a public company. Wait, here it is. This is a, let's see, 2000 and 2006, 20 years ago, 2005. Wow. Our stock prices went. I think our valuation went down to like, two or three billion dollars. From, from about 12 or something like that. I crushed it. And why? In a very bad way. Yeah. What is it now though? Yeah, it's higher. Very envelope. It's higher. But it changed the world. Yeah. That invention changed the world. It's incredible story, Johnson. It really is. Thank you. Like your story. It's incredible. My story is not as incredible. My story is more weird. You know, it's much more fortuitous and weird. Okay. What are the three milestones that most important milestones that led to here? That's a good question. What was that one? I think step one was seeing other people do it. Step one was in the initial days of podcasting. Like in 2009 when I started podcasting and only been around for a couple of years. The first was Adam Curry, my good friend who was the pod father. He invented podcasting. And then, you know, I remember Adam Corolla had a show because he had a radio show. His radio show got canceled. And so he decided to just do the same show but do it on the internet. And that was pretty revolutionary. Nobody was doing that. And then there was the experience that I had had doing different morning radio shows, like Opie and Anthony in particular because it was fun. And we would just get together with a bunch of comedians. You know, I'd be on the show with like three or four other guys that I knew. And it was always just a look forward to it. It was just such a good time. And I said, God, I missed doing that. It's so fun to do that. I wish I could do something like that. And then I saw Tom Green set up. Tom Green had a set up in his house. And he essentially turned his entire house into a television studio. And he did an internet show from his living room. He had servers in his house and cables everywhere. He had a step over cables. I was like, this is like 2007. I'm like, Tom, this is nuts. Like this is... And I'm like, you got to figure out a way to make money from this. I wish everybody in the internet could see your set up. It's nuts. I just wanted you guys to know that. It's not just this. So that was the beginning of it. It was just seeing other people do it. And then saying, all right, let's just try it. And then so the beginning days, we just did it on a laptop. Had a laptop with a webcam and just messed around. Had a bunch of comedians come in. And we were just talk and joke around. And I did it like once a week. And then I started doing it twice a week. And then all of a sudden I was doing it for a year. And then I was doing it for two years. Then I was like, oh, it's starting to get a lot of viewers. A lot of listeners. You know? And then I just kept doing it. It's all it is. I just kept doing it because I enjoyed doing it. Was there any set back? No. No, there's never really a set back. Really? No. It must have been. You're just resilient. Or you're just tough. No, no, no, no. It wasn't tough or hard. It was just interesting. So I just, the whole... You were never once punched in the face. No, not in the show. No, not really. Not doing this show. You never did something that big blowback. Nope. Not really. No, it all just kept growing. It kept growing. And the thing stayed the same from the beginning to now. And the thing is, I enjoy talking to people. I've always enjoyed talking to interest people. I could even tell just when we walked in. The way you interact it with everybody. Not just me. Yeah. That's cool. That's cool. Yeah, that's cool. You know, it's an amazing gift to be able to have so many conversations with so many interesting people because it changes the way you see the world. Because you see the world through so many different people's eyes. And you have so many different people. I have different perspectives and different opinions and different philosophies and different life stories. And, you know, it's an incredibly enriching and educating experience having so many conversations with so many amazing people. And that's all I started doing. And that's all I do now. Even now, when I book the show, I do it on my phone. And I basically go through this giant list of emails of all the people that want to be on the show or the request to be on the show. And then a factoring another list that I have of people that I would like to get on the show that I'm interested in. And I just map it out. And that's it. I go, ooh, I like to talk to him. If it wasn't because of President Trump, I wouldn't have been bumped up on that list. Yeah, I wanted to talk to you already. I just think, you know, what you're doing is very fascinating. And how would I not want to talk to you? And today, it proved to be absolutely the right decision. Well, you know, it's strange to be an immigrant one day, going to O'Neill Baptist Institute with the students that were there. And then here, Nvidia is one of the most consequential companies in the history of companies. Is a crazy story. It has to be a great story. That journey is. Yeah. And it's very humbling. And I'm very grateful. It's pretty amazing. So, around the by amazing people. You're very fortunate. And you've also, you seem very happy. And you seem like you're 100% on the right path in this life. You know, you, you know, you, everybody says you must love your job. Not every day. That's not hot. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. The beauty of everything. Yeah. Because that there's ups and downs. That's right. It's never just like this giant dopamine high. We leave, we leave this impression. Here's, here's an impression. I don't think it's healthy. We, we, people who are successful leave the impression often that, that our job gives us great joy. I think largely it does. That our jobs were passionate about our work. And that passion relates to it's just so much fun. I think it largely is. But it, it, it distracts from in fact a lot of success comes from really, really hard work. Yes. There's a long periods of suffering and loneliness and uncertainty and fear and, embarrassment and humiliation. All of the feelings that we most not love that creating something from the ground up and, and Elon will tell you something similar. Very difficult to invent, invent something new. Yeah. And people, people don't believe you all the time. You're humiliated often. Disbelieved. Most at a time. And so, so people forget that part of success. And, and I, I don't think it's health. I think it's, it's good that we pass that forward and let people know that, that it's just part of the journey. Yes. And then- And then- And then you as part of the journey. You will appreciate it so much. These horrible feelings that you have when things are not going so well. You will appreciate it so much more when they do go well. Deeply grateful. Yeah. Yeah. Deep, deep pride. Incredible pride. Incredible, incredible, incredible gratefulness and, and, and surely incredible memories. Absolutely. Jason, thank you so much for being here. Those are really fun. I've really enjoyed it. And your story is just absolutely incredible and very inspirational. And, and I, you know, I think it really is the American dream. You're this the American dream. You're really it. Thank you so much. Thank you. Bye, everybody.