You've said a number of times publicly, many times publicly, and I think it's now being confirmed that CIA had knowledge of at at best had knowledge of your uncle's assassination new things. It's still being hidden now. What do you think, and that's obviously true? What do you think the motive was in that killer? Well, I think the people who were involved in it, the specific people who were involved in it were almost all associated with my ami station, which was the largest. CIA station at that time, it was basically, it was the Cuban station. And the people who were involved in that station were people like Bill Harvey and David Atley Phillips, who was clearly involved in my uncle's assassination. He was, I all evidence, he was Lee Harvey Oswald's handler at the CIA. And then he Howard Hunt, who made a confession, David Morales, who is the chief hitman. He ran the Operation Phoenix program in Vietnam. He killed 10,000 people, civilians over there murdered them. And he both, he also gave a confession of being in Dallas. And there were not most of the people were associated with Cuba. And the impetus came from that group of people who were angry at my uncle for not sending an air cover during the big invasion. And even more so after the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, my uncle then developed this friendship with Khrushchev. And he shut down all of the Cuban attacks by Alpha-66 and these other groups that were harassing Cuba. They were sinking ships or sinking Russian ships. They were operating fliptillers out of South Florida and doing raids on. And my uncle and fathers had the Coast Guard down to confiscate their boats and their weaponry and to arrest the ones that continue to do it. And those people, those individuals, were also, you know, have been traced and tracked the assassination. And over the years, and there are now, there are millions of documents. But why not really sell the... What doesn't make sense to me is why not just admit it now. No one you described would be install wivers. No, everybody... So why wouldn't Biden declassify these documents? I don't know why. And why would Trump not try to... I agree. I know why Trump wouldn't because he was convinced by Mike Pompeo not to. So, as Donald-Excus, you know... We don't know why... What Mike Pompeo said to him that? No, but that's the point. What we would possibly require some to do it. So they give us assenations, require that all documents be released by 2017. And yet they refuse. But it suggests that there's something to be a big fan of. There's more than 4,000 of them that are left. And you have to assume, and again, I don't try not to talk about things that I cannot document. Right. But I think there's a fair assumption that they're not protecting individuals that they're protecting some institution interests. What's the most powerful institution in America? Why? Again, I don't know. I don't know. And you don't know. Yeah, it's... But it's... There must be something because why wouldn't they just... And by the way, for people, you know, you and I having this conversation about who did the assassination, and why they did it. A lot of that is the stuff that I've told you. And I've tried to stick to things that are documentable. And the names that I said, right. But for people who want a real, you know, kind of a panoramic view of what happened. I think the best hope that's been written about this is Jim Douglas' work, which is called the Unspeakable. Because he's done something that, you know, after the Warren Commission, that became the Orthodoxy. And New York Times and all the major news organizations have enforced that Orthodoxy. And anybody who challenged that Orthodoxy becomes a conspiracy theorist. In fact, in 1967, the CIA sent a letter out to an telecom out to all of its Operation Mockingbird people, which are all the assets it had in the American press more than 400 people, editors, senior editors, senior writers, the American press saying, from now on, anybody who questions the single gunman theory of the Kennedy assassination beaker should be characterized as a conspiracy theorist. The point the word conspiracy theory, but they popularize it with enamel. They sent them out to all their stations saying that talk should be discouraged. So those, you know, what happened after that is then in 1979, the House's Asinations Committee met for a year and a half. And they looked at much more evidence than the Warren Commission did, including, you know, Allen Allen, Allen Dulles had run the Warren Commission. He was the head of the CIA who went on go fired. When my uncle died, he said, I'm glad the little shit is dead. He thought he was a god. That's what he said to him, a young reporter. And then he becomes head of the Commission that, you know, it shouldn't have been called the Warren Commission. It should be called the Dalek. Because Earl Warren was at a full-time job at the Supreme Court. The only, all the other guys on the Warren Commission had full-time jobs at the Senator in Congressman. The only guy who went to every meeting and, you know, looked at every piece of evidence and developed the questions for the witnesses was Allen Dulles. He was running the entire Warren Commission. And you should have been the prime suspect in the crime. And he was communicating secretly with the people with the CIA, with David Adley Phillips, with George Johnonides, who was the CIA liaison, telling them what, you know, what questions we're going to be asked and what they should reveal. And, which he had to do over at the same time. The whole thing was a coordinated kind of kabuki theater. But then Congress goes back and investigates it in 79. And Congress then comes back after a year and a half seeing a lot more stuff. And says, and they conclude this was a conspiracy. Yes. And they make that official, you know, so anybody who says was just Lee Arby Oswald is different from the people who actually made the investigation. So he didn't know. Most of the people on that staff who I've talked to believe that it was the CIA. And as you know at that time, the dispute between him was between, it wasn't the mob of the CIA, because there was a lot of mob involvement. You know, John, he was Ali, Sam Jean Conut, who was the shocker of Los Angeles traffic on day with the Tampa Baws. And Carlos Marcello, who was the New Orleans Baws, were all involved. And they all had casinos in Havana. And they were working with the CIA to assassinate Castro. So they had a hit minute. They were on, they were training Cubans who were sharp shooters for Batista. As a hitman, and I've talked to some of the hitmap of talking to Tony of Echinana, who was involved and who was also David Adley Phillips. And, and David Adley Phillips was his handler. And he was Lee Arby Oswald's handler. So, veggie on him, that Oswald, in Dallas. And I think in September of 1963, I've talked to the people who were actually working for the CIA and the mob at that time, you know, to kill Castro. And how they were then pivoted to this, you know, some of them were pivoted to this new project. The young people say this new, successful, blind. And kind of these motor teams. Well, good and 39. He'll be the best of Jeffrey Epstein.