The joke and experience is it amazing to you as somebody who spent so long thinking about otherworldly Visitors that now they're releasing all this information and no one really cares Well the world isn't such chaos. No one cares. No one cares. I couldn't What happened during the middle of the Obama administration? Everything was going great. It would be giant news And what is the news even that the Pentagon just can't account for all these unidentified flying objects? Yeah, they don't know what they are because some of them that could easily be drones because they're Not moving at spectacular speeds. They're just sort of like hovering over aircraft carriers Those could be drones. They could be some new style of drone or some new kind of technology that maybe some foreign government has But there's other ones that were spotted by air force pilots and then tracked and they have Detailed data on the speed of these things They have video of these things going what would appears to be thousands of miles an hour instantaneously Accelerating with no visible propulsion system no heat signature. They don't know what the fuck this is Yeah, and this is from 2004 off the Nimitz commander David Freaver who was a fighter jet pilot is like Like rock solid credentials. You can't yeah, and I've talked to the guy How do my podcast and even better he was on Lex podcast and Lex didn't even better job than I didn't talk to him for two plus hours? about this and the guys Incredibly credible that fucking thing whenever he was tracking went from the Nimitz tracked it they tracked it on radar They tracked it with their the onboard sensors The things they use for targeting enemy crafts They tracked this thing from the Nimitz. It went 80,000 feet above sea level to 50 feet in a second That's crazy. They don't know what the fuck it is. They didn't know what it is They know that it was jamming their radar They know it was jamming them and and then it moved when it took off and in same rates of speed They couldn't even watch it. It just it's gone and then it re re emerged at the cat point The cat point is the predetermined location where the Jets are supposed to scramble to right during this exercise So it's literally saying I know what you guys are going right you're going over here Whatever the fuck it is who knows but does that mean that it's from another planet? No, it could be some fucking insane Technology that the military's developed that we don't know it could be because there there have to have you seen that shit where the military There's patents for UFO type See if you can find what those are because they're developing or at least there They've attempted to develop some sort of gravitational drive that would indicate that at least There's been some thought about developing a craft like that now if you put a person in one of these things and you shot them off Thousands miles now they turn it to jello right, but who says it's a person who knows we got a rover on Mars right now Taking pictures is a helicopter attached to it. You got a high-resolution photographs from Mars. Here it is Doc show Navy got UFO Pat and granted by warning of similar Chinese tech advances this is what I'm saying Patton document indicates the US and China are actively Developing radical new craft that seem eerily similar to UFOs reported by Navy pilots now if there if this is like on paper somewhere Where they're trying to get patents and they're telling you that Chinese the Chinese The military already has something like this What we're getting is years later right they've been probably developing shit like this forever So we probably have some sort of working thing that can move in extraordinary ways We are not gonna care until there's a Mars attack style raid on the White House like that movie I like yeah, if you're not gonna cut if you don't land with ray guns and start blasting people I don't even give a shit like no one's gonna care. We're real weird with it now I've always said that if aliens are real earth is the Tijuana about her space Not kidding they come down here when they're fucked up and then racy a show. Yeah, that's exactly right And then they're not trying to they're no one's trying to save Tijuana No, nobody's thinking about it. Yeah, it's a place that you go and they mentioned it in a movie Yeah, every now and then it's the a donkey show yeah Robert Rodriguez features it in a vampire moving then you get out of there It's interesting. It's the one conspiracy that I've never gotten into that much because there's the information is So tough to come by that I've just always said if it's Nothing would surprise me nothing would surprise me. There's something going on On but what that something is remains to be seen. Have you seen that video the men in black that walk into they walk into this It's just too very tall weird dudes that walk into like a Hotel and then leave Jamie you can find it easily and it's just these guys that were supposedly like you know Something weird happened and supposedly their guys it come in like after something weird happens and like Shut it down and they both very tall and very and I don't know if it's fake And I don't think it is fake though, but I don't know it could be fake where we're working one find this video I get's on YouTube or something Jamie could find it's the real men in black. It's like the real you know Whatever, you know supposedly there was something that happened where I don't know Somebody went in after it like somebody had to go respond to something in these two like We're looking dudes came in very strange There's got to be a men in black if there are if we know about there's got to be some Part of the government that deals with that well there's two schools of thought right one school Thought is that the government is way too incompetent to ever keep anything from anybody and that's not true That's not true and there's other schools of thought where you're like no they there's a Perceived buffoonery that's attached to some level of government because there's a lot of people in government that are fucking idiots Right, but at like there's a lot of people that work at UPS that are fucking idiots But if you get to the highest levels of the organization They know what to do. Yeah I mean if you're gonna send to the highest levels of the CIA or the NSA You're gonna probably be brilliant right what are the odds that you're not right? You're probably gonna have a good person The best but you're gonna be standing yeah, what's going on of yeah foreign policy and how to manipulate things And did you not find the men in black video not really I found something, but it was like all it was animation and stuff It wasn't really a hotel No, I don't know if it was a hotel. There was just two guys that walked in and Then left and they looked very strong as a description of events of like that happening. I didn't find it. Okay. I'm looking Well, it's always been one of those things the part of UFO folklore, right? These men in black folks yeah, oddly fake the little like fake looking skin Right show up. Yeah, that's what I would do if I was gonna go interview some guy about a UFOs, you know what I would do I'd put like weird white makeup on Yeah, yeah, yeah, dress in a black suit and I'd ask him strange questions while we're in sunglasses Yeah, I'm having freak out why not buy not fuck with him. Yeah, why not leave him to the point where what he's gonna tell all his friends is so crazy No one's gonna believe it well, that's part of I think what what a lot of it is It's the match if you have a yeah in aircraft that shape like a pyramid right and you're flying it over Philadelphia Yeah, here it is. Okay. That's all it is. I don't know what this yeah, well, we're in suits. I did me that proves. Yeah. What is that? To me I say that that proves it to me, but what is the Niagara Falls show cancel what is that? immediately Okay, what is this finally we have perhaps most conclusive evidence of the real men in black Hotel in Canada and for manager was a little disturbed when his bellboy informed him that the previous day The hotel had been visited by two tall men dressed completely in black who demanded to speak to him Maybe they were Johnny cash fans. Yeah To me so they're just men. This is what's ridiculous about conspiracy theories. Those are two guys I have a suit do you have a suit? Yes, but I don't think I brass now that what is this? There had no eyebrows. Oh see that's what I would do I would fucking shave my eyebrows or put some makeup on over them So that I look like a weirdo and then make them real uncomfortable when they're telling their friends man I'm gonna believe this look at these guys here. They are okay. That's gotta be a movie, right? What is that image from let that guy play it out? That concludes our look at the men in black At just a handful of real life accounts involving these mystery men. There are many more stories to look at online Oh British guys is the men in back There are many mysteries to look at as long as there's more stories online What's that that's a content online? We can sink our teeth into catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience For free only on Spotify watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify Including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free Spotify is absolutely free you don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience