The Jerogan experience. Jogvalay, you have been studying this most of your life. Too long. Too long. We discussed it last night at dinner that your interest in this came from an experience that you actually had as a child. You actually saw a UFO. As a teenager with two other witnesses, one of the witnesses was half a mile away with binoculars. I'm pretty sure that that object was real and it was a classic disk, middle of the afternoon, clear sky, absolutely clear. At the time I became convinced that it might be a prototype of something that would be coming out later. We're here many years later and we still don't have anything like that. It was just hovering and it was there. You've been studying this for so long and this was something you guys talked about on the film. You were actually the character that the French UFO researcher in close encounters of the first kind, or the third kind rather was modeled after. This Steven Spielberg film. Spielberg was intrigued with the idea of a character that was not quite as weird as the ETs. That was a lot weirder than the people on the ground in the US trying to make sense of this and the military and so on. So he needed this intermediate character. He thought, you know, the Frenchman was the right thing to do. And so did you talk to him about the film? Did you talk to him about when he was putting it together? Yeah, I generally put us together when about halfway through the final shooting of the film. And there were gaps in the movie at that point. And so we had launched twice together and it was a lot of fun. At the time he was looking for a transition between the time when they know the big thing is coming. The mothership is coming and they don't know where. And the mothership is sending signals but they can't decipher the signals. And he said, you know, he had spent the morning at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and he said he could make any sense of all the mathematics they had. And I said, well, maybe you can have two screens that give you an angle and the angle tells you where the thing is. And he said, now that's too complicated and it takes too long. It's got to be just a few minutes in the film. And then I thought of a photograph that was on the desk of Dr. Heineck, you know, Dr. Jay Eileenk who was the Air Force consultant on UFOs. At the time when I was working with him, building databases and so on. And on that photograph there were three guys, you know, really well dressed on ladders around a huge sphere of the earth in the lobby of some building somewhere with pieces of string that they were putting the string over the earth. And I talked about it. I said, I don't know what's the story behind this. And he said, well, when the first splitnik was launched, October 57, nobody had a computer program to computer orbit. But they knew where the splitnik had been seen. Nobody expected the Russians to come up with this and they needed to know where it was going next. So the New York Times called the director of Harvard Observatory saying, can you give us a comment on the Russian satellite. And the guy said, hey, it's 3 o'clock in the morning, you know, what Russian satellite? And so they got dressed in a hurry and they were trying to compute the orbit by putting a string around the, around the model of the earth in the lobby of Harvard. And I thought it was so funny. And Pierreberg said, that's it. You know, that's it. The general says, come on, you know, the, you know, the, the geographer who is the interpreter of the French, of a French guy, says, well, it looks like it's somewhere in Wyoming, you know, but where in Wyoming, you know, where should we go? And the, the general says, you mean we've got 10 billion dollars worth of radar and, you know, cameras and everything. Nobody's got a map of Wyoming and they break into the lobby of the building next door and they come back with this globe. And, you know, they've got the globe and they look at it and get the coordinates. And because the, it turns out the geographer tells them, you know, those signals, they look like a longitude and a latitude. So they, they, they, they, they get the point where it's going to be. And that, that was a piece that was missing in, in the movie. So I was really proud of that, you know, it was, it was really fun. Well, so it's the one funny part in the movie. Yeah, it's a great movie. And it's, it is probably the movie that got me most excited about UFOs when I was a kid. And I remember thinking, if UFOs were coming here from another planet, one thing that I remember thinking is, why would they even bother? They're talking to the government. Like what, what do they care who the government is? Like if, if I was looking at an ant colony, I'm not going to ask the ant colony, which one's the elected official that's in charge of all the other ants. You don't give a shit. You're just like trying to study the ants. And I felt like if something was coming here from another planet that was so sophisticated, it could either travel from another dimension or travel from another galaxy, why would it care like who the president is or who the generals are? Not only that, but the witnesses don't talk to the government either. By now, the witnesses are tired of being ridiculed by scientists and by, and told that those things don't exist. So they don't, they don't talk. So they'll talk to people like you, people like me, because they trust, they trust me. And in Silicon Valley, you know, you wouldn't believe the number of people who come to me, you know, including CEOs of companies that I've worked with, who tell me about sightings that people in their family have had or sightings they had, including, you know, sightings in Vietnam, for example, and so on, when they were in the military that have never been reported. And, and the government isn't getting that. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan Experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips, easily, seamlessly, switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost, all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan Experience.