What's up everybody? Hope you enjoy this beautiful Florida skyline behind me. So lately you probably noticed I've had to record these awkward little videos that roll before the podcast plays because essentially I need to start begging you guys to subscribe to the YouTube channel. People don't typically subscribe when they discover podcasts or discover videos I need to put the first time. And when people do subscribe YouTube knows to put us in front of more people so we can keep growing the show. It's just the best way to do it. That being said, the following podcast is with Andrew Eucles. He has been to the deadliest places on earth, hand-catching man-eating beasts, and I really believe that you guys are going to love it. Thank you to everyone who's been supporting and subscribing to the show. I can't thank you enough. So thanks to you guys, I'm not sleeping back here. So without further ado, please enjoy this conversation with Andrew Eucles. Ma. The most dangerous things I've been exposed to have been the diseases. Of course so many. But not as often yet. That's good. It's not it's never too late. Still early. You're still young. Exactly. How old are you? Just 10.36. We're at the same age. Hey, happy birthday bro. Yitty. How did you become a Australian survivalist crazy wildlife person? I guess I was just born in the right location. I think anyone from the area that I'm born in Dapto, we've got some interesting characters. We've got to tell us we can hear your accent. Yeah. 100% you know to give away. I've been interesting though. I think coming here to the US pending on which state that I go to, I feel like my accent's clear. I feel like it's clear. It's quite understandable. It's an English accent. I'll go to a lot of places in the US and they'll just say slow down. I can't understand you. And I'll talk a whole little more and say, what am I doing this wrong? But you can understand me. So Florida must be like a Florida thing. You can understand the Australian accent. Yeah, you will. You've said off camera just a minute ago. Can you say that again? What you said about Florida? I want to make sure we have that on right now. 100%. So I think having traveled to about 20 different states here in the US, Florida represents a state that if I was going to come and live in, it would be key. I think because of the climate, because of the wildlife, I think even when you fly in over it, like I'll say before, just like the vegetation structure and the matrix and all that kind of stuff, it looks wild. What it is wild. So you have Florida would definitely be number one. Yeah. We got everything here. Yeah. Coastline. We got the Gulf Mexico. We got the Atlantic Ocean. We got the Florida Keys. We got the swamp land. We got tons of forestry. All kinds of hunting. You can do all kinds of fish. You catch every fish. I had a girl in here. La Wisa. La Wisa was, she's Australian. She was in here. And I was talking to her. She's like, she's like a health person. She's like a neurophysiologist. Right? So she's all into diet and all this stuff. We were talking about fish. And she's like, she's like, you got to make sure you're eating the right fish. Yeah. We live in Florida. I'm like, we catch like I eat fish fresh fish all the time. She's like, yeah, but you know, we're getting it from. I'm like, yeah, it's the Gulf of Mexico. We literally catch it. I'm going about in a catch it. She's like, yeah, but it's not as good as fish you get in Australia. A lot of you think Australian fish is better. Well, I don't know about that. Just recently went out on a fish controller. And essentially, this is in the northern part of Queensland where they do like a lot of like coral trout fishing. And I think what's interesting is when you fish and for coral trout, you're also going to be catching a lot of like byproducts species as well. So you got like the Y who you got like the barramundi card. You've got these like giant imprecords as well. But what's interesting is a lot of the fish species there actually have what's called like the Sigateratoxin. That that's why I threw that bar accumulation from the sea. I just seen some barracuda the other day. Yeah. Well, there you go. So you got to be incredibly careful. Even in Australia, very careful about what species of fish that you can see. I mean, so yes. So I know the barracuda, I think it's the barracuda in the warmer climates are the ones that have the Sig and the ones that are in like up north and the colder climates don't necessarily always have it. But yeah, my dad made some barracuda fish spread the the other day. He didn't even tell me. He just brought it to me. He's like, hey, try this fish spread. I made like, oh, god, damn it's delicious. He cut up some jalapenos, put it in there. I was just gorphin it down. He's like, yeah, it's barracuda. I was like, oh, yeah. Well, I'm so alive. I mean, another friend of mine, Mandy Pwick, he's the guy. You know, Mandy, he made a lot of him. I like, I do. We all drop like watching him on jackass. You know, apart from a part from a Steve who was, you know, I think a little bit before that. I think Mandy was one of those people that was relatable. It was almost like that crazy next door neighbor, you know, the guy that's wearing a lawn mower kind of guy that just had something relatable. And I think he had an amazing skill set, you know, he just he spent so many, you know, so much time out there in the wilderness. He had, you know, a real special connection. And when I walked in, I saw these and I was just like, that's definitely 90 signature out there. Mandy was the one who taught who told me, he was one who got me interested in the ability to eat barracuda. Yeah. So he was saying he eats barracuda all time. And he catches them with these things. And he, he, uh, there's videos of him catching barracuda just with a knife swimming, right? He just like, swims up to him and stabs him and catches him. But, um, but yeah, man, Mandy, Mandy is a very unique mother. He, and he grew up in Cuba during the revolution, like right after the revolution. Well, he was the one who introduced me to Felix Rodriguez, the guy in that podcast we're just talking about. Gotcha. And, um, Mandy's dad fought with him in, uh, in Cuba during the revolution for the CIA. And Mandy's dad actually got caught and executed. Oh, I wouldn't know why. Yeah. Felix is his godfather from a very young age. I think after he was, uh, I think Mandy was around five years old when his dad got executed. You know what I find interesting for the majority of the people that I've met within this industry that have a real deep. Okay. So you can have a skill set, right? But then there's this next kind of level that you get to. And that next level is to do with understanding and more behavior. What I've noticed for a lot of people in the industry that just had that edge or just have that extra skill set that extra talent is generally there's been trauma in their life. Yeah. And I know, um, for a lot of the people that I've talked to who have had bad relationships or even maybe no farther in their life, they often find a relationship in nature that they'd normally like a normal, and also some would find a relationship with their father. They find a relationship in nature. And for me, that was the case. And because I didn't get along with my father at all. I think, and it's, look, he, he was the most supportive father in the world and loving, but we just, we just didn't get along. We couldn't stand each other. We just couldn't even talk to that. We couldn't stand each other. And I think what's interesting is having seen a lot of guys in this industry, which are really good, that next level good, we all have a very similar kind of thing. And I think that's probably something that's probably happened with Manny at that age is he found a relationship with nature. And that field listener's signature as well, that gives you a sense of control. Yeah. I mean, the most interesting people I think have had to deal with a lot of trauma, whether most likely early in life, you know, so like what you were saying with Manny, and that's interesting too, the similarity between you and him, you know, he talked about how when he came to the US and he moved to Florida and he went to college, he was just basically skipping school and going on solo treks in the panhandle by himself, just like wandering through the woods for weeks with just a knife and a backpack, like catching and killing stuff and eating it and just surviving on his own by himself for weeks. That's all I wanted to do. Well, that's empowerment. I mean, that's self identification, that's empowerment. And I think that's something that's obviously character building. You can see that in someone. And I know for the guys that I've met in the industry, which are really good in the survival realm, we're all self-taught. And I think a lot of the times we will try and reflect and say, we've spent a lot of times with the indigenous people and all that kind of stuff. And retrospectively, yes, there's a lot of of skill sets that can come from that. The best skills are the ones which are self-taught. That's time in the field. It's through mistakes. It's your failures. I can tell you what, like I've went through a lot of failures. I'm almost every continent. You know, but that's where your knowledge, that's where your understanding comes from. That's where your ability comes from. How many continents have you been to? I think most of them are, except in Tariqah. Really? So obviously from Australia, but I've spent time in Southeast Asia, a whole bunch of countries there, like for a Canadian Bay area, Laos, Thailand, Indonesia, Myanmar. That's where the previous discussion was forest, where we've done filming there, Myanmar. Is Myanmar where the crocodile massacre was? That's correct. Yeah. Yeah. North and parts there. I spent time in Africa. I've been in Africa twice now. South America, War of Olives, I've just flown in from Columbia. But look, every single environment that you go to is going to have different challenges. And I think there's an old saying, I'm just trying to remember who said it. And it goes into the philosophy of this whole life that I've had of catching animals around the world. But an animal is only dumb to a man's dull perception. I'm just trying to think who said that, quote, but it makes so much sense. Because for every environment that I've went into and I've looked at an animal I've fought to myself, I'm just going to be real easy to catch. Doesn't he say me on a spiral? Like quite literally. It doesn't matter if it's beavers. This is all stuff I'm catching by hand. You know what I mean? This is not, you know, this is this is Mano, you might know one on one level playing field. I'm going to try and catch and I'm going to do anything that I can to do it. And I guess there's going to be a persistent stream. That's I think that's probably one of my big mental problems is my persistence. Is there'll be something and I'll be like, I'm not leaving until I catch it or I'm going to die doing it. I don't know where that comes from. But I'll take it personal. Like, yeah, I'll spend months trying to catch something. Yeah, that's what a forest was trying to explain the difference between the main, your difference between you two. And he was saying that you just have this insatiable appetite for for adrenaline or you were in adrenaline junkie and you just cannot stop chasing and trying to catch the most deadliest animals on earth. Well, it just doesn't, you know, I think over the years, so this story starts at about five or six years old. And I used to go out into the back of Westapto with a bucket and go and catch snakes. And I'm not talking like yeah, rich kind of goddess snake. We're talking about hardly venomous snake species. You know, we've got the brown snake. We've got the, you know, tiger snakes and black snakes. You know, we're talking like we've been in the top top 20 quite literally. And, you know, I wasn't stupid to the fact that I knew this thing could kill me, but it gave me like an immense control of being able to capture something like that and actually, you know, have it in my possession. And so that's where I believe the curiosity started. And then we all have natural curiosity when we start off. I think that's something which is innate and somewhat instinctual. And I guess that's probably where it started from just going around catching snakes. And then from catching snakes and went to like other animals. And then I'll be watching birds. I'm wrong. I'm going to try and, you know, figure out different ways of catching birds. And so I think the more time that you spend out there, you become quite what's the word? You're incredibly observant because all that you're doing is your starting animal behavior. And we've been that you're looking for flaws, we've been animal behavior. And you're probably thinking, well, what do you mean flaws? Well, there's definitely dissection points, you know, particularly, you know, if you're trying to capture like mammals or birds, you've got to find a weakness within that animal's pattern or path then enables you to be able to capture him. So let me give you an example. When I was 14 years of age, I went through this whole thing of catching like birds. Fucking loves it. Like I'd wag school and just go and try and catch birds. He'd probably help. I'd be going to catch birds. Yeah. Yeah. How the hell do you catch a bird? This got me in a lot of trouble with the authorities. Right. This was like my first introduction. Because everything went, there was the law and I just it just went over my head. I just like, I've had to change now. But I just, I gave not one can I swear on this podcast? Yeah, absolutely. Not one about about those wild life laws. I just didn't care. It just didn't register in me because it didn't. So I would go out and be like, well, what animals am I going to go and catch today? So you know, go and catch like one bat to the kidneys and like kind of stuff. And then I remember watching these birds thinking like, I really want to get into catching birds. And so what I did was I went for like a lot of values, but I soon realized like, you know, cockatoo species are self-accrested and glars and lorocates and resellers like all the parrots species. Okay. So what they do is they will actually reside in tree hollows like when they're doing even nesting or even at night on the other side in tree hollows. And I soon realized that I had to keep distance on these birds that if you got too close to where they were nesting up in the trees, then essentially they would identify as a predator and they wouldn't go and hollow in these retreats. But late at night, if you stayed at a distance just before sundown, you could actually watch these birds go into the hollows. And essentially this would be the same retreat site. So we've got our first intersection point there. I know where this guy's going at night time. Okay. So that's tick box number one. Now tick box number two is well how they held the hook out of the tree. And so you'd get there to the tree. And you'd soon realize that if you made noise, even at night time, if you made noise trying to get up into the tree, well, the bird will hear you. And then it would take off. And that's probably like a natural instinct with the bird of like, you know, the gawanna's, the monitors climbing up the trees and hearing the scratchings and stuff. And I'm like, oh, this is predator. I've got a back you wait. So what I do is when the birds are out feeding, I used to go, I used to cut these like Rio, you know, the still Rio bars, like reinforcing bars. And so what I would do is I'd take like a handful of them and I'd nail them up into the tree to where the hollow was. And I'd do it in the daytime whilst the bird was gone. And so at night time, I'd come back and I'd even put like go to the effort to put like socks over my shoes. So I wouldn't make noise. And so I'd climb up the tree at night time, I'd have a net, I'd get up there to the hole and I'd put it over the hole and bang on the trunk and then these cockatoos would fly out and then bull might have my cockatoos. Love to it. And what would you do with what you got to tell you what happened? So my dad, my dad, as much as I had conflict, somehow he supported my antics throughout the years. And I'd just bring all these birds home. So he built this beaver in the backyard and I had like all these different animal species in the night, like cookabars and king parrots and like all these like really highly protected birds species. But it was entertaining. It was fun. You know, and I'd have friends come over and all that kind of stuff. Anyway, sooner or later, the authorities cracked onto me, right? And I remember it was like Thursday, I just finished up, I just finished school and I remember this knock on the door opened up the door and there's this ranger. Hi, how you going? We're just doing routine inspections on averies and people's backyard. Do you have an aver in your backyard? And he was from like the New South Wales, what was it? The New South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service. And then to me, it was like the enemy, like they were like, you know, Darth Vader to me. And I just thought to myself, yeah, I've got a baby in the backyard. And I thought to myself at this point, so I'm like, I'm like, I was like 15. I'm like, I'm. And he went into the backyard and like all these birds are going to be simplistic or had about 30 birds in there. And he was there with like another person. They're taking pictures and all this kind of stuff. And he goes, we're, we've got these birds from. I said, when you mean we're forgotten from corn. He goes, who's been catching it? I said, I've been catching it. And he said, all right, well, you know, what traps have you been using? I said, I like used traps. So essentially I used my hands. And he's just like, and he's taken all notes of this and he goes, can you sit down for a second? You're six feet down. Right. And he goes, how are you being catching these birds? Honestly, you need to tell me. And so I sat down. I told him the process of how I was catching these birds. And I remember he was looking at his partner just thinking to himself, like, where the is this guy coming from? You know, like literally. And anyway, long story short, because all the mine aren't, they gave me like a warning. And then they had like another lady coming in from like the animal services and what, you know, take all the, all the birds and stuff, which I was completely devastated. They let, they let me keep my favorite bird, which was a galar. So did you, I kind of had like a cat? Did you have something over the top of the backyard so they couldn't get out? Yeah. No, it's like, it's called like an Avery. So like a mesh, like a mesh, a Avery. Oh, a guy. Like a like a big arch chicken pit and guy. Right. Okay. And so, yeah. So that was my first introduction to, to the law. And it was a warning. And then I guess since then, you know, I went through my escapades and going around and catching animals around the world and like docking and, and, and, and, and ducking and dodging all the laws, you know what I mean? And jumping through loopholes and all that kind of stuff. And that can be stressful. You know, I was getting pulled up at airports, you know, interrogated, investigated what footage you have show us your phone, this and that. It got to that point quite a little, 100%. We've got to points where I'll send in hard drives and SD cards back home, because I didn't want anyone to see what I was up to. Wow. Oh, yeah, 100%. Yeah. But it was all in the love of doing what I was doing. I love catching animals. I can't explain it. I can't explain it. I just recently went to a kilometer to South, you know, to, to Central America. And even there, I'm trying to go on holiday. I can't help because I'm watching monkeys and coides and all these animals just thinking like, you just have something in you there. I just like, I don't catch animals. I don't know. When something's invading me, I just want to chase it down. I just want to, I just want to catch it. I haven't made it as successful with women, unfortunately. That's what I was going to say. Yeah, careful of the, get it careful in the States. Yeah, but it's just been something so instinctual within me, you know, and I think as it's come through now and I've developed the skill set in this ability, I've had to turn my ways into a way which is more legalized and doing things the right way. And only recently has like the government essentially started to open up and say, all right, we'll, we'll give you permits to do this and this and this and this. But, you know, we're, you play by the rules in Andrew. So I've always kind of been that. So after you started catching birds, what did you move on to? Anything in everything, by the time I was 19, I went to Africa and I thought I'm just going to go after everything. And my parents literally thought I wasn't coming back. Yeah, 100% it is tough. I was there for a lot from Kenya to Zambia in Bali. And I just went there catching everything all the high there venomous snakes. And this is like in the early days of YouTube. This is early, yeah, you started YouTube channel a long time ago. And for that, it was, it was different. It was, for me, it was a lot of comedy, but teaching people. It wasn't about being, now it's changed. It's about being famous. It's about creating a bronze statue of yourself, like a motto of yourself, a lot of it is, you know what I mean? And I think when I started out, it was very organic. It was real, it was genuine. And people saw that, you know, and that's, and that's exactly what it was. And look, I think it definitely had its time impaired. You know, they were video uploads that I was doing and getting, you know, quarterly interviews and at work and it was just going to, at that point in time, those kind of like, where's this all, where's it all leading to? Right. And then I went and done a number of documentaries. So I've done three documentaries, their own Netflix, not in the US. I don't know why, but it's in the UK, Ireland. I was going to be just going to be a challenge. Yeah. So, yeah, so I've got a series called Born to Be While, which follows like my escapades or when I was doing freelance documentary work. And those are some tough yards man. Like we're talking about before, like proper tough, blood, sweat, teas, you know, I went through hell. And then it got to a point where I was watching, like Nain and Bell's watching other wildlife presenters on YouTube, on the Instagram, just getting an accumulation of, of, um, of resources and, and viewership and all that kind of stuff. But I was watching their stuff and saying, it's scripted. It's staged. It's phony. It's fake. And it's not real. And these individuals were developing just these very cartoonish characters. Yeah. And they were winning with our business plan. They were in the production company. And, and just, they just took over. And but I didn't want to, I didn't want to sell out, I never wanted to sell out. I wanted to stay genuine. Right. I really wanted to stay genuine. I think people in the industry that know me, they know about as well. Yeah, man. It's an unfortunate part of media and show business and YouTube and all of it is that whenever anything becomes popular, whether it be a niche, like the wild, like the things that you're doing with wildlife or whatever it might be, a whole new format of media, like podcasting, there's always going to be people that that just like latch onto it and try to monopolize it and monetize it as much as they possibly can. So they'll take whatever, whatever it is, like you've been doing for your whole life because you're passionate about it and uploading content, you were one of the first people to do it. Once people see success, they smell blood, they smell money. And they're like, how can I reverse engineer what this guy is doing? Well, look what he's doing. Okay, we gotta go to Africa. We gotta get in front of these animals. I gotta wear this hat. We're gonna name the YouTube channel this. What color should we use? I'll change my name. Exactly. They changed their. It's an easy. Yeah, this is the story of Coyote Peterson. I can hide that guy. Who is he? If you can ever set up like a, like, yeah, like an MMA ring or whatever, get this guy there because I want to fucking flogging because he did exactly the, he did exactly that. He watched what I've done. And he was like, how do we capitalize on this guy? Even saying he don't want to punch him. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Bubbs. Bubbs natural is a badass company that has collagen peptides. It has coffee creamer, has coffee, electrolytes. And they are amazing because they are a tribute company to a Navy seal and former CIA contractor Glenn Bubbs, Dorty, who died defending American freedom in Benghazi, Libya. Again, there is obviously no shortage of collagen products available on the internet, but I support Bubbs because it is not only a superior product, but they support American veterans by donating 10% of all their proceeds to veteran organizations and 100% of their proceeds on Veterans Day. Bubbs collagen peptide packets are easy to use as a daily supplement. I keep them in my truck and I drink them on the way to the gym. It's flavorless, easy to mix nature. It makes it easy to mix into anything I prefer mixing in coffee. You may not know, but after the age of 25, your natural production of collagen starts to fade, which can severely impact your skin. An interesting thing about collagen is more you supplement with it, the more your natural production increases. Since I started using it a few months ago, I've already noticed a huge improvement in my joint connective tissues, my skin elasticity, and the overall quality of my hair, believe it or not. You can support Bubbs and this podcast by visiting BubbsNatural.com and using the code DJP at checkout for 20% off your first order. Again, that's BubbsNatural.com and use the promo code DJP at checkout for 20% off. It's linked below now back to the show. This guy in the evening can a constant standing by any person. What kind of in look at him? So it's like some Hollywood agents get together and they're like, okay, we need a wildlife show. We're going to sell it to A&E. Who could we get? They give a bunch of auditions and they get this guy to come in and teach him how to handle animals. I think what there is is there's two different types of people in this industry. There are those that have a genuine skill set and ability and there are those that see an opportunity and know the business structure or how to move forward. And he'd done that and he'd done it well. I think the problem is when you go into something and you're like, right, we're going to create a brand, we're going to create a brand, we're going to create an image, we're going to create a bronze statue, which is exactly what he's done. I think where the failure comes into play is this. They try to relate what they're doing their motivations and everything else to other people previously. And I think Steve Irwin and Australia, right, was one of the most brilliant, one of the most passionate conservationists on earth, an incredibly lovable person. Do you want to know why? Because he was genuine. There was nothing to take about him. Right. He was genuine. Right. He was genuine. He did be what he did because he was he was he was a true identity and he done things from a different place. When I watch people like that, he does it from a place of how can I make a brand into myself. Yeah. You know what I mean? And he's IMD B.B.P. I want to go for you. I want to kind of flogging. I want to flogging. I can't stand him. Anyway, maybe that's just like the strong. Maybe that's just like the strong. Like what's in this drink? It's called it's Craddle. Right. There's rum in this drink. I'll say this is rum in this drink. But look, at the end of the day, one thing I do respect regardless of who it is in the industry is our respect hard work. Because regardless if you're finding your fake or whatever, there's got to be some hard work that gets put into that. So let me try and reverse engineer that conversation into saying, yeah, you got to respect people for the hard work that they put in. You know what I mean? And I think ultimately, you know, we've come to a time where we've got some big environmental problems which are happening and we need people out there to be advocates for the environment in whatever our format or retrospect. I think. And that's something that's probably in it and comes from my self and my childhood because that was me being connected to the environment. It was like because that connection was there and I felt empowered by the environment. You want to protect something that if I'm stressed or upset or down or whatever, where do you you think I go into the city, you can go and go and say, no, I go into the bush by myself. That's where I have my power. That's where I have my connection. You know what I mean? And I think when you have that, you want to protect it. I think that's where it comes from real deep. Real deep. You know? At what age were you when you figured out how to turn this fascination with wildlife and catching deadly animals into a job? Like how did you when did that happen? So I went to university. I did degree in environmental science and then after that I had done a master's in wildlife conservation but still what I saw this was going on. I was still doing my antics and catching animals and it wasn't until I started posting on YouTube. I started seeing like a big following that was coming in and watching off of myself. Maybe I can actually keep doing what I'm doing with this love and go around the world and do it's then essentially that's what I did. I just I went around the world with my camera and done this and then I had a a really good friend of mine which just joined me in Medellin, Columbia, my mate Dave. He taught me how to do the very basics of video editing news in Adobe. Obviously with a crack format because I couldn't afford the real life. And essentially just taught me the basics obvious. But a lot of it was to do with I wanted to have a sense of humor that ran through it as well. And like real thick humor as well. And yeah and then I had another big thing that happened and I haven't really opened up too much about it. I know Forrest knows a bit more about it. So Bear Grylls had came through and he had done a very successful job of building the brand of survival and getting a lot of people involved in that and kids and all that kind of stuff. And I think that was absolutely amazing that how he opened up that niche in that genre. And then essentially what had happened was he had left the network and the network at the discovery was trying to find the next person to essentially coming and start their own genre. And they reached out to me and this was back in 2015. So I got into contract with ITV America. I don't know how much of this I can say because it was probably, you know, NDAs I had this on. I felt good. It was over 10 years ago. You're good. Yep. And so I went in with probably out of the entire crew of 12 people. I dare say 10 of them were the greatest concierge of them there. Yeah. Oh, I'm so glad. And then there was only two that represented to be people that, you know, were generally had my back. I remember so I'd done all this work. I'd, I'd, I'd created this entire platform and everything that I'd also been with the with the footage and all that kind of stuff. And the first series and this went on for ages because I know they're having their new CEOs of discovery come through. And essentially I just said, I want to come in and do something that's never been done before. And I want to do what other people have done that doesn't interest me. I want to take things to a whole new level. And I like okay, this sounds great. So I remember our first episode that we shot was actually in Thailand. And I remember there was a dinner that we had and everyone had been broadened and there was about 12 people sitting down. And I finally fought to myself. I've worked. There was a dinner that we had and everyone had been broadened and there was about 12 people sitting down and I finally fought to myself like I've worked hard to be. Loneliness on top of almost died to be sitting here at the table and now you know finally my crew is about to take off. And anyway this guy stands out I don't know who he was I think it was exactly direct out stands up and you know he gives this speech for like 10 minutes about everyone you know how hard it worked to be here and that it are and this and that and you know starts you know talking about the projects that he's worked on and this and that and then he takes a seat. And there's a guy sitting across from me who's expedition special forces right he's a consultant survival consultant. He's done multiple networks multiple you know he's always in the background is the background guy to make sure everything's going safe he's the first day at this guy's like the real what is it the Macciber right names Karen O'Donnell right he's actually I think that missed the base guy he's now he's. you know survival security agent really yes oh wow he's his next level and so Karen Karen's got an amazing ability to just read a room right I guess that's why he's trained the way he is and he looks at me and he sees the look on my face and he goes I can I just can I just say something we're actually all here because of this young man. And that was the first time that I thought to myself this is someone that's actually got my best interest at play and it was just I don't know it was one of the most is heartening introductions to. American television or American productions that I didn't even know existed you know it was just. Yeah this guy was just like you know we're here because of me and it's just life. Like I've just worked my entire life to get here and he hasn't even acknowledged me you know and that was I think that was the start of the whole thing just going downhill. We got free episodes in they ended up canceling the entire fucking production as a multimillion dollar production why they cancel three episodes in. I think for one of three reasons one was almost died twice you almost died twice it's correct. Yeah. Okay what's the other reason. The thing was I said to the network is this is no this is no if we're going to go in and do this. There's no you know and you know the fake or eating all that kind of stuff I really want to go in and do this and take things that whole whole whole new level. Which ended up me being in hospital twice almost died once. That was bad that was bad time. The other part of the other reason was not going to say who it was but I had co-host that had been brought into it and we just didn't get along on camera. I wouldn't use that word but yeah we just yeah we just we didn't get along. I think I respect that person. Okay. But yeah we didn't get along and yeah the show never went there. That was a sliding door opportunity and it got burnt in front of me and I still don't even think I've ever recovered from that. Because I knew that was that was my shot. That was and I remember talking to Forrest about that and he was like don't worry man that was a wrong time. You know there will be another time and done it other than that and then he ended up getting us on a show called Face the Beast which was the history because he goes on. We know you've got this talent we know you've got this ability and he's actually just put me forward for another picture of a show on Animal Planet. He's just like you've just got to get your time online. Yeah you're like you're like you're just you're getting shot. You can pull it up a little bit to keep it like this far. So you know Forrest has always had my back because he knows you know he knows what I'm like. Yeah so I think I've had a bit of a everyone has a I guess everyone has a rough road company. Yeah. And there is regardless of how hard your work or the talent that you've got you know what you need. I mean he'd like to. Yeah man. The the the drugs and the reality of of can Hollywood and old television is just so soulless. And it sucks the goddamn life out of you and I was telling you off camera that's how I got into this like the old documentary stuff. But prior to me doing the documentary stuff I was doing documentary stuff for television and trying to sell it to television. And after years of that that's when I quit and decided to go 100% onto YouTube. But that it sucks there's no creativity in it it's just turns into numbers and money and a P&L sheet and lawyers and it's just there's no creativity and there's not fun. When you're you're just waking up and following us call sheet schedule being a certain place at a certain time. Make sure you get the shot. And then you're gone when you do it yourself like when you're doing YouTube you can just fly by the seat of your pants and go have fun and film cool shit not to worry about it. That that horseshit. But I meant to ask you when you were there how did you almost die twice. Remember that first discussion about the lip gloss prices. Oh were we recording for that by the way gosh I have no idea. Tell that story yeah tell that story does that one is that more of the reason you almost died. Let's oh shit. Oh shit. So I've had a number of diseases over time. Yeah. No yesterday. I've had I've had I've had I've had I've had hypnosis I've had micro marinum I've had. Yeah I've had a lot from nature so the one that I almost died in and this was with the film shoot with discovery was lip dose process and the way I believe I'd got that. I was going for those it's called like a water marinos big Asian water monitors and will unlike the back end of like a like a farming kind of area and the water was you know essentially that gray water you know there's a lot of. Affluence and like all that kind of stuff. Once again I'll just that immortality kind of like nothing can kill me kind of however you 24 so I'll 25. And so here I was duck diving you know in and out of the weeds and all that trying to stuff you know trying to get these water monitors and you know going on the water and all that sort of thing and I must have accidentally ingested some of that water and it was you know like most of your. Or zenotic diseases it's going to take you know incubation period of four or five days until it kicks in and I remember when it kicked in. So the guy cummer is on all he was there with me and he just sensed that you guys it's something not right about you I said I know I'm feeling pretty pretty ill pretty sick. And then you do I dreaded so we went to a Vietnam are Vietnamese hospital you know the doctors walking around with like no shoes it's like blood on the ground it's no it's bad you have been to Vietnam hospital in the north. Proper back is like cats like walking for the surgery room and start a lot of fucking you know he's just crazy past me the scalpel and it's like a monkey that's doing like oh no it's not bad and so. I am. I mean that I can hospital there I remember I went through two bags of IV and then count was like oh let's you do the trick and went back there to the hostel and all of a sudden my body just dropped again and dropped again and dropped again and essentially the mom my body was just shutting. And ended up going to the hospital was there for I think three or four days and they were just giving me what's called a shotgun therapy which is essentially the just giving you every kind of antibody gun to the sun. And trying to get you yeah you'll be a body up and it did I think for about a week it done it and I was fine finished off to shoot got to Australia. Well in the Arnhem land which is a really remote part of Australia and the first day of filming was me going out and trying to catch a donkey and I remember I'm running off this. Playing a wild donkey and running off this donkey and I just collapsed and then hearing once again I was like oh the fuck is going on. There's something like more sinister going on here and I remember he literally like picked me up and carried me to the bug games I we need the game to hospital now and I'm aiming hospital for just over a week there are. Fighting left this process I don't know what anybody they ended up giving me as well see I've been. I remember shutting down the scariest part about this was they didn't know what it was and they ended up flying a specialist doctor for the CDC from Darwin. and I was catching all these weird fundamentals through Asia getting scratched bitten up and all that kind of stuff and the doctor there was like hey this guy's had some interactions like his signs and symptoms are very you know it was almost like occasional like this is and I ended up flying down a doctor you know scary about this any imagine this you're on the bed you've got your dying and you're in a dark room and the bar the bar has a room and a lady walks in. The first thing she says is that okay if I can turn on the lights and I just like not it was. She turned the light on and she goes in and I'm just going to pour your glass of water can have a drink and then the the small amount of energy that I had I said that you've just tested for two things. And she stopped and looked me I said you've just tested for my reaction to light and you're now you test my reaction to drink water. And these are the two things that you test for when someone's going for the early stages of rabies I said to your telling me I've got rabies as we both know dying on this bed. She didn't say anything. I think it was one lady that survived that here in the US and the only way they'll I will to bring her back. I was a put her into an induced coma and then her body right out but even then I think she had ongoing problems I think I think she might have made a full recovery now but I think there's only been like one or two people in the world to have survived rabies. I will mention that I had pre exposure on my prophylaxis I did have pre exposure but when I got bitten and scratch by these animals I didn't have the post exposure which was supposed to have. Post exposure essentially being that once you've been bitten or scratched it's on day zero that you've been bitten you have an injection at day seven and day 21 I believe there's three injections that you have. and then that that count as any kind of infection of what rabies so as long as you get the injection right away that's correct if you've never had the injection and I believe it's six injections right there all only one so you know there's also a very effective. for but you just need to make sure that you take the rock procedures in that in that protocol of of how to take a medication. But yeah that was. Yeah that was people say with the animals you know the animals fear the animals fear the animals you can do is the shit that you can't see the micro micro. So what's this tell the story about what you caught from the can. I know that so that was the story that I was saying so there's a story in America many years ago where the rat had actually pissed over like a bunch of cans and she drunk it and she was able to get left as. Oh that's not how you actually can't it. No I got it from duck diving right so when I was in the rivers in that murky water that's that's how to court lepto. But your dad always told you to wipe off the can right exactly because the cat because the rats piss on it right. You know I've you heard of talk so plasmosis yes I have yeah that's another thing that rats have yes. Weird disease that weird as that's why pregnant people can't go around kitty litter. Yeah yeah because the friend of you don't get talk so there was another story in the show I was was an interesting one where. It's like a typical Australian thing you know it to be you know it bet to do something stupid and. These guys were having a bit of a barbecue and there's a slug and he said to me to make you guys off. I'll give you 10 bucks if you swallow that slug. As you do it right and so you put this slug in his mouth and you know he's probably got like a croner and like swallowed it down and they all had a good laugh. Anyway a couple of days later hands up in hospital and they're trying to track down what's happened to these young men. And you know they're obviously called his mates and me along you know he's been taking drugs anything out of normal and that it are eventually one of the guys said fuck. Well he did swallow a slug a couple of days ago and then all the sudden like being. So slugs can carry particularly if they've I think it's once again through rats I think it's just the main vector if they've been. feasting on like rap feces. There's a parasite that they can ingest which is called. It's like a type of what the name of it's called a rat lung worm character parasite and essentially once that parasites start developing in you and once again it's like an automatic shutdown on the body and he died. He died from this. That's another skirt. Yeah, rat lung. Yeah. Is that it there? And you. Click that's the one. Angio strong gillis can't on this can't on and sis. Wow rat lung worm also known yeah that where I just said disease it affects the brain and spinal cord. Oh that's terrifying man. Oh yeah. So and even in a struggle got a form of rabies which is called. This lost my mind. Jeez. What's a call a list of ours which is essentially like a strain of light rabies that we have in Australia and that's spread through bats. And so that's another thing I want to talk to bat. Right. Any other animal? Yeah. Okay. Let's go bat. So those are the only animals that you're afraid of. Well not. They're not the parasites that you can't see. Uh huh. Because I've seen it like I said I've went through that process. There could be a fruit bat flying around in here and I'll say Danny's all yours. Guy for it. Watch the wings. Like sure it doesn't bite. Yeah. Scary. Scary stuff. Okay. You and Forrest were talking about the honey badger. I had no clue that the honey badger was a dangerous or scary animal at all. I mean I guess I don't know Jack shit about the honey badger. Definitely. But can you explain why the honey badger is so scary? I can. Did you actually catch one? I can tell you the original original story when I was in Africa the first time. So generally when I go into a country I go into a country where I can't object this list. Right. Wherever it be. You know Peru or Bolivia or you know Thailand. I'll literally have a list of animals that I want to go in there and capture. And once again I undergo a process of identifying where the animals are, how they utilize that environment and then trying to break down a pattern and how to catch that animal. The first time when I was in Africa I was in the western province of Zambia. And it was hard because obviously I can't speak the tongue there. So you've got to get quite creative on trying to explain what you're after. So I remember the holes with a tribe of African guys and I was trying to explain this animal that was after being the honey badger. The whole big pancake. I'm like a. Yeah. Well he got the porky pie but yeah he's been the price. He's been the price. And so I remember you know I had all this African guys behind me and I was drawing out this image of this animal. And then I explained to them like you know this part black and this part white. And one of the guys from behind said its name. And then everyone just started laughing because they like you want to catch one. And they just like you could see that they and they feel this out there. And they'll just look at each other. They're like how are they going to try and catch one. These are all. Yeah maybe we can figure this out. So this is such a the same time when we went out there catching the baboons. We were doing like hunting on the baboons with the dogs. And that's a pretty vicious thing to be part of. But I watched how they did that and eight baboons with them all that kind of stuff. Which I should have known better because you know they're not to carry all sorts of things like a bowl or an everything else. But anyway that's another story. But anyway we're now there for five days into the savannah trying to track down a honey badger. I don't we found one. This thing went into a hole and all the dogs are barking and all this kind of stuff. And he's like he's in there. I said right. Between five of us and two machetes I said we'll get him out. We started digging a hole and digging and digging and digging and digging into the point that we're digging a trench. Literally. Like a trench that you can walk through. And we're all taking turns and it's funny because that's where digging noticing. And I can hear that this animal's digging as well. And even between six of us digging this thing's digging faster than us. And I'm thinking like fuck yeah, they're fucking going to get too sentimental. So all that right what we'll do is we'll dig it trench at the back. Right so where he's heading we're going to dig a trench all the way down. You know free meat is down. Two minutes down and we'll corner him out that way. Right who else think of all sorts of things. Smoking that put water down there. All the different tricks maybe if we put like some rag bags of diesel we can roll that down there. You know the fumes that get him out. I was trying to think of all these little tricks I'd used in Australia. You know trying to get Australian animals out of holes. None of it worked. And I thought right let's dig this trench. And while that time we'd been working on this hole for several hours. And we didn't have a shovel. We had machetes. Were you filming this? No I wasn't. Oh you were right. So I think there's probably two biggest regrets with filming. This is one and another story which is the baboon attack. Okay we'll go to that next. Yeah. So digging digging digging digging in it. Essentially what this animal had done is because he knew that we were digging. From a certain height he just started digging down low. And so essentially he just went under our trench. So you already think so. We were already dark like 6 feet. And then this thing is just dark like an extra free feet below that. And just kept on digging. Wow. So these guys essentially gave a whole new life. I said not I'm going to wait here until he comes out. I ended up spending two days there at the hole. And he knew how he knew how he was outside. And that's where it started. And you weren't filming it. No. You just stayed there for two days because you genuinely wanted to catch it. It became personal. Very personal. And it represented the one animal at that point in time that I had challenged myself to capture. And I wasn't able to capture him. And that just stuck with me. I remember I cried when I got back on that plane. And then 10 years later I got the opportunity to go there and try and catch one again. And I said to myself to that point I'm all coming. I'll be I'll become a citizen here. I just saw him catch one. And I did end up catching one in the end. And I came to see this in. No. Exactly. Now South African. They are. So how did you end up catching it? Well, interesting story. So I'd spent a couple of months in Zimbabwe. And I'd went high and low trying to catch one. I didn't talk to a whole bunch of people. Experts in the field. The best of the best. And I've been sent to all these different locations. The problem about this animal is unlike other muscle days, which is like the family group who might come under. Most of them have like a retreat site that they go into like a hole. And they occupy that hole consistently. Unless they're breeding and they're going back to pubs. This animal here is probably one of the most no matter animals you'll ever meet. He can move 20 kilometers in a night. He'll utilize different holes. So try and actually define a pattern. It's like trying to work out where a butterfly is going to land. You don't know. And that was one of the biggest difficulties in trying to catch this animal. Not to mention that there are an animal which is apparently an octurnal, which is very difficult as well. Not to mention that if you're in a landscape which is a free-dealing landscape. So there's a scarthments and a lot of rock formations. And there's like a matrix of vegetation and forms and all that kind of stuff. Good luck. Because you'll see in the little disappear. I don't care how quick you are for the bush. You're not going to catch one. So the only way that they've been caught in the past is in like what we refer to as a 2D environment, like open desert, like in the black, the calle herring, all that kind of stuff. So we can see them from a distance and you can run them down. Right. That's essentially the only way they can be caught. But they also represent a big issue to a lot of the farmers, particularly like the bee farmers because they get into like the honey. But because they are a carnivore and a scavenger and an opportunist, essentially anyone that has like a chin farm. And that was the location that I ended up getting one. Was on a chicken farm. We set a trush chicken farm. We set up a trap and this was in South Africa. We ended up setting a trap and we got one in an avery. And I got to call that morning and the guy was like, hey man, yeah, we've got one here. Don't know how you're going to go about this. But to be honest, I will not get in there with it. And it was funny because when I went there and actually saw this animal, I said for one of the first times I really started feeling the fear because there's no really. Yeah, 100%. And you played that video that honey bad, you Steve, that 25 second video on the right. Is that real? I don't think that's real. Oh, this is a commercial. Never mind. There you go. There's the badger. Wow. Those are way scarier than I thought. It's got hands like a sloth. See me and find the real video of the honey badger. Anyway, sorry, 10 a.m. So you went. So it was in there and he didn't want to go in there. You said you were going in. I was like, I'm going to stay on the outside. I'm going to feel in the air. And he goes, how you going to do this? I said, I'll get in there and just work it out. And he goes, okay, good luck. And so he literally opened this door. Close the behind and this badger. That's also explained it to Forrest. He's trying to get out for one of the corners and he was just walking backwards and forth, backwards and forth and forth. And it's kind of stopped and just like looked over at Scholney. Now that slower rolling look that like Chuckie would give. Well, he's done that one. He's just like acknowledge me as for okay. Right. I'm just going to keep working at this hole. He's doing this. And anyway, I've moved to the side and started moving towards him. And at this point in time, he just went right. So he's went along the side of the cage and actually walked to where the door was. So he knew my entry point. Think about that for a split second. If you're after, you just want to kill someone. And they're in this room. Where's the exit? You got that exit door there. Right. So what are you going to do? Well, you're going to approach him from a line that you're going to come in a direct line from that exit door. Right. So they can't get past you. And that's exactly what he did. He had lined me up and he said, I'm going to get you. It's the last thing I do. And that's a line. He's got the opportunity to walk away. You know, yeah, exactly. But he doesn't because he's just got this territorial, you know, this is my area back out kind of area. And I don't know what it is. I don't know if it's something to do with the hormone, something to do with the way they're wired, but they just don't have a fee. They just continue. I can get vicious little animal. More than more than the inspiration to catch one, it became an animal to me that I completely love. I don't know. Very good. I'm so excited. Holy shit. It is such an amazing animal. Like I, I love this animal so much. And there's no way of, I think in America, I think there's a couple of guys that have them as like captive pets and all that kind of stuff. Then in Australia, we don't have the ability to bring in like an exotic animal like this as a pet. I would do anything to sit down with whoever's in charge and be like this and can we please just bringing like a breeding pair. Well, I love this animal. I really love this animal. So when it got in front of the door, that your entrance to the room, what happened? We came straight at me. He lined me up. And they're fast. And I mean, look, I'm fast. But this animal, he's got a jalidians bead. And so he chased me around. So I was like, he chased you around. I was essentially like screaming yelling trying to like hold on to the mesh, trying to get my legs off the ground. And this thing was just fucking after me. How big was it? And so what they do is the name of the honey badger. It's also got another, another name which is called the Rital. Right? Essentially, rattle. Rital. So when they come in at you, the growling and that growl goes straight for your body. And I look, I've had animals charge me before and you feel the noise that they make and you can kind of, you can compartmentalize that noise and put it into your brain. And it's like, yeah, I know you're coming after me and done it hard, but you're not mocking me. You're not, you know what I mean? Like, you're not, you're not putting fear into me. When that animal comes at you with that noise, he puts feet straight into a party your body, you've never even felt before. Straight out. I can't do it. Yeah, he puts feet straight into your body. And you know, you're not even controlled. What would have happened if that thing would have caught you? What did it do? It's all like he's going to kill me. And let's, I like that. If I tripped over and got me on the neck, different story, but right, he's going to just, the same way of probably being molded by like a small people at the SI. Really. Yeah. So you're going to be screaming and yelling a lot. Yeah. And not just that like this animal is the way that it flexes its ability to flex and maneuver and all that kind of stuff. Very difficult to handle. So I ended up having to get him into a net and even then because of the looseness of the skin, very hard to handle an animalize. Mm hmm. But like truly it's, I think you know, all my escapades and having to do it with different animals around the world. Each one's unique. Um, you find a regular video, not like a vertical one. Do you have any videos on your channel? The one. No. So what I've done is I've done a complete documentary on this quest for a honey badger. And until I have the right production company, until I have the right network, the right opportunity to release this, I'm just going to hold on to content. Holy shit, man. Well, everything is afraid of a honey badger. Oh, that's a big ass lion. Do they have anything like in particular that they like to eat or do they just go for it? And they just use it their scavenger. So they'll just eat anything. They're a scavenger. They're an opportunist. So you can see what's eating. They all look a small crocodile. Here's going to snake. Yeah, they're a snake specialist. And I think holy shit. He's a tackedo cheetah. There's such an intelligent animal. And I think part of that intelligence is probably got something to do with the fact that they've got such a diverse range of species that they consume. Is you got to think you got to work out a tactic to catch all those different species of animals. So you're going to have an amazing ingenuity. You got to be like a problem solve quite literally. And that's what I think is like really unique about this animal is they are completely a problem solver. I think, yeah, look, that animal, they literally should be the, they are kind of cute too. They are. They really are. When they're not showing their teeth. Yeah, they gorgeous. They really are gorgeous. So what was the story with the baboons? Right. So this is the first time in Kenya. And like in Australia, I never had any kind of experience with baboons. We don't have, we don't have primates in Australia. Right. And it's funny because you know, a stone friday like Papua New Guinea in Indonesia, we've got primates, but Australia, the Australian continent is quite unique in the fact that we don't. And the closest thing probably to a primate would be, I don't know, like maybe like a possum that we got. You know, I think that would put into the closest thing. So essentially, I went to Africa and had like a list of all these animals that I wanted to catch this with the first time I was there. And a savannah baboon was one of them. And I remember going into a wildlife, it was like a dingy wildlife park and I met up with two young guys there. And I said, oh, look, I'd like to learn how to handle a wild baboon. And these two African guys, look at each other. And they're like, okay, we can help this is good. This is a life lesson. Is that something people typically would want to do as catch baboons? No, we have no interest in catching baboons. No. This was a good life lesson. Nothing for anyone traveling to Africa. I think they'll hear this analogy or people who live in Africa will hear this analogy and they'll just laugh. I'll just get it. So I was with these two very enthusiastic African young men. And they're like, oh, we've got some baboons here. We can show you. I said, okay, so I mean, it's just doing it anyway. It was like constantly dingy menagerie where they had these, you know, these baboons. And you know, they're somewhat habituated. And I said, oh, you guys know how to handle it. You know, we do a lot of the handling here and, and you know, I've caught hundreds of them before and, you know, game it, the whole spill and it's professionalism of handling baboons and stuff. And I said, okay, is there any way that we can like try and catch like a wild one? Yeah, sure. Because actually at the back of the zoo, we've got like a bit of like a cage trap. like we can set up. And I remember it. So we go down to the back of the zoo and I had another guy that was with me that was filming. And I employed just like a street kid to film. Actually, this is one of the documentaries that I got up on Netflix. Oh, really? Yes. It was like a 14 year old street kid. And I taught him how to use a camera. He filmed the entire thing. He filmed the entire thing. He filmed the entire thing. And this kid was fearless. Like when I was like, right, elephant charging, I need you behind me filming. You'd be like, yep, that's a yes man. That's cool. He was a yes man. So anyway, and he's a local. And he was a local. So he could speak the tongue. So anyway, I felt like he he should have been my first cue because he was kind of smurking a bit suspicious about all this. This whole, this whole deal. And anyway, went down there to the back of the zoo and there's this big cage trap that's set up there. And anyway, we'd bait it with like pumpkin and everything else. And you guys like, okay, we'll catch we'll give you a call. And we'll only eat about 20 minutes out of 10. Remember that more. Anyway, we'd bait it with like pumpkin and everything else and then guys like okay We'll catch we'll give you a call and we'll only about 20 minutes out of 10 Remember that morning. It was like five thirty in the morning early sunrise. I get a call under who we have a bubble Lot was literally that was literally I said great fantastic. I said we'll be down there and anyway, so I remember getting there and Early morning and this thing is going wild since it spots us with this this thing is like shaking the cage and I'm talking like Okay, not much bigger than this table right about a meter off the ground and It's going absolutely wild this episode of the podcast is brought to you by rocket money Do you ever feel like money is just flying out of your bank account each month and you have no clue where it's going? Well, I do it's to all those subscriptions you have think about it between all your streaming Services productivity tools fitness apps meditation at guided apps It's endless and I'm guilty of this so I ended up using rocket money to figure out which subscriptions I'm still paying money for every month and they help me cancel all the ones. I no longer use if you're unfamiliar with rocket money It's a personal finance app that helps you cancel your unwanted subscriptions Monitor your spending and helps lower your bills and it's not just about canceling subscriptions It's about monitoring and controlling your spending you can see all your subscriptions in one place No more digging through bank statements or suffering these long grueling calls with customer service people They'll even work on getting you refunds on subscriptions that you haven't used. They're very skilled negotiators Rocket money could potentially lower your bills by up to 20% just snap a photo of your bill Send it to them and they will handle the rest. The bottom line is rocket money has already helped over five million users Save an average of seven hundred and twenty dollars per year. That's over five hundred million dollars in cancel subscriptions Stop wasting money on things you don't use and cancel all those unwanted subscriptions by going to rocket money com slash DJP again, that's rocket money dot com slash DJP it's linked below Now back to the show and my heart starts racing be like the honey badger. So that's right something in half Are we going to get control of the Senate? How much do you get weighed? I know 14 kilos what what you love 14.15 kilos. Oh, what do you got? You got damn it? We use pounds Yeah, uh, how yeah, I don't understand metric system like a small child. Okay. Yeah, like you know I got like how many kilos are in a pound to your old You got back to my song. It's not easy. You're gonna get me here. Right. Oh god. We really have to Google this Stevie, you know, yeah No one pound is point for kilos So for some kilos six pounds. So six pounds. Okay. Got 16 pounds. That's like a that's a good newborn Yeah, well just yeah about about a two-year-old. Okay. Yeah, this is this is a decent this was a decent animal And so Savannah baboon, you know, um, muzzle like a dog. I'm not not sure if you've seen the Savannah baboons So if you if you type Savannah baba. Yeah. Yeah, that's a Savannah baboon. Oh, okay. Yeah Yeah, that interesting individual right there And so This baboons going absolutely wild and you know the birds are flying and all this kind of stuff and they start talking in their own tongue And I'm like, hmm, that's going on here and the guys like I'm going to use it It's like a stick. We've kind of like a fork kind of thing. Mm-hmm and I said to myself what we're gonna do is this I want you to teach me how to handle this. I was about 24 25 So I wanted to teach you teach me how to handle this But then we're gonna put it back in the cage trap and then I'm gonna do it by myself The worst mistake is just coming to the two times that I didn't film is the worst mistake that I made was not recording Hean teaching me how the hand of the baboon because I'm supposed to be you know this guy that's an old all and I'm gonna Come in. I'm gonna to show you how it's done and thought it are so you either pretend like you knew it you were doing yeah exactly 100% I tried to do a lot of the time and Anyway, so I remember I set up the camera sit on the tripod and the guys like right get up there on top of the cage and they've got the cage door I said, okay So as soon as I do that now I remember those only gaps in the mesh like so and this thing straight away Was trying to grab my feet it was trying to bite me through the for the cage and like they've got some teeth on them Oh, yeah, this is a gnarly gnarly animal and anyway It's trying to psych me out. It's making all these crazy noises and all that kind of stuff and I eventually managed to get the cage door up and the guy grabs it by the tail and I remember just watching it grab the sides of the cage door and the cage doors are like flexing in an hour just based on the power of the animal and at this point in time I'm thinking there is no way There's no humanly way possible. We're gonna get control of this animal. It's just not even an old pain. I'm for this Right. Yeah So anyway, they've got this thing by the tail. They pull it out. It's been screaming and going off and anyway They eventually pull it out and I'm thinking to myself at that point in time like these animals are any bit extra So they can probably use their tail the same way as the feet, you know as like a leverage point, you know like I'm probably does So anyway I've almost got to like explain He's like he's got to buy the tail and it's holding out like this and these things are crazy It's like trying to grab him and then he's saying to him. He's like we like trying to bend it down with the six Pin it down with the stick Anyway in all this craziness It's kind of worked out that because of the shoe weight of this animal It can't pull itself up by its tail So he's got to buy the tail and it's trying to pull itself up Like gravity's working against something into myself. Oh, well, maybe we've got a bit of a chance here Anyway, I'm still on the cage at this point in time and I've jumped down and I'm saying to him like what can I do? How can I help how can I help and as he's trying to maneuver into positions? What it does is it grabs the sides of the cage and goes right well If I can't get you that way, I know how I'm gonna get you and it pulls itself towards a cage and then just goes boom Like jump off the cage back onto him and I mean it happened like that and so Automatically it's went for his face And what he's done is he's put his arm like that straight in front and so the baboons grab him and it's bitning on the arm As it's bitning, he's turned to me. So all I'm seeing now is the back of a baboon in front of me And my instinct straight away is like I've got to help this the guys the guys scream in the baboon screaming There's just the worst energy in the world and I've grabbed this thing while the tail and I've started pulling as hard as I could to rip this thing off And I just remembered the shee strength of that animal holding onto him once again, I thought to myself There was no way we were gonna get this animal under control Impa impossible. It was just too powerful the parent is animal, you know quite literally Anyway, I'm pulling pulling pulling and then finally the animals released and as it's released It's hit the ground and tried to go for me right and I reckon all of it maybe inches from being bitten as well Anyway, let's look off on the trees And he's went off in a shock screen. He and I said Turn around show me how bad it is. I need to see how bad it is and he's went like this And he's done like a real slow like that. You know like when you take like a bite out of an apple But it's not like a like a complete bite in the sort of like a flat kind of hanging. Yes Just definitely just like bleeding I think to my I took my shirt straight off I'm like trying to like stop the bleeding and stuff and I said to my my guy quick run up to the car and get the first day We need to get into hospital right right anyway Yeah, so we end up getting into hospital. He ends up getting You know, and then this is how the story unfolds Okay, first of which he was only volunteering at the park He'd never handled the baboon before He had no inoculations whatsoever Had no money obviously Um It was a life lesson going to Africa because I feel Have you heard of what they call the African Promise? Yeah, they'll promise you the world. Oh, no the African Promise. Yeah. It's like yeah If you ask one of those One of those like straight kids can you help me? Can you do something for me? It doesn't matter what it is. They can do it. It's yes It's 100% I can do it and I thought what was absolutely Comical that could be a jet sitting outside and I could be like hey, man I need to you know take a flight to Captain Hagen like can you fly the jet and you look at the jet and be like Yes, I can fly the jet You know, I'm here it out and all this he's only watched like a trailer of top gun, but nice piece of professional you know, I mean and Yeah, so it was one of those learning curves that you just be very careful We're asking people for help You know Africa because a lot of the times people will tell you that they're in the instant expert And it can get you into a lot of trouble because they want to get they want to make money. Of course right. Yeah, so off what that was Definitely big learning curve particularly for the second time that I went there again But look some beautiful people beautiful culture Some of the happiest people either the scene have been You know some of the African tribal people that I've seen there's completely different way of life. Yeah, and Really, you know, I think it's a different it's a different reality for them The way that they look at the world and through their lens, you know, and I think I just come from Columbia And I've seen a whole other reality over there Yeah, the world's at the world's a big place. Yeah, I had this day Guy Ryan Tate on the show. He's a He's a he was in fought in the Iraq war and he's a veteran and he started a company called Vette Pah where military veterans who suffer from you know A lot of veterans come over and come back from war and they can't Just they can't find meaning to their life anymore. I like after doing something like that they come back and they have this just Trollmatt either trauma PTSD or like this hyper vigilance where they're always looking over their shoulders They're used to being in war zones that it's tough and they and getting just a normal working a nine to five job Just doesn't fulfill you like doing something like that does so they need something more in their life so when he's on these created this organization of these veterans that go over there and They try to protect endangered species and fight off the poachers over all the poaching that's going on with like the elephants and the rhinos and all that and He was explaining to me it basically like this civil war that's going on between the poachers and the The rangers running the national parks over there like trying to fight against the poachers and the problem is these people are so poor it historically There's you know, obviously there's way more money for the poachers and there's For getting the ivory and all that stuff these guys have an opportunity to make a ton of money and like change their lives So a lot of these guys will go from being poachers to then working for the rangers trying to say trying to protect the rhinos and protect the elephants They'll go back and forth so these guys have like jumped over this bridge multiple times being on both sides of this fight and it's it's crazy some of the stuff they go through and and He was explaining to me they literally like they use their military trains like go into these poachers houses at night and kidnap them and like arrest them and It's just like I can't I can't found them what it would be like you know growing up in a place like that where you literally You you have to do terrible things to feed your family like if if I was in the shoes of these poachers And I had to go kill an elephant to feed my kid. I would do it right, but it's a horrible thing to do It's like you don't need to do that. There's other way there's other ways if you can teach these people and bring in new new jobs or if you could even fund those rangers that are protecting those those people or protecting those animals even more You know, it would make it Africa much better place and save the animals So yeah look part of the when all many they're doing this documentary part of it was doing the black market trade and I saw quite a bit particularly to do with the the ivory products which had been sold and I went to a couple of market Paisels, but you could buy absolutely anything and everything and Actually, you know two people within this industry, which I really respect is Poor, mostly which you've had Paul on Paulson some amazing work in the conservation space and I think also has worked on the The umbrella of that poor as well and another friend of mine beautiful person is Harry Turner released a documentary last year that won a Grammy called actually he'd be a great person to get on the podcast called Wildcat and essentially he had He was a British British soldier and had went to Iraq. I think he'd done a tour in Iraq and some pretty bad stuff had happened to him over there and He was medically discharged and I don't want to tell too much of his story Because I think he's he's got a really interesting story to tell But he ended up going to this Harry Wow recent documentary. Yeah, so I'll I'll send the I'll send the jungle We've Harry for quite a period of time and yeah, we know our each other's antics quite well and He done a documentary on Wow, look at that guy on his connection with an oscillate cat could have a top left photo of him like nose to nose Oh, he's looking sexy there. Don't worry. I've seen him naked. Oh, yeah Wow So he was actually with Paul as well in the jungle. Oh no sure and yeah, so look he's got a heart of gold But you know, he's obviously been exposed and seeing some stuff as well. Yeah, you know in me That one skin that's his story to tell you know, he's what he's been through but Like I said, you know going back to the virtual fair It's this industry has a lot of interesting individuals could come from different places and Sometimes a person's connection to nature happens through trauma You know Generally this trauma in the background, right, you know, yeah, I think it's it's you know Where's what was funny is? actually when I was doing the the Introduction to Discovery Channel there at the network that actually asked me the question And so you know this connection that you got with animals and all that kind of stuff like where does that come from? It's because they know that sometimes there is Psychological traits that forces people to just want to be with animals and not with people Right, you know what I mean one but the horse lay not the horse one. We you know you stay where you know date those horse Yeah, yeah Get away from them if you see that on the tin to profile and they're a horse and they're a horse girl stay away from it Yeah, I'm just joking mucking around But yeah, there's definitely there's definitely some traits in people all psychological traits that connect them to animals because Sometimes they find a hard ability to get along with people and all that kind of stuff But you know, they're also the same people which draw some pretty impressive PhD papers on you know Animal behavior because I can just sink into that wavelength, you know, they really get to understand the animal Do you uh do you feel this way about even like the most dangerous Beasts like I know you deal with crocs a lot and you've been around hip-partumuses Do you feel any fear when you're dealing with those kind of animals and how do you approach an animal like that? I've seen this in this drug get casted out a lot as in you know I haven't talked with forests people call me insane people come into learning taking all that kind of stuff Yeah, it's how far as how forest describes you But I think in a jokingly sense because a true lunatic or something that's crazy I'd have died years ago you you have to have a really good understanding of Your physical limitations and where that red line sits and that can be incredibly difficult a lot of people Industry get caught out. What I'll say is this is the advantage of being self-taught and being young and having these experiences in the wild and being raw with the animals is very different to And you know, I see this all the time Is a lot of people and the experiences that they have is from the zoological industry So dealing with animals were wild animals, but in a captive state, right and using that as their underlying Um, you know skill-serter ability and connection animals They're very they're very dangerous person to deal with because dealing with that animal in a captive state is not the same as dealing with that Animal in a wild state and I was I see it all the time and I think a lot of those people in the zoos They have a You know like the animals my friend You know what I mean I'll and a lot of those individuals they they develop these You know mystical relationships with the animal where they actually believe that there's a closer connection between you and the animal Right, this is where it can get very very dangerous because you hear it from time to time You know the the girl that's been working with a lion for six years and then it's like, you know What I'm gonna go into the enclosure with it understands me and she gets a fucking pool to put Right, and they've literally got to put a body into like three different bags to it and a photo right you hear it all the time um And I think The orca drama exactly thinking about there to look at me. Yeah, I was just thinking about that one The interesting thing is and I think what makes a professional in this industry is being able to draw that line And there's a quote there's a quote from the movie Life of pie. Yeah, and you know the scene with the young boy goes over to the tiger and He's trying to feed it and the father is entire life had told him You know stay away from the animal stay away from the animal any goes. No like Decenable to something about it like I can see my spirit I can see my soul and all that kind of stuff and anyway, I guess this feed the tiger And a tiger runs at the cage and all of a sudden the father grabs him and pulls him back and starts screaming What are you doing? What are you doing? You're doing? He's goes. I was I was just trying to be its friend and The father says that animal is not your friend and he says a quote This is deep He says when you look into that animal's eyes or your scene is your own Reflection hmm The big issue about a lot of people that work in the zoological industry is able into those animals And they think that they're seeing themselves in that animal or personality or characters within those animals And we've been those traits and that's how their connection is drawn and it's a very deep psychological way of thinking Yeah, but I've studied those people in that industry and a lot of them have this kind of like that animals My friend and I'm the only person that can do this and sure, you know, there's a relationship that you build with animals and that kind of sense of connection But there's also a red line there as well and I've seen I've seen it come undone plenty of tons before You see that a lot on and there's particularly one lady on Instagram I think she's in Hawaii and she does all of these videos swimming with tire sharks and She talks about like she's little is swimming with these fat Well-fed tiger sharks right and she's talking about how beautiful they are and like Swimming up and she's beautiful touching their noses and like explaining like oh These are just very beautiful creatures, you know, they're they don't they're not man-eaters and she like she paints this picture of this of this harmless loving creature And when in reality people don't understand like it goes right to what you said like be maybe maybe she's seeing herself in this animal And they don't realize that like many pointed out when he came in here these are Man-eating beasts that are very very well fed when she's swimming with them if you run into one and that in the wild There's not well fed. It's not going to be that story. I think there's two ways to look at Her name's ocean rimsie. Yes, and I she's done amazing things for the conservation of sharks She's done amazing things to draw, you know awareness and all that kind of stuff The biggest issue is that is that however is when you're dealing with these animals they are habituated animals And it's not just as easy as like going you're back and you know swim towards them And you know if it comes that you like push its nose away I can almost guarantee that if you try and do that with a wild tiger shark in Australia I don't care what your skill level has been there for the custer fly That animal's gonna Compute your part and pull your part fast. It makes it great that the footage looks amazing The footage that she does is beautiful Incredible and she's very a sweaty like she looks, you know, amazing in the water her name's ocean rimsie Actually, she'd be a good person to get on the podcast because I'm sure she'd give you a her side of the story Yeah, but I have you seen the video of tiger shark eat the guy in Egypt. Yes. I had just written Yeah, man I've never seen anything that that Ging brutally terrifying. I think the part that we can all kind of you note to there is You know, I think We scream in our tweeze father Yeah, yeah, that's the one and look like I said, I think this is all Amazing and I think she's you know her heart's definitely in the right place. I think where this would I think for the normal viewer that just watches her stuff and then goes oh wow That's you know, that's really interesting without you know because I'm sure that she sends out a very strong educational Warning out there that you know, you can't do this with all sharks But to the average person which is just coming across Instagram or YouTube or whatever that sees is like May you I can do this, you know, maybe I can do this off like the Neptune Islands with a great white shark Um Maybe not yeah, um, but yeah, she's definitely look she's definitely got a skill set And she definitely understands these animals behavior. That's a hundred percent, but Yeah, my concern Wouldn't be for her it'd probably be for other individuals Which might want to try and you know do these tricks and I can be honest I've been given for myself when I go and catch highly venomous snakes So I make it look easy. It's not and there is a skill set and if you don't know what you're doing you can probably get hurt Um Force said you almost got eaten by a bull shark. Yeah, I did the topiest confort the bastard Where were you guys when that is probably my fault? So we were filming off the coast of Florida there and All was there. We have a guy by the name of he's passed away and he was it isn't another beautiful person that was Michael Dornillis Um, he used to do a look actually I think Michael Michael Ocean and being a husband's name is a Final Toronto thing. I think they used to work on sharks. Yeah So I think they used to do work together, but he was helping film this documentary for history channel and Essentially what they wanted to do was they wanted to do a scene where they was like a bit of a bait ball bull sharks And they wanted me to like swim around and all that kind of stuff and look When it comes to sharks. Yeah, it looks I swim with sharks in a straight out, but it's more Speed fishing you see it from a distance, you know, I'll do life and you do your thing And essentially I tried to swim through a bait ball which I thought was a good idea Which is an incredibly stupid idea. Anyone will tell you that, you know, and I remember Forest yelling out to me being like what are you doing? I'm like what do you mean? I said you wanted me a shot in the middle of him It's like not like that and like there's really like a blood like meatball I'm like so afraid of it. I'd like to do yeah, well, I like tried to take my flipper Yeah, that was pretty intense. Yeah, geez. It's close. Maybe I stick to the land animals. Are there a lot of bull sharks in Australia? There are yeah, there are I do to I'm involved with the DPI Which is a department of property in the streets and they run a shark tagging program So essentially in the northern territory so I run tools business where I take people out I teach them You know how the engagement nature and you know very survival focus as well I haven't talked about that. Yeah, but yeah, so I'll take clients out to go catch these bull sharks in the rivers and essentially We tag them and it's all part of a program to understand The spatial distribution of these animals and how they're moving right right So yeah, obviously a big advocate for that as well But um, yeah, look we've got a lot of bull sharks and particularly in the rivers as well. They travel very high up into the rivers but Look, they are involved in a number of attacks as well, you know, there's another guy by my name a Paul de Gilda and he was attacked by a shark in Sydney Harbor, I believe back in the day and Now he's a he's a huge advocate for shark conservation And you know he spends a bit of time in the water with him and stuff He's he's doing some amazing work But yeah, he got nailed and I think he lost these his leg and his arm. I think he lost he got hit by a big big bull shark But um sharks are getting crazy in Florida right now man. I've heard there. It's like getting it's really fucking bad They're literally everywhere and it I think forest. I don't know if the moon was man He was telling me like now if you off the east coast and you just all you got all these guys got to do to bring in bull sharks Is they just jump in the water and start popping the bands on their spear guns and these things Yeah, well, yeah And even in like the surf like it like in up in Daytona Beach, you can't go you can't go surf for 30 minutes without seeing A bunch of black tips, better sharks bull sharks. They're just everywhere man in there and like it is a real problem with spear fishermen now Like to me really they are Everywhere Well, the question is this this is the the big question I think this is a question that's been highlighted in Australia particularly to do with the crocodiles and the boom in population of the crocodiles Is that the end of the day? Teron Varma. Yes, it's their environment. It's true ultimately. Yeah, you know because even in Australia It's been questioned about you know the shark calls and the calls with crocodiles and all that kind of stuff as well And that's been a big one a big issue in Australia is being you know What to do with this increasing crocodile population, but I think there has to be a very intelligent respect for the fact that you know These animals occupy that land space they've occupied land space for millions of years before us and essentially that's their environment So it's not so much of How do we manage them? It's how do we manage ourselves? Right the sharks are are Really protected here like you're not even allowed to kill sharks You know that you're not allowed to catch sharks for sport like you know that have tournaments where you catch sharks So Managed thing was like he believes that you know they should bring those back like it's not gonna hurt to Sharks are so fucking over populated right now. It's it's it would be fair to Kill some of the sharks like they're and it's not a problem. They're not there's not too They're not like endangered. They're not there's not a problem with too few sharks reproducing or whatever There's if there's anything there's like more and more sharks than there have ever been But it is a cycle at the same time right like it back in the 90s and the 80s there was a very very low shark population And then it ramped up again and went back down again and now it's at its peak right well I think the biggest difference between I think Of saying like you know it will even when I was in Africa You have what what they call a carrying capacity and even here in the states, you know We're hunting a deer and hunting all these other animals. You know the ducks and so forth is there's a There's a respected amount of animals that can be essentially hunted Which won't prevent the population at hand, you know Obviously this is you know looked at the data is looked at by ecologists and by you know wildlife experts and all that kind of stuff And there's a different modeling system to identify that How that works for sharks and shark populations? I'm not an expert in that. I don't know But look in Australia I know we've definitely got that in play, you know to do with you know Your targets species and even like the size in even like the gender and all that kind of stuff Can it work? Yes, it can work But you know is it one of those things where you know people like to talk about what what's called like the traffic cascade effect where you take out like a large predator and then you know You got this unbalanced in effect that happens in the environment in the ecosystem I think that's probably where the big concern is and that's where you have more of like a conservative approach rather than Yeah, there's this dude who lives down on the east coast south east coast of Florida He goes by name a python cowboy. We heard him. I think I have hood. Yep, so he hunts iguanas Yes, and I guess iguanas are a huge problem. They're a big time invasive species around here And he does these incredible like expeditions where they go out and they hunt these iguanas And they'll like ride around the rivers and like through the everglades on these airboats And they'll popping on us with these these like a little pelican. I've seen this. Yes I'm not sure what they do with the iguana because I was gonna say because I know I'll just come from Central America And down there everywhere there really, you know, they've got introduced. He didn't they yes Yeah, yeah, they get they get brought here to sort of like Call of a different species and then iguanas eventually get an out of control and they're killing everything sounds like the Australian story Yeah, exactly Yeah, because over there You know something indigenous people they eat and actually takes pretty good like chicken, you know, I mean really yeah So you know if they're if they're an invasive species then Yeah, I wonder if there'd be any kind of mark. It actually sell them eat as an exotic mate as a jerky as you know Yeah, because in Australia look we've got a lot of invasive a lot of feral species here. We've got A lot of prime production ones so we've got pigs. We've got goats. We've got wild horses wild donkeys. We've got water buffalo We've got rabbits. We've got hairs. We've got foxes. No, the list goes on We've had some of the worst invasive species coming to Australia Like an it Australia has essentially been identified as an ecological disaster Literally and I think that's what point why the Australian continent and we have to be the Australian continent has become so conservative I'm with our environment like we need to try to go into Australia There's like a natural box. It says do you have any soil on you Well, the Australian continent and we have to be the Australian continent has become so conservative with our environment. Like we usually try to go into Australia. There's like a natural box that says, do you have any soil on your shoes? Because the concern of bringing in any kind of like soil bacteriums. Have you been working on a farm? So I think Australia is very proactive in terms of having all these security layers between play to prevent these problems. And it's not just in the space of the introduction of an animal species, but also xenonic diseases as well. So we've got huge concerns of like bristle laces or tuberculosis, foot in the half disease. And that's only a stone-pro way in Indonesia. This is the whole other topic which is a huge concern to Australia. And that's why our bi security and all that kind of stuff, we have to have such a strict thing in play because Australia was separated as an island in such a period of time. This island is completely unique. It really is. The environment, the ecosystem, the animals which inhabit these areas have done so for millions and millions of years and adapt it. So without the intrusion of invasive species. And so unlike America where you can go and get a tag or a license or a permit to go and shoot native animals under the whole carrying capacity approach. In Australia, you can't really. I know in the northern territory, we've got the ability to hunt like the magpigies and all that kind of stuff, but throughout all the other states, you can't go and shoot kangaroos unless you've got what's called a commercial harvest laces. So essentially you're only shooting kangaroos to supply for the marketplace. But in terms of recreation, you can't go out there and shoot like a one bat, you can't go and shoot like it's completely illegal. You can't do it. But we do have the novelty of being able to go and hunt feral animals because we've got so many like you can spend time in Western Queensland, Western New South Wales, Northern Territory, and you'll probably come across more invasive animals, what we call them invasive animals. Then you will native animals quite literally. And the big problem about these invasive animals is that they are reservoirs for a lot of dangerous dangerous diseases. So for example, like the feral pigs, like in Florida, are reservoirs for liposporosis, like tuberculosis, like Japanese and sephillitis, like a real bad one. Same as the water bath loads. So we've introduced these management plans, not just in government sector, but in the private sector where people can actually go out and harvest these animals. And consuming them is nothing wrong with consuming the meat if it's prepared the right way. So I've got a lot of friends that they'll go and shoot pigs and eat the pigs as well. But yeah, I didn't know people killed kangaroos. Yeah, so we got them on the shelf at Woolworths. You're equivalent to Walmart? Yeah, like the Woolworths. Really? Is it any good? Look, kangaroo meat is probably one of the best mates. Very hot, yeah, very hot, very hot protein base. I do have it from time to time. It's done in a very sustainable way. Is there a problem with kangaroos? Is there too many of them? When I think of the bezel word too many, I think what have we done wrong? Exactly. So we think that we can just come in and play God and try to like fix the balance of the ecosystem. Well, I think what happened was this, these drinks make him high. Have you put anything in the street? How do you feel? I feel like I'm talking about door back for bezel this day. It's great, man. It's like a life. Yeah, it's cool. It's just like the feel it. It's cratum, bro. It's amazing. It's like magical. This is not like an avatar. I'm being scared. Like I'm feeling like I'm about to fucking start. I'm not going to play or something. You drink too. I mean, you're taking a nap. I'm like, yeah. I'm really. Yeah. So in Australia, what happened was there was a lot of areas which was that they manipulated or manufactured for the production of like cereal grains, like your own sibality, your wheat. And so with that, they've had to introduce a lot of big irrigation dams and all that sort of stuff. So when you introduce a resource, it's like we've got water and now we've got grain, all of a sudden you can actually sustain a lot of native animal species, right, particularly like Kingaroos, emus. So what happened was like for a lot of like central Queensland and out through New South Wales where the population probably many years ago is actually quite low because there was no resources or the availability of such good resources, quality resources, all of a sudden I would supply that. What are you going to have? You're going to have population booms, which we had. And that's not just the native animals, but like a lot of like the rats be there's been like rat plagues and with the rat plagues, it'll be like, you know, snakes, like, you know, it's all like a follow on kind of effect. So Kingaroos also can get managed as a pest to to primary production. So like if you're all like a wheat owner or oats or whatever, and you identify an area which has been impacted by the Kingaroos, I believe you can acquire a permit to go and shoot them. So these animals just can be in shock for probably a dog meat or whatever. And this is quite contentious in Australia because, you know, the Kingaroos is a beautiful animal. We love our Kingaroos, but at the same time it's been tending to a commodity. So there can be, you know, a lot of friction between the conservationists and people who, you know, take the other side of the spectrum, which is just like, well hold on, we have a commodity here that can be utilized. And the same goes for crocodiles as well, you know, there's a lot of speculation about the use of crocodile meat because like the alligator's he and we have a farming system in play where you can actually farm crocodiles and sold them eats and the skins and all that kind of stuff, which goes for the lovers. But the difference is with Kingaroos is we don't farm kangaroos. It's called like a wildlife harvest. So you will go out into the field. These people that have these licenses, it's got to be a specific area. You can only shoot a specific amount and not just that the size of the kangaroos very important as well. I'll tell you what happened. It's really interesting. I think this is back in the 90s and they were doing estimations like population estimates on kangaroos. And essentially, they went into one area and they said, right, we're going to go in here and we're going to shoot out, let's just say those 10,000 kangaroos. We're going to go out and shoot 1,000 kangaroos and see, you know what this does to the population over time. And I believe there's a CSIRO that was doing this population study and they went in and these guys went out shooting and obviously they went to shot the bigger, larger males. And a couple of years later they went back and they done like population study and I think it could droopled and I'll try to figure out what the kind of happened. And this is why nature is nature and it's so important to know the depths of how animals interact in their own communities and their social hierarchies. So essentially, the larger males prevent the smaller males from breeding. So all of a sudden when you start shooting out all your larger males, it then gives the opportunity for the smaller males to breed, you know, because the larger ones are essentially preventing the, right, which I thought was really interesting. And I think when this comes to light and your economy makes sense, you kind of like, oh yeah, I can see that now. This is the concern about going in and managing any kind of wild, you know, animal population. You just don't know what the the come down there and the fact's going to be and we've got some big examples like it was, we've got the kangaroos in Australia and that was probably the dumbest thing that anyone could have done. The what the kangtoed, the kangaroos. It's not here in Florida, it's not introduced into Florida as well. It was introduced originally into Hawaii, them from Hawaii into Australia. This thing has caused this creature has caused, you know, the almost extinction of many native species of animals. It's a poisonous toad. What's the fact sheet originally coming from South America, which introduced into Australia as a form of what we call like biological control because at the time the sugar can in the industry in Australia. I believe this was back in the 1950s, early 90s, if you could have been 1930s, 90 food something it was. They introduced this kangtoed to eliminate the kang beetle, but the problem was the kang beetle existed at the top of the stalk. The kangtoed is a terrestrial species that can only go along the ground. Right. So that was the first point and think that one through. No, I didn't think that one through. The second one that they didn't think through is it's got a toxin that it releases from what's called the partoid gland at the back of their neck and essentially this milky substance when it's consumed, particularly by any other reptile species, is it's almost instant death. So an even for like a large crocodile, for example, like a saltwater crocodile or a freshwater crocodile, it consuming this. It can kill it, even like small mammals, like your quolls and all that kind of stuff. Right. You know, all these species were essentially being affected in the populations numbers were dropping. Huge concern, particularly the monotilizards as well, you know, large monotilists on their population was being declined. So and the reproduction rate of these animals is just it's unbelievable. You know, one female can spawn up to 25,000,000 eggs or whatever it is. So trying to control these species in a physical format, it's just not possible. The only way forward would be to the release of a virus and what's that coming to lead onto that. Right. You know, so yeah, Australia has definitely been a place of experiments and a place that probably a lot of the world has looked at and been like, well, we're not going to do that. You know what I mean? So yeah, but we've dealt with that. But um, you know, I think in time, you know, I think technology is going to come to a point in time where we may be able to reverse a lot of these effects. Coyotes are a huge problem in the states. They're in everywhere. They're in every neighborhood, every city, don't care what city you want you want to mention. They're there. They're literally every they're running around this neighborhood all the time. And that's a similar thing to what you're explaining with the kangaroos, but not quite what I guess would happen when you kill them. Um, the females realize when another coyote has died or part of their, their little pack has gotten smaller, they do some sort of crazy mating call where and they start reproducing more, they start like reproducing more pups. I don't know if it's a business point. I was just meeting couple what they do. Like somehow biologically when they know that a part of their pack has died off, they automatically just produce like more and more pups than they normally had. Gotcha. So it's like a, it's like a reverse effect of if you're killing more of them, they're just reproducing like triple what they would have normally, which is really crazy. Interesting. Yeah. Similar to the, uh, the kangaroo thing. Right. Um, I wanted to ask you also, I want to ask you about your, uh, your crazy quest you did through what's it called? Like, Anna, on a land, on a land. On a land. Yeah. What was that about? And where where is on a land? Okay. So Anna land is in the northern frontier, the northern territory, uh, it's beans. Uh, had you seen the northern territory before? Like, maybe if you get it up on the map, it'll put things into the northern territory of Australia, northern territory of Australia. Um, but even if you type in on a land, which is felt, uh, and yeah, uh, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our, our land. Yep. There you go. Click on the map. Pull her up. And I guess, um, this is almost like my, my, my, my tourism plug that I'll put in now. So is this this big national park? And so that's Kakaroo National Park. Okay. But if you type in, it might pop up. So it kind of advances it or all this land free. Okay. Got it. Yeah. Um, so the northern territory, uh, in the northern part of Australia is probably one of the most wildest places on earth. Like it's literally probably the last while frontier in Australia. Um, it is a place that has some of our biggest predators. We've got, you know, it's a lot of the, you know, crocodiles here. Amazing bird life. Um, the, the wildlife and the diversity of wildlife and the diversity of habitats and different bioregions there is unbelievable. It really is. And I guess that's why it attracts a lot of people even from like the US, we've got like a lot of, um, US clients to go to. Um, yeah. So that's actually where I started. So, uh, down where it says number one. Yeah. On the coast. That's a lot of us where I started the walk. Um, essentially I walked from there all the way into Catherine, which was, he met 700 and something a moment was holy shit. Yeah. So I walked directly across it. What's that 500 miles or something like that? Yeah. So it'd never been accomplished before. Uh, what I saw, though, person and there's Catherine just there displaying the gorge. So, um, yeah, Catherine, and I'd like to say, you know, I walked it as a crow flies, but that's impossible because it's such a treacherous landscape. Well, I was actually told by a lot of people that just wasn't possible. Couldn't be done. And that to me, I feel like that's where I'm at in my life. Now, Daniel, when someone says when something can't be done, and I'm in a proper like, you know, that can't be done or whatever, that's where I really go. I feel like I've saturated myself with like a lot of things, but if there's something like that's what really caught me laugh and forest would probably gonna say, don't you dare? But that Tasmanian tiger, if there is a good confirmed side in on that thing in Western Papua New Guinea, I'll drop everything now and I'll spend the next six months there trying to hunt that thing down to find it. Turn by the thylosine, fall asleep, tell me what I saw. Yeah. Is there any evidence that they're things still around? Or is it any of them left? I think there's a very small circle of people that know it, but information about it. Uh huh. They may potentially be a location out there in Western Papua New Guinea. Really? There may be. There may be. Definitely not in Tasmania or on the Australian mainland, but really think you could catch this thing. Oh, look, I wouldn't want to catch it. That would be the last thing on my list. Okay. I don't want to. I don't want to. I don't want to even touch it. Yeah. I would love to take a picture of it. I would love to film it doing it's thing. You know, that would, I think it may maybe even to be honest and I'll be completely honesty. No, I don't want to catch it. No, I think it's too precious. And this is, I think this is to the deeper call of me. I think as as my connection with nature, you know what, I don't even, I don't even think I'd want to take a picture of it or film it because what am I doing there? Yeah. What am I doing? Right. I'm doing the very thing that I just said it at the original start of the podcast on them against. It's that whole exploitation of, you know, it's trying to make a name for myself. You know what I mean? Like, I think if if nature, if nature, I think you're hurting anything, wait, taking a photo of a thalacy and you're not giving up its location. I think I think the concern. Yeah. Well, I think the concern would be if I did something like that, the amount of people that would jump on the bandwagon and try and go out there and that's where my concern would be for that animal. And I think the depths of where I'm at, I think Neha, my life would be if I did see something like that. Now, you know, what I do is I'd show a couple of very select few people and say, this is the pick shard. This is the footage. This doesn't go anywhere else, but it's there, but it is there. You know, who those people would be? I'd show forest definitely. Right. And just say he could say, yeah, he's definitely found one. There'd probably be a small handful of people, but I don't think I would release it to the world and say, you know, yeah, I just, I think it's personal. It's really personal. I feel only because it represents such a an internationally hot topic, this animal, then they, it's been questioned so much. This animal's been extinct and now it's alive in this sightings and all that kind of stuff. And I think a lot of that's been debunked. But if it was out there in Papua New Guinea, I think, it would be unbelievable. Do you think if we, if they found it, they would try to bring it back and try to like increase its population? I think the first thing that would happen is this, if it's still there, it's essentially saying one thing that's been understood and there's probably nothing wrong with the population there. Right. That's a part of the first thing where my mind would go. The second thing is, if someone did come across it, I'm just trying to think, well, look, I don't know what PUBNINYINY is like in the government, but if a place knows that it's got something, if it's got a white unicorn, I would be concerned that they might fund an internal project to capture some specimens. And so we want an investment to create a zoo or whatever, to bring the world to Papua New Guinea to show them, and they would wrap it into a very crazy, so logical featured thing. And from an economic point of view, it would be a huge, it would be human beings do, we fucking, we get something and we manipulate it. And I think that's probably, that would monetize it. That would be my gut instinct to what the government would do. That would be my gut gut. Probably right. I think you're right about that. Yeah. Because you know, Papua New Guinea, I think is quite, you know, it's a developing country. And if they had that, if they had that unicorn, that golden card, they're definitely going to use it to their attention. I think it's probably this smartest idea, no matter what species it is and whether there's too many of them or too little of them. It's probably, I mean, look, I'm sure there's nuance in here. There's probably, you know, it's probably not just black and white, but by and large, we probably shouldn't try to fuck with it. 100%. Yeah. Well, look, they are going to bring, I think Forest follows that laboratory group quite well, they are going to join bring one back. You know, and I think in our lifetime, we will see one, but whether or not there are still living specimens today. And I went through that whole thing with him, you know, as why I believe there's not any in Tasmania. You know, this is, imagine like a honey, a big form of honey, but you're here. Right. You know, this is, you know, it was a scam and drain. Well, it was an opportunist. It used to move vast distances. It had a huge home range. It would have popped up in someone's back yard. It would have popped up at a campsite. It wasn't necessarily a fearless animal of people, because that's why it was such an easy animal to hunt. I think that if there was a small population in Tasmania, it would have popped up with them out of game cameras with the amount of solo people to winning. They're trying to explore to take that golden picture. I think even the Times magazine back in the day said they were going to give a billion dollars. One, it was like one billion dollars for live footage of Tasmania in Tallahassee. I think that had something like that back in the day. Look, no ones, I think the last reported sighting was in 86, 86, I mean, or 88 by a guy, and I'm in Nick Mooini who was a parks and wildlife ranger. And Forrest has actually done that interview with him. And he said, look, I don't think there was a tourism plug. I genuinely believe he saw one of one of the last ones. Yeah, one of the last ones. But to shame what happened, it just goes to show that when humans come in and we try to manage things in a way that we think is right for our best interests. This is what happens. We lose a beautiful species like this from the Earth. But yeah, I would love to catch one. Fuck it. I'm not going to die for it. I'm going to die for it. I'd be hiding. But I'm not going to die because I'd have my Tasmanian togga. Yeah, right. But yeah, but on an arnemland, aren't arnemland. Yeah. So what made you decide you wanted to track 800 kilometers across this fucking barren landscape? What is it made up? What is it? Is it all forest or swamps? Like what? What is it consist of? Well, tell you it's the question, what made me do it? I think one one would fear fear. Fear. Had anyone else you had? Were you aware of anyone else who had done it? Oh, I am sure I'm not going to take anything away from the Aboriginal people. The Aboriginal people are unbelievable. Really? Yeah, Indigenous Australians and what they can do. I'm sure they traversed back and forth and back and forth and up and down and all that kind of stuff. And we've done it as a group. I think on the first white man to have done it solo. I do believe however that Indigenous people walked, they walked that continent back with them forth. Part of the reason why I wanted to do it was there was a lot of fee about walking that place and to answer that question of what does it comprise of? Arnemland comprises of flood plants, it complises of swamps, billabongs, escarpments. It is so diverse in the habitat features which are there, which is what brings a lot of tours into the area because it's such a wild space. It's also a space which is perishable. You get lost out there and if you get lost out there, you don't know what you're doing. You'll die pretty fast. It's very remote land and there are Aboriginal communities that exist all throughout it. I think there's a population of like 20,000 Aboriginal people that still suffer as well. Yeah. Look, I like these uncontacted tribes or she's who are the six for arrows. I think in general, the Aboriginal people out there definitely want their privacy and to go into these areas you need a special permit to do so, to go into those areas. But Aboriginal people are very welcoming. I think there's probably to the outside people from the US that don't know much about the Aboriginal people in Australia. Very welcoming. Very fun to hang out within the bush as well. The Indigenous unbelievable at the part of my job working with the Australian Defence Force, something I do as well part time, is we do a lot of recruiting. We've Indigenous Australians and they're amazing because they know all those places like the back of their hands. They're almost like the security guards of the bush. So we call it like the human terrain model. We try to understand more about what's happening in those remote areas where we don't have surveillance because the Indigenous people out there, they are our eyes and ears and we get a lot of our intel from them. So particularly in a lot of our remote coastal areas where they might be drug importation coming in, you know, illegal fishing and all that kind of stuff. The Indigenous people, yeah. Although they'll see tracks walking down the road and they'll know whose footsteps they are within the community. If the footsteps don't look right, they'll be like, okay, something's going on here. So yeah, we've got the best, we've got the best of the best of the best of the best. It's called the Australian Defence Force. We have the best surveillance system in the world in the northern parts of Australia and that's the Aboriginal people. Wow, that's incredible. What sort of people are you guys looking for up there? You said drug trafficking? It's actually from Indonesia. Yeah, so from, yeah, we do get quite a lot from that pathway that comes in because, you know, Indonesia is not too far from Australia. There's a lot of like archipelago, it's like little islands in between. And so, yeah, that's definitely a transit route for drugs. But yeah, we're, so it's actually called Norfolk. So it's a division terraces, squadron that on in part time. Is it Norfolk? So N-O-R-F-O-R-C-E. Yeah, Norfolk. Yeah. Wow. At least some of the some of the needed ones. Yeah. Oh, wow. So now it looks, it's, it's an amazing place and it's full of so many different skillsets. You know, when we're out there and we're doing operations on the coastline, it's you're always learning something from the Indigenous people there. You know, whether it's like different types of bush tucker or how to navigate through the bush. Yeah, it's, it's an amazing thing to become part of. That's wild. So I've been doing that for a couple of years now. So when you did this track, yeah, sorry, go ahead. Yeah. So yeah, so I don't land, so it was 700 kilometers. It was a fear of mine, all different types of landscape through there. And I took a horse, which was essentially a green horse. Like, I was, my, Danny, I was a fucking idiot. I'm not a horse person. I first been, like, you know, the original idea, the original idea was I picked up a donkey from a, from a fucking prop Deanna. I've only had to do the track with the donkey. This donkey was the bigger. Right. He had a character. But he was a, he was a proper, you know, he definitely wasn't a stallion. But yeah, the original I was going to do with a donkey. And then it worked out to be a bad idea, not because we didn't have an amazing connection relationship. Right. He was like my best friend. This is like, you know, like, this, like, Trek's donkey, like, what about a mule? Do you think I'll get in the mule? And your would be good. Yeah. Yeah. They're, they're a hard animal, but this donkey, so he was loyal to the fact that he would fall in the everywhere and all that kind of stuff. But as soon as I put a rope around him, he's like, well, hold on one second. You put a rope around me, went on the same level now. Like, I'm like, so I'm like, so I'm like, so I'm servant to you. And didn't like that. No, he did not like that. And he was smart. Like, I was trying to train him and I like cross like a bit of a river. And I was like, try and lead him. He'd be like, I'm not going. He'd wait for me to cross the river first. All it's like, look out for crocodiles. He might, oh, he made it safely upside. Now I'll go. If you're going to put yourself in a situation where you're going to be relying on an animal for your survival, because he was carrying my ward is kind of my food. Don't pick an animal, which is a liability. Great. Okay. So I went with a green horse, even after that lesson had been I took a horse that had never had a pack saddle on it. Yes. And in four days, I was trying to teach his animal to have weight on its bow. It was a disaster. Stupid honor. I look up on some dumb things. But you're not they say, you're not they say, well, they say the worst of ideas make for the greatest of memories. That's a good. That's very true. But it was, I look, it was the challenging, challenging experience. And I was completely living off the land. I was hunting there, anything and everything I could find out there running down water bottles. This is another Netflix episode. How much food and water did you bring with you? So water provisions, I believe, I was using the camelback bladders. And I think I had up to about 12 letters of water. Okay. Right. So that's 12 kilos. Is that enough to last you? You think you mentioned you can do that? No, no, no. No. So in this route, that was transient in, I was actually going through river systems and going through billabong through rod had to, you know, get water, boil it, prepare it and all that kind of stuff. There were obviously places like a drink like straight from the river because of how, you know, clean it is. You are running risks there of getting, you know, waterborne, you know, back to even all that kind of stuff. But I feel over the years, my gut's become pretty hardened. That's sort of stuff. But yeah, look, in a survival sense, prepare your water. Okay. That's my first advice. But yeah, look, I was running down pigs. I was catching water buff loads and all that kind of stuff. And, you know, barramundi and spear and barramundi. And yeah, essentially just living off the land. But I went in it, I think 74 kilos and walked out at like 52 kilos. I took rations of rice and like the shortbreads. But that didn't last long. And then my body just essentially went into a form of ketosis because I was a seeding or, you know, meat products. And I became very worry. And my instinct was so sharp, so sharp. And you have all these innate instincts inside of you. Right. So you'll be, for example, because it was such a period of time, the whole was going without sugar. My body instinctively was making me look up. Why does it make me look up? And what's interesting is when you're in the bush, I feel like your body, your brain says, download in information. Right. And so there must have been as a child, me getting a honey from a beehive, you know, up high. And that's an instinct to clue, you know, glucose, honey, look up high. You know, all these little innate kind of things, which are just sinking in, you know, and it's just funny, even things of, you know, the animal tracks, you know, animal tracks leading you to water. This is a lot of conscious things that would be going from my mind that your brain just taps into you. You don't need conscious of even thinking about this, but it's like, this is like evolution boiling up to the surface. Yes, 100%. And we all have it inside of us. I think that's one being one of my biggest messages is everyone on this earth, you're living on this earth. We've come from this earth, we didn't come from any worlds. We've came from with a wall from this earth. We have the schools, the ability. We have the biology. We have everything inside of us to sustain us in any kind of environment. And we do. We've got that ability, but we need to try ourselves to get back there. That's so we are. We are, we are losing it. That blew my mind because Paul Roseley explained that really concisely when he was in here, how when he first went down to the Amazon and he was wearing his shoes, they were all laughing at him. Like, look at this, look at this green go with the shoes on and then eventually he took him off and after like a couple days walking through the jungle, like the jungle, the birds, the monkeys, every the way the wind blows, it all communicates to you in a way where you understand what's going on. You understand where danger is. You understand where you need to go. And it's just like this crazy network. It's this network that just connects to you and these these innate traits that we have and these signals or antennas that we have inside of us that are buried from technology come to the surface and now we are communicating with the forest and with nature and it's fucking fascinating. I think well, it's generational as well. Like if you think about it, like our ancestors and all this information, there's got to be genetic material which has been passed on. Where it could be the fear of snakes, for example. You know, if your grandfather's grandfather had a about experience with a snake, this is kind of like information which has been passed down the lines and I really believe in that kind of information. You know, even like character traits, for example. grandfather's grandfather had a about experience with a snake. This is kind of like information which has been passed down the lines. And I really believe in that kind of information. You know, even like character traits, for example, you know, when someone turns and say, oh, you're just like your uncle. You're just a stubborn as your uncle, or you just a stubborn as your father or whatever it might be. I believe it's true because we see this saying downloading of information in nature. And they've actually seen it with, you know, we're talking about with the canesodes. Yeah. Okay. So what's happened now is monitor lizards. Now the generation of monitor lizards in Australia do not consume canesodes. They've learned not to, you know why? Because through the process of this species adapting to the canesodes and there has been selective decisions which have been made probably by individuals not to consume it based on smell or the way it looks or whatever. And that genetic information is now being passed through. And I've watched it. I've watched a monitor lizard go up to a cane zone and just completely avoid it. And it's got nothing to do with the fact that it's learned to as a species on this earth now, like as it's as an individual. This has been information which has been hardwired through. It's not like they can learn about them. Not the turtles. How the turtles will, you know, navigate form, you know, islands that they've, you know, never been or crocodile for example, we'll leave from one place and go to an island where the turtles will be simultaneously, you know, hatching. How did they even know that information? This is all information which is being passed on. So we're not too different from the animals as well. I believe there's a lot of information which is inside of us, you know, at a very deeper level that can only come to the surface if you put yourself in those situations. And I believe it's 100% of them. We are animals. Only a couple hundred years ago, I think it says this without leaving off the land. Right. Literally. It's not bad. So what, what were some of the biggest things you noticed like in your body or things that changed in you after you went so many days without eating any carbs or rice or anything and you were only eating what you killed? Like other than the fact you said you were always looking up, but was there anything else? I realized how much I miss a fucking subway. You do get cravings. My biggest cravings is always fruit loops and sneakers. There's high sugar. It's not my, yeah, older and fanta. I don't know why it's fantasizing about junk food when you're out there. Although it's on to our, yeah, I think that's like an evolution or anything. But it's just like, you know, it keeps you in touch to, you know, keep hunting or drinking. Yeah. In that situation, you become very calculated at how much energy that you use up and what you're chasing. Like, for example, I'd see like a group of pigs. And just by watching them, I'd be like, right, I can see the weakest link there. And I'd be working out in my head strategically. I'd be calculating how much energy it's going to take to acquire that animal because I do what's called persistence hunting, where I chase that animal down. You know what I mean? So if I know that I'm going to be running a lot of tool for eclometers, how much energy do I have in me to get me that distance and how much energy am I going to get back from that animal? Does that make sense? So it's like, it's like, it's like, it's like an energy system sort of thing. That can only work so long because, you know, running your body just off eating meat and organs and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, although nutritional in terms of energy though, you need your carbs. And that was something that I was lacking. So yeah, my body was slowly deteriorating. Really. Yes. Yeah. What I do think is interesting is actually after this and this such a part of the reason of joining norfors was I had one of the high commanders going in contact with us after I'd done this expedition from Ireland land and said, did you know that the Australian Defence Force, we run a survival course. And then that's what actually got me involved in the Australian Defence Force. Oh no, you've been a survival instructor. Yeah. But they had heard of my antics and catching animals and all that kind of stuff. And you know, when you have these self taught abilities and skill sets, they're priceless. You can't read them in a book. You know, so yeah, it was a way of me being able to teach some of my skills, abilities and techniques to soldiers in any kind of situation where they'd have to survive for like a period of time. So how many days told her were it was did that track take? It was 42. 42 days. Did you have any sort of like, lifeline in case you got really in trouble? Did you have like a a sap phone or an airy? So I did have the saw it out in that way. There was a time where I got lost and I thought, I'm in some big trouble now. Like so batteries all out or gongs, those are not enough like solar, like solar power. But I did work out that if I kept, if I essentially kept walking in a westerly format, I was going to hit river systems. And so when he didn't river systems, yeah, essentially you look, you can sustain yourself for a period of time. There's a lot of food at any given time. I knew that I could get out of that situation. But look, a lot of people go missing in the Northern Territory and generally they will cast, this is the rescue services, they will cast a free day window or a four day window with searches. Reason being is in that, there's actually a guy I think in South Australia, here's a doctor. And when they do a rescue on time, let's just say it's you, they'll go right, they'll get in contact with your local doctor. Can I get all these hot records? Okay. Is the Asmati? Does he have, you know, blood glucose problems? And that about how old is he? How fit he is? What's his BMI and all that kind of stuff? And strategically, now just develop like a biological format around you to see how long you'll last. No, sure. Based on layers. So whether you're in the cold, whether you're in this climate, whether in the Northern Territory, if you're in the Northern Territory, don't know what it is in Fahrenheit, but 35, 38 degree days, you go out there without water, you're probably going to last, we call it the rules, the rule of free. So you know, three days without water, three weeks without food, you know, three minutes without oxygen, three hours exposed to the environment, you know, whether in the cold or in the heat and all that kind of stuff, this is like a general format that they use. But yeah, we'll generally cast about a three day window for people, you know, between three and five days to survive out there in the in the outback. If you've got no real understanding or skill set, you've got to be careful. You perish, you perish fast out there. The crows, the crows will be your friend, even when I was walking on land, the crows will be hanging around. Really? Watch me 100%. But they say, you know, they actually realized, I think that's realized because I was so successful with what I was doing in terms of hunting food. I reckon I had these pair of crows following me all the way from the coast of Fucking number one into Catherine. They're following me because every single time catching food or pigs or whatever, I'll just find the scraps all this following me like a beacon. And you're just building fires to cook the pigs. Yeah, under a senior, of course. Yeah, everything. What were you afraid of? Was it what would have been those number one way? You know, you're afraid of your afraid of your own isolation. You're afraid of yourself in your own, you know, what I've never what was the biggest threat to you out there. So I've rolled my ankle actually trying to try to catch a water buffalo. And so that was bad because then I had the strap it. Um, look, I've always told people this would be my advice and this is in a psychological format. Don't look at it like you got to walk 700 kilometers because that's a really fundamental to you. The way that you got to be able to undertake any kind of expedition, you know, like a long term expedition, you got to break it down. So the way that you got to say to yourself is right, break down that 700 kilometers into like 10 kilometer journeys or 15 kilometer days. So in your mind frame, that morning when you wake up, isn't, I've got to go 700 kilometers. No, no, keep that in the back of your mind. When you wake up, you object the fire that you need to walk 15 kilometers to an ex-billabile. That's where your day is ending and tomorrow will be a new day. That is the way that you undertake those expeditions, whether you walk in the fucking Amazon river or whatever you do it, you need to be able to break down and compartment size the journey because if you think it as a thing as a whole, you're mentally going to fry yourself there's the same from a book and it goes and this is almost always hits an emotional part of me because me and that horse went from fucking a lot man, fucking hell. I remember there was a day out there for two days where I went and we were out water, that was tough, 48 hours from no water, whilst walking and that was a bad one. And so the style of the trip mean this horse, like we couldn't have been any further apart of human and fucking horse. And as the trip went along, obviously the connection didn't built and built to the point that we were able to actually do this thing together. I didn't even need a rope on rope on him. No, he just followed me. In fact, he was actually helping me catch the, I don't know if you got, yeah, so that one down there, that's a water buffalo, ai, asianic water buffalo, which picture? So down here to the right, go right, bottom right, yeah, that one. Yeah. Yeah, like the ones we have to get out of there. It's a big fucking, oh, you can catch a nice, oh, I was telling fire, I'll catch him. You ever get an eat one? Oh, well, I took down free when I was there. Why? Yeah, the shit thing was only had a small knife, a K bar, and we had like a four inch blade. So that was, yeah, so we know, tie them up and brought them down and then I had to kill it with that knife. That was, um, how did you do that? It's okay. I can explain it. It's quite graphic. I just want to let people know that when you own a situation of survival situation, um, yes, keep your morals about you. Yes, keep your ethics about you. But the only way to survive is you need to be a savage. I've seen publics, it's the same fucking, you're not shopping at the grocery store, you're literally late for death. Yeah, you become a savage. Yeah, okay. But you know, yeah, try and keep your morals and ethics about you. How I had to kill him, uh, you bring him down to the grand time up. So come. So when, first of all, when you spotted him, where was he? When he made his own land, so, so he wasn't in the water. He was, because yeah, so normally they do hang around with water, water buffalo. I mean, you find it in around the bill of bongs, particularly in the early mornings and later in the afternoon. So it's when I'll come to drink. But during the day, you'll just see him out in the flood plain, you just see him out walking. Okay. And then you pick your, you pick your match. You know, generally you're going for an older bull, like an older male bull. Right. Right. Right. And, um, yeah, you stick to him. You make that commitment. You just keep going for him. So I had a lasso. So I'd run him, so persistent funding. So I'm running behind, running behind, running behind. And, um, we're talking, we're talking, we're talking, sprinting, I was jogging. So I'm not talking, David, we're edition 800 meter, spring. You know, you, you keep an average speed on them. You keep pressure on him. Okay. And those are all the balls. Yeah, they, they'll run for a good distance, but I normally just keep behind him. What you want is you want that animal to turn back on you? Any animal that turns back on you? I said, I'm now your laughing because that animal's made a decision that's went from flight into flight. Right. And now it's like, okay, well, now it's manuimano. Um, so what I would do is I'd run with these animals, uh, and then I'd get a lasso around him. And then I'd run with him with the lasso. Now you're talking about a one ton animal. And the only way to hold up a one ton animal is what I would do is as I was chasing behind him, he would go to one side of the tree. Like imagine, um, as I'm running, you need to pick your trees good too. Um, because your tree is going to be anchor point. So you got about 25 minutes of rope, you're running with this buffalo and all the sudden you see a tree up ahead and you chase him in such a way that he goes to the left or to the right, every way. But in that point, you put the spring time, so your ride up is back in because what you're now going to time is as soon as you go past that tree, you've got to run. Well, it feels like you're fucking sliding. No, with the base body, do their slides, you got to slide and get one rope in to anchor. Does that make sense? Mm hmm. So as you go down one side of the tree, you go the other and you get that first anchor in. Now, that can be very dangerous because you lose your hands very fast. Your hands get caught up in that road. I said, you pull your fucking arms there. Um, get him anchored once he's anchored and you tie that off, then it's about. He's going into fight mode. So he's there. He's fighting this last loop and then all of a sudden you walk towards him in this smart. There's smart animal very calculated. I get him to charge me, but as I'm getting into charge me, I just keep running around the tree. So when I'm doing this, I'm just lowering the, um, the rope, you know what I mean? Like I'm listening and getting to a point where you almost wrapped him supper around the tree. Then I get a back leg, right? Another bit of rope, back leg. And then I essentially just use his motion against him to get that back leg up. As soon as I get that back leg up, your roll, whole tip. And then you got to be fast because then you got to get in there and you got to tie that back legs up. So animals now on the ground, back legs are tied. Um, you got to be careful because they can still move their horns and all that kind of stuff. So yeah, you're trying to essentially get him entangled at that point in time. Um, you know, you've definitely got heavy connection with your animal. And I, you know, I talked to him. That's how America's going to be okay. Everything's going to be fine. Um, take your shirt off, wrap it around these eyes. And then I would, um, because the skin of a buffalo is so thick and I've only got a four inch blade, what I'd have to do is I would literally cut, let's get it around, we'll fuck that up. I'd have to cut almost like a patch. Like, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't cut a patch. Right, pull the skin and then get the blade in and then literally try and get my hands inside so that I can start cutting because trying to get through the, uh, your artery, it's actually quite deep. Wow. Yeah. You have to get like fist deep in there just to get to the artery. Holy shot. Bro. Yeah. So it's pretty, um, like I said, um, I can be a, yeah, pretty deep sort of thing going on there. But, oh, I can't fucking even imagine dude. I think, did you, did you just figure this out or did you, did you sort of know or understand or talk to people who have caught water buffalo before? Nobody catches them like that. People doing that in the, you just made this up as you were going. Yeah, you're just sort of done that. That's, uh, I, I, I got on a catch animal. So I figure out different ways of doing it, different methodologies that doing it. And just, yeah, just, I love it. And actually, the catch on water buffalo is probably the one thing I actually enjoy doing in the Northern Territory because it represents the biggest danger and the biggest challenge. I put our love at man. I really, I get kicks for it. I love it. You are fucking savvy. But I don't kill, no, this is, I don't kill them. You know, I'll catch them releasing all that kind of stuff. But right, right, right. When I was doing this track, I was catching the, of course, I was catching in the kill. Yeah. Um, that is so intense. Yeah. I don't, yeah. See, I've narrowly opened up talked about this too much because this would make a lot of people feel uncomfortable. And they'd probably look at me different and be like, man, this goes real fucked up. I don't think so. No, I think the respect that I have and what I've had to do, I think people will be very surprised. And I think there's got to be a lot of discipline. It's got to be a load discipline. You know, in what I do it. I think, you know, your connection with the animal, you know, the well for the animal and all that kind of stuff that needs to play a big part in it. You know, someone that's not of that mind space, you know, they've, yeah, they're a bit different. I think there's a lot that goes from my mom when I'm doing that consciously. Um, yeah, man, you're doing it with your bare hands and our rope and a four inch blade. I mean, it doesn't get any more intimate than that. There's one thing I'll say. And this is important. I think it's probably worth all I say this. That all quote that I was getting to is it actually starts off as there's a boy in a horse and they're in the forest. And the boy says to the horse, I can't see a way through. And the horse says to the boy, can you see your next step? And the boy says, yes. And then the horse replies will then just take that. And I think that's a huge analogy out there. I think for anyone that's listening, if you find yourself in life where you're in a situation, you don't know what to do and all that kind of stuff. As long as you just keep moving forwards, 100%, that is the way to go about it. And things can look dark and deep and bad. And I've definitely faced that when I've been out in the bush and I've done expeditions and all that kind of thing. As long as you keep pushing forward and you keep positive, I was prepared to fucking crawl out of it. I was prepared to finish that thing by fucking crawling 100%. You know, and I think everyone has a deep motivation inside of him. And I dare say, probably 99% of people in this earth never really get the tap into that deepest part of their motivation. That's survival motivation. And that's days where you, because I can still remember, I can still remember the mindset. I can still remember every single animal's eyes that I've had to look into to kill. You collect all that. You collect all that information. You never lose that. You hold onto that. Wow, man. That's fucking heavy, dude. Yeah, you're probably right. There are, it's got to be less than 0.01% of the population who has ever experienced anything like this. And it's scary to think, like, how much farther are we away from completely losing it altogether with the development of technology and artificial intelligence and all of these phones. Now we have fucking Apple goggles that people are wearing walking down the street, fucking doing conference calls on. And it's interesting to think how human beings are going to look in 50, 100, 500 years, the way we're going right now. And how far away we are from what you experienced on that fucking on that quest you went through, man. It's it seems like we are losing a lot of our, a lot of the senses that you talk about that you regain when you go there and stuff like Paul talks about when he's in the rainforest. Well, Paul, Paul, Paul knows well, spending time in the jungle is you have to, there's a frequency, there's wavelength that you have to tap into, you know, and you get, I only get there by immersing yourself out there. And I do say, look, I've been on a pretty wonderful trip through Central America and Nicaragua and Costa Rica and Columbia. My truth freedom is being in the bush by myself. That's my freedom. That's the realness of it. You know what I mean? That is the pure realness of my freedom. And I wish I really wish that a lot of people get to find their freedom and their connection. I believe that that can sometimes be the recipe for a lot of things in life. We're dealing a world now where mental health is a big problem. Soapsides are consistent problem and all that kind of stuff. And I think people need to be able to identify their escape. In some way where they feel, you know, they can be more than the person that they are. And we had designed to be out there. And only when you're out there, do you know what you really are, as a person, as me, as we sit across the table from each other as a species. Do we know how I'm very designed and what we're designed from? Really? Yeah, we were hunting. Right. We were, we were sharp. It sounds crazy. We were sharpening spis and, you know, let's go back to four, five thousand years. We were sharpening. We were, we were a formidable species that survived off this earth. Yeah. We're, we've lost that. Maybe some of us, very few have this, like a recessive gene that gets followed through to keep it there in the psych. I've definitely felt that. Remember when I said when I was a kid, I just didn't know why this fucking random guy was running around chasing animals and stuff. And like, I said birdfly and like, I'll just like, maybe that was something that's instinctively just kept there, just in case, right? Just in case, don't know. Were there any other crazy fucking animals that you had to run into that you weren't prepared for that either you had to evade or you had to hunt? Well, look, there's obviously a very high population of saltwater crocodiles in the Northern Territory. You've just got a piggy river system smart. And most people in Northern Territory would hear they'd be like, they're all in there. And they are true. But I think there's certain junctions and certain places where you can walk, which would be through the water, which would be less dangerous than others. You know, that's definitely the case. You know, a lot of guys out there right now doing pig hunting and all that sort of stuff. Crocodiles are a dangerous animal to do with because they're an ambush predator. I, you know, I've got a lot of respect for those animals. I see them all the time when I'm out there doing it. So what I do to us in the Northern Territory, where I take people out and I teach them what I know. Right. And it's a very immersive. It's a very inclusive. You have to come one day when you come to it. Yeah. There's the instructor right there. Very inclusive. I do like this is my plug now, do on my plug. Yeah. Australian wild tours. So I take people out there and I teach them how to survive. So I use obviously, you know, information from the mandate of the Australian Defence Force, my own survival techniques and all that kind of stuff. And essentially, my job is teaching you how to become comfortable and confident in nature. And so I've run a number of different programs where I teach people that when we're out there's obviously a huge focus on crocodile safety. These will there, everywhere there, there's hate, there's hate for crocodiles. Look, I think it's a master. I've seen some things with crocodiles over the years which have really surprised me. They're a sneaky animal. And they, it's almost like the crocodile get this, you'll, it's almost like the crocodile was designed to exist between your behavioral wavelength. Let me explain that. Okay, let me explain it. When you're in an environment that you don't know, after a while, it's natural for us to develop a pattern and to develop a sense of comfortability with it. So let's just say you move to an area for the first time and you know, you work out where the shops are, you work out like shortcuts to get down to the park or whatever. You're essentially hard while when you're brain to go from point A to point B to point C in a very biologically calculating way. Same way an animal goes down to, you know, a place to feed or then goes into like, you know, vegetation to, you know, take refuge or whatever. They develop a pattern at play. Now what happens is when you develop a pattern is you become incredibly confident and complacent. These are the two things that are crocodile will use against you. So I'll give you an example. You get down to a nice camping place in the northern territory. You go there to collect like a bucket of water on the first day, you know, to, you know, wash dishes or, you know, wash your car and you go down there and you click water down at the bank, you know, you're looking out there, like, fucking, you know, can't see anything going, click water or go get away with it. Second day, you go down there, same thing, third day, fourth day, fifth day, 10 days in, you're still doing everything's all fine. Naturally, what happens in every human being is you become so confident in your surroundings that you go in down to collect water is nothing more than automated response in your brain. Right. That's where it gets here. That's where he's been watching. He's been following your pattern. So it's on the seventh day or the eighth day that you go down there just to click what as you did. Like the interview that I've done with that kid, they got swiped, is what interview? Oh, so that was the interview I've done with. It was too interviews. I know, one was with a guy who'd lost his wife to a crocodile attack and I asked what had happened. And she went down there to clean, you know, dishes down there at the river where she went, you know, for the last week or two weeks and, you know, change things out. But no, you know, she'd went into a pattern and she got taken and the husband watched the get taken. So that crocodile will know the exact pinpoint location and there's time, time doesn't matter for that animal. He's got all the time in the world. He always eat their all day, you wait there for three or four days. He's got all the time in the world, you know what I mean? And so, um, where the issue comes in is it comes into your natural possession of confidence and complacency in your brain. You'll wait all day for you. You wait there. And he will get you. Um, that's why they're dangerous is because they can understand your pattern probably better than yourself. Is that why you have an advantage when you go to like catch them? Do you, because you're coming in there? You're not, they haven't seen you before. You're not going there every day. You, you are doing the same thing, but the roles are reversed. You know what they're doing, you know where they are. Look, there's so much boasting about, you know, the crocodiles, I could be I could take a 14 year old child out on a dinghy and say, right, I'm going to teach you how to catch up four meter or five meter crocodile. And it's not hard. Yes, there are very dangerous and a lot of things that can go wrong, but there's a technique to it, you know, going at night time, you can use like a, like a pole with a lasso. There's many different ways of being able to capture an animal like that and get him under control and safely. Manny hunts gators with those things. Oh, yeah, 100%. I love to meet him one day. I love to meet Manny. Yeah, that would be, yeah, that would be incredible to get you guys together. Yeah, I'd really love to. Because like I said, he was one of the, he was one of the originals, you know, he was one of the, the true, you know, true originals, Manny. Obviously the videos of him levitating the crock, the alligators, unfortunately stuff. I love him. I think it's great. What, um, he'd be in his 60s now, and he's probably, yeah, his probably in his early mid 60s. He's getting up there. Yeah, he's focusing on his art now. He doesn't really fuck around with wildlife. He does, um, he'll do be like guide people on like hunting trips and stuff like that. Yeah, hunting hogs or hunting gators or whatever. But, um, he doesn't do any of the crazy. So he doesn't swim sharks anymore. He's been bitten by several different species. Yeah, I'll, yeah. So wild. Are, is it so is there a big difference between your approach to a gator versus a crock? Oh, look, you couldn't, you couldn't, you couldn't, and Manny would tell you this to, you couldn't go into the Mary River or the Adelaide River and the Northern Territory and go their way state and try and levitate a saltwater crocodile because it'll be the last thing you ever do. Why is that? This is different. It's, are they more aggressive? Oh, can't compare them. Couldn't even put them in the same room. Couldn't even put them in the same box. Well, I'm trying to say, yeah, behaviorally different. This animal here, the saltwater crocodile, so the estuarine saltwater crocodile, um, is a whole different kettle of fish. The way that he looks at the world, different to an alligator. Oh, look, um, I've been in the water of alligators before is the diet different. I think the diet would probably be the same. Okay. I think, okay. Um, yeah, almost identical. I just think there's just something, um, definitely structured in the brain, which is differently. They just see you purely as prey. And their approach is very sneaky as well. You know, we're talking about, uh, you know, a predator that's evolved over, you know, tens of millions of years. And yeah, he doesn't at all see you as a, he doesn't see you as a threat, as long as he's seeing his own natural environment. If he's up on land, yeah, he'll still defend himself, but he doesn't want anything to do. You can walk along the banks of the northern territory. And if these guys are up on the bank, though the first thing those do is go straight into the water. They know because that is where that's their, that's their world. That's their realm. That's their hiding place. That's their advantage you know, it's where you go to the edge of the water or you go into the water, you will become undone. You become unstuck. So one of the things I teach as part of the tours is obviously crocodile awareness. I'll take them out. We've got some captive crocodiles that we feed and, you know, I get people to really appreciate and respect these animals, but just, um, you know, teaching them the safety points. And, you know, the northern territory government, the, the parks and wildlife, they do a very good job at, um, you know, trying to educate the public or travelers which are coming in. It's called the Croc Croc-wise program. And essentially just telling people like, you know, stay out of the water essentially, you know, be smart around the water's edge if you're doing fishing. If you're doing any kind of things for recreation, because the problem, it looks someone gets taken some, you know, a father or son or a daughter or whatever. Generally it's a man because we're just, you know, that way inclined. And, um, but, you know, then the animal's got to get shot and it's bad media. It's not a good thing. So yeah, we try to be quite preventative. We've got our approach. And, you know, a lot of, a lot of warnings and all that kind of stuff, you know, you got that video Steve, play that video. Is this that same area? Northern. Nice. It's the finished, finished river station. So it's where I operate. And it's, um, like 55,000 acres of just, uh, one land. That's a fun, venomous snakes on earth. We've also got our very own ancient dinosaur. Jukele's wall tours are Australia's wildest experience. And adventure like in Nava. Two, that is wild. That's gorgeous. There's a wall that's experienced. And adventure like in Noah bar. To that is why that's gorgeous. You can walk to it. Don't come. So I'll tell you a funny story. So I started having meetings with the Northern Territory Government. And this is around about the same time. I started talking with parks and wildlife and what's this like. I'm going to do the right thing from now on. I'm just, you know, I'll do everything your way the permit way. And, you know, and I like our own Mr. Euchles, you know. We're going to trial you see how you go. And then as soon as I think I've had this pivotal part in my life. The, you know, I started connecting with NT tourism. Northern Territory tourism. And, you know, essentially they've been, you know, fantastic. You know, helping me try to develop the tours and make it more, you know, increased the distribution and all that kind of stuff. But the first thing that the lady said when I sat down, is she says, if you want us to help you get behind you, you have to do just one thing. And I said, what's that? She goes, andering. If you want us to take you serious and you want us to promote you to an international market, you have to put your fucking shirt on. And it's true because the layers. Cultural appropriations different around the world. I actually, you know, I was in Zimbabwe and I was walking around my shirt off. And I had one of the locals there saying, hey, where's your shirt? Something really? Where's my fucking shirt? Is it my fitshits in the car? Is it go put your shirt on? I said, why? You go, because this is, you know, not allowed to do this. You know, I had your shirt off. I thought everybody walked around shirtless there. You know, me too. Oh, uh, most of the pictures are without shirts. Only the locals are allowed to wear, or not allowed to go shirtless maybe. Exactly. Yeah, well, yeah, so the local shirt back on. That's weird. So, uh, yeah, so I all had to do everything we were calling shirt now, which is, which is fun. Okay, find the video on Andrew's YouTube channel. I think it's your number one video with you approaching a hippo. All right. Yeah, probably. Probably the summer. What were you doing? Was that in Africa? Um, that was, yeah, that was in Africa. Yep. Oh, look, I've had some close calls. The thing that I want to put out there is this is whenever I've had a true, like a true, true, true, true, true, close call. The camera's never rolling. Right. Because you're fucking, you've got to get the fuck out. Yeah, so I've had, and this was years ago, film, but I have one just recently where I almost got taken out by hippo. And it was that night time. Uh, this is one of the least in the honey badge one year. I hit him with a torch. Yeah, he came at me. Dude, you and I are a mania. I ended up hitting him in the head with a torch, which I thought was a good. They're pretty good advertisement for this torch company. Um, but yeah. So what happened was I was walking and, um, here's came in from the bush and I was walking for the river. And I don't know if it was directly, no, no, he was directly going for me. Uh, and the only thing I had in my hands as a saving grace was I had this big torch. I fucking threw the torch at him. It's fucking bounced off his head, but I feel like it was enough for me to just like kind of get away to the left hand side. And then he didn't worry about chasing me. I think it was just more so just trying to go to the water, but it happened fast and they can fucking move. Oh my God. Yeah, but I plugged him with the torch. I heard it. Um, so people get fucked up by hippos often. People die. A hundred percent people know to stay away or do they still get people? But like, it was a pretty smart. Yeah. It's like, it's like, there's a good, like a flight distance, I guess, you know, the people will have with them. Right. People get chomped all the time. Right. If that animal gets on top of you, just like a water bath load like you'll, yeah. He'll make, he'll make work of your own. But they don't need meat, right? No, they don't. So I stopped doing the YouTube stuff a couple of years ago. Why? Oh, for the reasons I was saying it was just me with my camera. It was so much hard work. When you're trying to do things which are organically, the reason why, look, when you look at the success of people like Katie Peterson and that space. Crew of people, things are organized, things are scripted, things are, you know, and it's becomes a process which is completely computational and algorithmic. Yes. And it has to be in your deep and it's like when you, the ability to do a podcast and you'd have next person after the other one, you know, like a, you know, like a, you know, like a, you know, door to door, it's always opening. Yeah. It's always content coming out. It's a lot, it's a lot of monotonous work. Yeah. Yes. If you're trying to film your natural engagement with animals, capturing animals and all that kind of stuff, some of these animals would take me weeks to try and catch. You know, even look at the honey badger took me four and a half, a month to catching in Africa. And one thing I really want to stay true to is I didn't want to do the same thing, the same snake and I watched some guys, the same snake and snake and snake and snake and snake and snake and all that. And the guy that's been done the first time, I wanted to do things, you know, all like all different animals species. But doing these and going to these areas and doing the filming, sometimes it takes me, you know, on average two to three weeks to try and find an animal, you know, or to capture it down the like kind of stuff. And when you start thinking about that and how that would integrate into content for YouTube and engagement and like, it doesn't work. Right. Because there's no consistency there. Right. And I think that was probably one of the biggest issues and that's when I kind of left that in Fort Wright Waltis to the documentaries. These are all solid documentary sales doing these are the ones that went to Netflix. Right. And now it's come to a point in my career where, and I think I can say a lot for us, this just put me up for a show on animal planet which I hope I get, you know, hosting show. You know, if it's something like that and there's help around me and a production and things are paid for, then I'm more than happy the first person at the airport waiting. The problem is in my entire life and I don't take back one day of it. But 15 years ago and out there just by myself, the camera and the amount of expenses and everything else, I'm barely made a dollar. You were a barely made a dollar. A barely made a dollar. Like if I was to break it down over 15 years, I've probably made a quarter of a million dollars. But imagine if you would have been. But think about that, quarter of a million dollars over 15 years. What's that? That's like, yeah. 16,000 dollars a year. Yeah. Well, it's nothing. You can barely live off it. You know what I mean? So I think it got to a point where it was just like, I've got a skill set. I've got this ability, I know I can host and I've got the character. I know I've got all the necessary formula behind me, but now I just need something which is more formative because the continue going like is by myself. That's interesting, man. That's an interesting way of thinking and doing and living your life because I think by, I think most people would, if there was no cameras rolling, they'd be. there was no cameras rolling. They wouldn't do half the shit. Or they wouldn't do probably any of it. But you look at it the completely opposite way, which is very, very unique. And that's not just with doing crazy wildlife shit and trekking through fucking deadly territory and catching deadly animals. I mean, that's with anything, right? Even podcasting. Like how many people would sit here and would want to, it would be unsustainable, I guess. It's impossible to say to flying people from all around the world and talk to them if you're not trying to like set up some sort of a, machine around it and try to develop and money making apparatus to make it sustain itself. Well, I think, and what people are seeing there, look, I think I've uploaded close to 100 videos. What people are seeing is less than 0.001% of what I was willing to show people. Right. There's so much that I've done. You know what I mean? There's so much, there's so much to it. Yeah. And I just seen a lot of these guys that were coming up for you in the first thing that they would think there was a, there was a, there was a brain instruction play. All right, we've got to do the hats and we've got to do the backpacks and we're going to do the shirts and we're going to do this and everything was just, it was just like a McDonald's. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's what it was. It was just like a marketing McDonald's thing. Yeah. And when I saw people like that person, like Katie, that's all it was. It was just like how can I be a franchise brand and that was the force that animal stuff is second. But how can I be that brand first? And I think that's where the dis, being dis and genuine that dis and gen, people can sense that. Yes. The people like that never become icons like Steve, though, and because the core of what they're doing, you can see the under current of that. I'm sorry. I'm sorry to call it out that for me, I can see I feel like Australians are really sensitive to that kind of stuff too. Someone that's selling out is, yeah. I wouldn't wear a backpack or I wouldn't wear a pair of shoes that I didn't believe in. Is that my experience? Absolutely. I don't believe in that. I've only had free sponsors. I've had Kaver, right? Because I'm better than I was work. I'll put them to the test. If you don't believe me, I can show you some stuff in the buffaloes. But if you're live. Really. But there's only very small brands that I would actually put my life into. And I can relate that back to the rawness of what I've done. I'm not going to sit here with something and promote something that I don't believe in. I just want, I just, it's just, it's against my core. I just don't believe in that. And maybe, you know, people, a lot of people probably watching this podcast. I'm like, well, no wonder why you got no money because you didn't sell out. I'd rather be broke than sell out. That's my character. And I think a lot of people in the industry, it's not like that Daniel. They'll sell out. They'll change their fucking names. They'll do whatever they can to make it, to make it, to make it, to make it. And that was never going to be me. I'm sorry. It's just, it's not who I am as a human. It's not. Well, that's why you're such a fucking badass bro. Well, I think it's just, it's, it's a lot of it's been, being treated yourself too. Yeah, 100%. 100%. You know, and yeah, it's got to be gives and takes. It's been, some shows that I haven't been 100% on. And you know, you got to see these things as opportunity or opening doors. So it's not like I've been close to that because there's definitely been things where I've fought. You know, okay, but I think, yeah, you definitely got to stay true to yourself. Yeah, you have to stay true to yourself. What do you think about, have you heard of this thing called interspecies, this interspecies AI communication? The first thing I think of though is if an only one wants to come down here to earth, how long do you think you'd be until someone tried to fuck it? Honestly, once you know that would happen pretty fast. Yeah. Yeah, if there were enough of them, 100% you could find somebody who'd want to fuck it. Absolutely. Yeah. Like, and you know that'd be a disclaimer. You know, the government would be smart and it'd be like, do not contact, do not touch, but really the government says like, please, someone just don't fuck one. We just don't want to create talking virus that we, you know, it's going to wipe out the earth, but we just, we just don't want that right now. I don't think it'd be, we'd have to be worried about that. I think the thing you have to be worried about is that aliens wanting to fuck us. You're right again. I think the aliens would want to probably fuck the humans or like find some, you know, some hot indigenous shop. Okay. I think I have heard about this. So is this to do with the original conversation where, um, York to post wasn't from here? It came from somewhere else. Is this where this is going? Oh no. No, I don't think so. I think so. So this is, um, correct me from, I mean, we can read it, but I, what I was explained to me was that it's a new, artificial intelligence that's being developed, uh, like a language intelligence that can decipher animal communication for us and basically, and basically translated into something we can understand. Um, yeah, blow that up so we can read the, the bio of this company. Interspecies internet is a multi-disciplinary, disciplinary global think tank to encourage the acceleration of interspecies communication with 4,500 plus members, including leading sector professionals, a primary premise of the project is that the interspecies internet can be used to both link non-human species that are not collected or collocated and can use its computational capacity to introduce AI and machine learning methods to trans, do signals from one species into coherent signals for another. So yeah, they want to, they want to basically translate animal language into human language. I feel like something just went for my mind. I feel like if I was to compile a series of sentences, which would probably came off all the animals that I've chased over the years, a lot of those things would, a lot of the sentences would run off the narrative of why the fuck are you chasing me? Fuck off. Who is this wanker? Yeah, you're probably right. That's right out. That'd be not the concise me. Yeah. But how fucked up would that be a dude if we could like tell about the click and communicate with animals? There was a dog that I seen. Okay. So there's been a number of animals over the years, which I think have really been individualized as having this next level of intelligence. One was a African, African gray parrot called Alex. I think that was one. I think there was also a gorilla that was in captivity. Is that Amy? May have been. And a dog. The most recent one was the dog where you know, they've got, I think it's got a lexigram where they have all these different buttons that symbolize them from being like outside. Right. Food, water. And this one was actually a really complicated like next to the ground where it was almost like questions in it that it evolved around motion. And I believe it's one of those is a labradoodle like the poodle cross the labradoodle. Yeah. One of those ones. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then intelligent. This was the most interesting part was the dog went up to it. And it pressed. So I'm mutaneously. It pressed the button that said what am I and then walked over and looked into the mirror and looked at the owner. Oh, that's that's deep. Wow. That's deep. That's deep. Wow. That's deep. What am I? Hmm. That's deep. That is very deep. What the fuck man? That's interesting. Yeah. I got to find that. Um, coco. Cocoa. That's it because there's a famous scene with Robin Williams with, with coco. Um, and I think it learned sign language was able to communicate. There's an interesting study that they've done years ago. And this is actually a really scary. I think it's one of those Russian experiments where they put a child and a chief. And a chimpanzee together at a very, very young age and essentially the experiment was to teach this chimpanzee. Um, you know, human knowledge and human traits and behavior and all that kind of stuff. I think the experiment only went on for a couple of months and they had to shut it down. You know what? Because it was actually the child that was starting to learn the traits of the chimpanzee. Because animals have such a hard, wide behavioral system. Like in everything that they had to say so hard, why? Uh huh. And it was interesting to see that it was the human brain that had that plasticity or that adaptability. And it was actually absorbing more information from no way. So yeah. And which awful was fascinating. You know, truly fascinating. You know what I mean? Like yeah, we're, we are so different from apes. I mean, it's our closest living relative species. We were, you know, supposedly came from apes and we have, you know, we evolved from apes. But we're so fucking different. Like it's like, there's nothing. There's such a huge gap between the most developed primate to a human being. It's almost like there was some sort of like intervention there. Yeah. That's like the, that's like the, um, the theory that, you know, a monkey at a mushroom, a psychedelic mushroom and the brain grew like five times size and what's the name of that theory? That's called the, um, I forget the name of it right now. We've never heard it. Yeah. There's all these crazy theories on, on how he, because there's nothing really, like, there's nothing really close to us in the world. Like, think about every single animal that exists on earth and then us. We are so fucking, we're miles apart from every single one completely. Um, it's funny. I just, the stone date theory. That's what it's called. It's the night. I just, I just, well, that last image reminded me of, uh, Travis, the chimp. You know, that story. No. That's terrifying. Who's Travis the chimp? Just the one where the chimp ripped apart the little girl. Ah, yeah. That, that woman, the next one ever. It ripped a face off. Yeah. Oh, and the 911 call and that ladies, this is ties him back to that whole animal attachment emotion, emotional attachment with the animal and all that kind of stuff. This lady had a very unhealthy relationship with this chimpanzee and Linda Hainas and Dara Dara and all that kind of stuff. And this chimpanzee would look out the window like every day and see the next all neighbor because this lady was friends and this other lady and it just would death. There are, you know, I mean, it probably waited. It's entire life to be like, I'll get you one day. You know what I mean? Because once again, like two or chimpanzee, like that, like, time doesn't exist. That's, that's it. Travis, is that what she looks like after she died? She lived. Is she still, she lived. Oh, wow. She got a new face. Travis the chimp managed to escape from the enclosure one day and it essentially molded this lady to death. It made a bit of a bit of a hand off it bit of face off. And this lady all throughout the while, I think she was, the owner was like stabbing it with a kitchen knife whilst on the phone to night. And it, yeah, it's this, you know, I think at that point in time, particularly in the US, it really raised a lot of question about the exotic animals or, you know, these dangerous animals which were being kept as literally kitchen pets. You know, this kind of brings into the whole talking thing. Yeah, doesn't it? But, yeah, I just thought that this was, yeah, a real, a real tragic and bizarre. Monkeys are terrifying. Yeah, you've seen the videos of Monkeys stealing the kids. There's like, there's videos on YouTube of like these little monkeys. I forget where it was, but there is, I don't know if you think I think the parent, like, intervened the last minute, but these monkeys, like, stalked this little toddler. And like, tried to grab it and like steal it and they were like in a tug, there it is right there. Yeah, watch this. Have I seen this, maybe there's also some TikTok? Gotcha. Look at this. No. It's gonna use those to form a bottle of crap. I'll give you the child back. You give me some crackers. Like what the fuck man. I think someone was just filming that recently. I think it was in a monkey store over here talking about in Indonesia. I think it's in the cracks. And what they'll do is they will steal a wallet or a purse or a possession like a phone. And that actually uses like a form of barter. And I'll go up to the tree. And so you give me a treat and I'll give you the phone back. So they've been able to work that out, which I think is that that's another level of intelligence, isn't it? Really? Yeah. Oh yeah. Well, monkeys are the one that first developed prostitution. Really? Yeah, I forget. I forget when the study was done or whatever, but they, there was a study done where they put like a, two male primates or chimps and a female. And how did it go? The, the females were, the female would end up fucking the male who gave it food. Right. I think that's how it went. Right. But basically they were both competing to see who could like bring the female the food. And the female would only sleep with the, the, um, the ape that brought it food. Right. Wow. Yeah, they, they're bizarre. So what else is there, what else is there that you haven't done that you, that you still want to do? Is there, is there any crazy track or any crazy animal that you haven't called yet or any place in the world that you haven't been that you want to go? It was funny. I was just, you know, in medicine and Columbia, I went to the zoo there and I was walking for the zoo. Uh, you know, I have quite a wider, versus animals from all over the place. And it was funny because I was walking now. I was like, yeah, I've caught that one. I've caught this one. I've caught that one. I've caught that one, tracked this one. I think unless it's something which is really out there, you know, um, and once again, I think if, uh, if a network was to turn out like the Congo River, it hasn't been walked yet. I know people have talked about it, but if I put this out now and I'll say to a network, if you will pay the way for me, I'll go and walk the fucking Congo. I'll do that tomorrow. It's just, for me, it's not, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It's, it obviously it's a challenge. It's a Congo. It hasn't been done. Remember? I just, it's been done. I don't know. Okay. Whatever. It's something hasn't been done. I'll do it. If someone's willing to pay the way for it, I'll do it. Actually, my friend, that you gave me a good idea. He's like, man, you should just start like a go fund me. I'll, like, people that can't believe you, you know, to like catch certain animals. Because I'll tell people about how I catch the water buff loads and then straight away. So, I'll go, but you can do a cake buffalo. I'm like, no, better I could. So, I reckon I could actually start like a go fund me where to be like, right. If you want me to go and catch a cake buffalo, this is how much it's going to cost for my air fizz and whatever. And then I'll go and spend however long to go and catch that animal. You know what I mean? Yeah. But, you know, you've got to think like, what's the, what's the plight of all this? You know, I think part of that plight is it's about, you know, educating people, bringing the awareness. What I love now is teaching a skill set. You know what I mean? I think that's why I've probably evolved into conducting the tours in the Northern Territory and doing that kind of stuff. But look, I'm definitely open to doing stuff with networks and filming. You know, that's always been like a huge passion of mine. You know, I don't feel like you can over explore any kind of place. I think there's always something to do. But like I said, like Daniel, I'm always after a challenge. I want a hard challenge. You know, and I said the fire. So I said, you think it's the funding to go to that Tasmanian targeting? I said, I'll be there. He knows I'll be there. That's fucking incredible. I hope it happens. Yeah. Well, dude, thank you, Andrew Ukels, for doing this man all the way from Australia. Well, from Medellsheen to here back to Australia tomorrow. But thanks again. Where can people find you online and find your tours? Right. So Australian wild tours, but they can obviously find me on Instagram, Facebook, just for Andrew Ukels. And I've had got YouTube channel, which is there. And yeah, and not only fans. And the dad. That's funny, man. I know actually I know people who use only fans instead of Patreon. Oh, really? Yeah, there's this dude. He lives in Hawaii. Nathan Florence. He's a professional surfer. I've had a knife in just why? I think we follow each other maybe. Oh, really? Yeah, his brother's John John Florence. Oh, I'm not like the world tour. He'd been like one of the biggest, best surfers in the world going up the North Shore. Anyways, he used only fans to publish all his content on there. So he's a patron. That's pretty funny. Pretty creative. That's wild. So. Alright. Thanks again, bro. Awesome. We'll link all your ship below. And good night world.