The stakes in this particular story seem pretty high since the government has evidence that we're not alone in the universe that there is some form of intelligent life or something that is creating these crafts. They're buzzing the earth. We don't know if they're from outer space. They're spiritual beings. I mean, we just don't know the answer. But the government does know what they're lying about at Cuz why. And so does it occur that maybe the billions of unaccounted Pentagon funds that you mentioned that turn up in every accounting process. That maybe that they're not lost through incompetence. Maybe those are attached to programs that we're not allowed to know about. Completely think it's intentional Tucker. You're exactly right, as usual. You know, they've been lying about it since 1947. And then all of a sudden we're going to pass legislation and they're going to say, oh, we're going to come out and tell you the truth. I mean, this, you know, Schumer's thing, everybody's on me because I'm not really sure about the Schumer because it basically is modeled after the Kennedy assassination files in the real, and here we are 60 years later. We haven't done that. I guess it's a good step forward. But the reality is we're going to tell them to tell us the truth after they've been lying to us and they've been funding these programs. Lou Elizondo, for instance, is the program that he was involved with for a long period of time. They said it didn't exist. Yet he shows up. He's got a department that works for him. And so, you know, this thing has just been going on like I said, at least since 1947. And we know it's been going on maybe before then at some point. It's a worldwide phenomena. We have some of the best pilots, not in East Tennessee, the best pilots in the world that are telling me their crafts have been buzzed by this. You know, and I've had members of Congress say, barge, you know, we need to be on something important. Let me ask you, what's more important than something in our airspace, buzzing $50, $60 million aircraft, putting American pilots at risk, and that we don't know who it is or what it is. And then we have a government that claims they don't exist. And now, the sudden, people like yourself have brought this issue to the forefront over half the American public believes that they're out there. And now, the Pentagon is, it smells dollars. It's what I think it is. That's why they're they're putting all this out. In each department, NASA and everybody else has their little pamphlets out now of, you know, NASA's, I think it's something about, we want to do robust research. Well, you know what robust research means? They want to, they want more of your tax dollars. I just want them to come forward with the truthful information that they've been hiding from us for decades. Do we possess this technology or don't we? And if we do where is it? And there have been, as noted earlier, a number of pretty ominous indications over the years, apparently informed people that the US government has been in direct contact with these forces, whatever they are, the people who created and flew these objects, whatever they are. But there has been direct dialogue between the US government, maybe other governments, and these entities. Are you aware of that? Has anyone even asked that question to say the President of the United States or someone else who could answer it? I'm aware of it. And I've talked to people about it, but it's just another rabbit hole I go down. And I have to be real careful, Tucker, to be honest with you, because you would not believe the amount of research and things I've gotten poured on me from all over the world. People send me books and photographs and things. And of course, a lot of that is, I think it's fake because they're trying to get me to embarrass me further, I guess, in this issue. But I'm not biting on all of it. I don't usually put any of it out actually, just because, you know, I don't 't know if any of it's truthful or if it's a government entity putting this garbage out to discredit this community or what have you. But it's a complete, it shows the mistrust the public has of our government and for good reason. Yeah, it's been well-earned. So where is this legislation going? I mean, will there be disclosure short term? Will these two committees chairmen, the Speaker of the House, Mitch McConnell, will they shut it down? Well, the Senate passed it, the amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act, but it hasn't been signed into law yet. The House is in negotiations for what I understand over this amendment. I'll be talking to the Speaker today or tomorrow about this amendment and just telling him how important it is to this community and transparency. That's really all I want is transparency. Where we're spending all this money on something, where is it going? And why do they not trust the American public? Those are the things that people need to ask. You can, you know, as I said at the hearing, I said, we're not going to bring in a UFO, we're not going to bring in little green men, but what we want is transparency. And unfortunately, we don't have much of that United States Congress because there's another shiny object over here, they'll misdirect us over here, they'll misdirect us over there. But I believe this community is very, very in tune to what's going on and the cover of this thing going on. Yeah. I mean, if this, if this is real, clearly Israel, and 10 people have come forward with security clearances to say, yes, it's real. Well, the answer to think about that was you said 10 and that kind of jogged my memory, we asked more than 10 people to testify before our committee and several of them were scared off. They were told by their overlords or whoever at the Pentagon that know they could not come speak. And then the three that we got were dynamite, obviously, because that really led to fuse. But there's several more out there and several more have come forward. Now, the Senate text just was as I was in here getting ready to come on your show from somebody else. But again, I have to be real careful with those because they get up there and embarrass the whole community then we're two steps back. No, that's exactly right. And I think they've salted this information lies throughout this story in order to discredit the people who tell it. Last question, you come out with a statement that we played at the beginning of this interview, pretty compelling, kind of hard to see what the counter argument is. What are your fellow members of Congress say to you about that? And what is the excuse that they give you to your face for not disclosing this information to the public? Well, as I've stated many times, there's several members have come forward to me. Some of them fairly prominent in both parties that have actually seen something as a child or in the military or other things. I think now that their phone lines have been lit up because of you, a folk community, if one thing they are relentless and they call and they're informed and they call and some of them actually, they've called my office in support of me and I always tell them, I appreciate it, but I'm good. You don't need to get on with the with your own Congressman or your senators. And so they've made a great effort of that. And I believe now at Congress, even if they don't believe it, they're going to start looking into it because they know this public, this group is well versed. And I'm glad of it because, you know, the thing that happened to me was they started this stuff and sure enough, I get home and somebody's running a pole against me to figure out my weaknesses. And who do you think's doing that? So, you know, and I fully expect this to be an issue on the ballot next time. I mean, maybe and on the ballot as well, that that would be, you know, they're going to be running that against me. But I don't think they're going to get anywhere with it because I think they're, you know, they're still driving around in their 72 Vegas and their Blue Leisure suits with their zip-up Dingo boats listed into an eight track tape player. I think they're a little bit behind the times right now. What do you think? Just I'm interested. Who do you think did that? Who do you think's coming after your seat for your willingness to talk about this? I think it's probably one of three people. You know, I don't know. Maybe any of those people that you mentioned and there's some that there's others too. I mean, you figure they've got unlimited funds. And that's what scares me about the whole thing. They have unlimited funds where they could literally buy a seat in Congress, which I know that's had been naive of me to think that that's never happened in the past. But but in Tennessee, we were fairly independent people and that bothers me a great deal. Well, it's just interesting. I mean, that they're willing to go to that effort. You think they say, you know, oh, Bertch, he's crazy, believes in UFOs. But they're very threatened by this, which tells you that they've got something to hide that implicates them. That's what I'm learning. Absolutely. They're threatened because people like Tucker Carlson are adding an Arab legitimacy to this thing. And they know that every millions of viewers that you have are watching this and they're scratching their head. And then they're going home to their barber shops and some guy who was in the Navy who was on an aircraft carrier and was in saw something and was told by when they got back to port that some men and some suits said, hey, you didn't see anything. This is national security. You ever bring this up. You're going to the federal penitentiary and break rocks for the rest of your life. You know, those stories are coming out daily. And it's happening more and more. And so I think they're, they're, they're taking a step back now.