The Joe Rogan experience Yeah, we were started right now we were just started it has become yes What was your question though? I was gonna ask you know like what does something comes up? You know like what you know you need to like be here. Oh you can totally do that Yeah, we'll just pause and just run out that happens. Don't sweat it I want you to be comfortable. Have you ever done a podcast before first time really first time? So tell me how Where signal came from what was the impetus what was how did it get started? It's a long story. So we have time we're playing a time Okay, well, you know, I think ultimately what we're trying to do is signal is Stop master valence to bring some normality to the internet and And to explore a different way of developing technology that might ultimately serve all of us better We should tell people maybe people just tuning in signal is an app That is Explain how it works and what it does. I use it. It's a it's a messaging app. It's a messaging app. Yeah, but fundamentally it's just a message Yeah, explain lofty aspirations. Yeah Yeah, it's a messaging app, but it's somewhat different from the way the rest of technology works because it is encrypted so You know if typically you know if you want to send somebody a message I think most people's expectation is that when they write a message and they you know present that The people who can see that message are the person who wrote the message and the intended recipient, but that's not actually the case There's you know tons of people who are in between who are monitoring these things who are collecting data information and Signal's different because we've designed it so that we don't have access to that information So when you send an SMS that is the least secure of all messages So if you have an Android phone and you use a standard messaging app and you send a message to one of your friends That is the least of all and when it comes to when it comes to security, right? That's yeah, it's a low bar. That's that's the low bar. Yeah, and then iPhone. What is a signal? Yeah, so iPhones use iMessage which is slightly more secure But it gets uploaded to the cloud and it's a part of their iCloud service. So it goes to Some servers and then goes to the other person. It's encrypted along the way But it's still it can be intercepted. Yeah, I mean, okay, so there's like Jeff Bezos a situation Yeah, like shut face situation exactly yeah There's like the fundamental of there's two ways to think about security one is like computer security This idea that will somehow make computers secure We'll put information on the computers and then we'll prevent other people from accessing those computers And that is like a losing strategy that people have been losing for 30 years You know you information ends up on a computer somewhere and it ends up compromised in the end The other way to think about security is information security where you secure the information itself that you don't have to worry about the security of the computers You could have some computers in the cloud somewhere Information's flowing through them and people can compromise that compromise those things and it doesn't really matter Because the information itself is encrypted And so you know things like SMS you know the iMessage cloud backups most other messages face with messenger all that stuff you know they're relying on this computer security model and that ends up disappointing people in the end and so you Why did you guys create like what was Unsatisfactory about the other options that were available? Well because the way the internet works today is like insane You know that uh Fundamentally I feel like private communication is important because I think that change happens in private Everything that is fundamentally Decent today started out as something that was essentially unacceptable idea at the time. You look at things like You know obviously that abolition of slavery legalization of marijuana legalization of same-sex marriage Even you know constructing the declaration of independence. Those are all things that required a space for people to process ideas outside the context of everyday life and um Those spaces don't exist on the internet today and I think it's kind of crazy the way the internet works today You know that like if you imagine You know every moment that you're talking to somebody in real life There was somebody there just with a clipboard a stranger taking notes about what you said that would change the character of your conversations and I think that in some ways like we're living through a shortage of Braver bold or courageous ideas in part because people don't have the space to process what's happening in their lives outside of the context of Every day Interaction. Yeah, that's a really good way to put it because you got to give people a chance to think things through But if you do that publicly they're not going to They're going to sort of like like basically what you see on Twitter You know if you stray from what is considered to be the acceptable norm or the current ideology or whatever Whatever you're supposed to whatever opinions you're supposed to have on a certain subject You get attacked ruthlessly so so you see a lot of self-censorship And you also see a lot of virtue signaling where people sort of pretend that they espouse a certain series of ideas because that I'll get them some you know some social cred Yeah, exactly. I think that Communication in those environments is performative. You know you're either performing for an agreement you're performing for Advertisers you're performing for You know the governments that are watching. Yeah, and I think also the ideas that make it through are Kind of tainted as a result, you know that like Did you watch any of the Like the online hearing stuff that was happening over of it You know where like city councils and stuff or having their hearings online. No, I did not It's kind of interesting to me because it's like You know they can't meet in person so they're doing it online and That means that the public comment period was also online, you know And so it used to be that like you know if you go to city council meeting They have a period of public comment where you know people could stand up and say what you think you know and like ordinarily It's like oh you got to go to city hall you got like wait in line you guys sit there You know, but then when it's on the zoom it's just sort of like anyone can just show up at zoom you know they just die later than they're just like here's what I think you know and You know it was kind of interesting because particularly When a lot of the police brutality still was happening in Los Angeles. I was I was watching Those city council hearings, you know people were just like you know You know they were just calling you know be like fuck you I yield the rest of my time fuck you you know it was just like really brutal and not undeservedly so and You know what was interesting to me was just watching the the politicians basically, you know Who just had to sit there and just they were just like take it You know and it was just like you know you get three minutes and then there's someone else to get you know They're just like Okay, and now we'll hear from you know like sense and you know watching that you sort of realize that it's like To be a politician you have to just sort of fundamentally Not really care what people think of you know you have to fundamentally Just be comfortable sitting, you know and having people yell at you You know for three minute in three minute increments for an hour or whatever, you know and so it seems like what we've sort of done It's like bred these people who are willing to do that, you know and in some ways that's like a useful characteristic But in other ways that's the characteristic of a psychopath, you know, yes and yes And I think you know what we're seeing is that that also extends outside of those environments that like to do anything ambitious today requires that you just are comfortable with that kind of Feedback like Trump's tweets If you watch, you know if you look at Twitter and look at any of Trump's tweets when he tweets watch what people say It's ruthless. They go crazy. They go so hard at him So I'm assuming he doesn't read them. I'm assuming he just or maybe he does and just doesn't say anything But he doesn't go back and forth with people at least no, but and I'm I think you know Trump is perfectly capable of just not caring, you know Just like you know, like you know, it's just like yeah, whatever. What you know, I'm the best they don't you know, yeah and like that's You know, that's politics, but I think you know the danger is when that You know to do anything ambitious, you know outside of politics or whatever, you know requires that you're capable of just not caring, you know People think whatever because everything is happening in public I think you made a really good point in that change comes from people discussing things privately because you have to It's a you have to be able to take a chance You have to be daring and you have to be able to confide in people and you have to be able to say hey This is not right and we're gonna do something about it If you do that publicly The powers that be that do not want change in any way shape or form They'll come down on you and this is essentially what Edward Snowden was warning everyone about when he decided to go public with all this NSA information He was saying look look this is not what we signed up for you look someone's constantly Monitoring your emails constantly listening to phone calls like this is not this mass surveillance thing It's very bad for just the culture of free expression Just our ability to have ideas and to be able to share them back and forth and vet them out It's very bad. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, I think when you look at the the history of that kind of surveillance There are a few interesting inflection points, you know like at the beginning of You know the internet as we know it and like the related mid 90s where these like DOD efforts to do mass surveillance, you know and They were sort of open about what they were doing And you know one of them was this program called total information awareness and It was they were trying to start this office I think called the total awareness office was something within the DOD The idea was like they're just gonna like collect information on all Americans and everyone's communication It just stockpile it into these databases and then they would use that to you know mind those things for information It was sort of like you know their their effort to get in on this at the beginning of the information age And you know it was ridiculous, you know, it's like they called it's total information awareness. They had a logo that was like You know that the pyramid with the eye on top of it. Oh, yeah, this is their logo Pyramid with I like casting a beam on the earth that bit of Latin there means knowledge is power. Oh wow And interesting this program was actually started by John Pointextor of all people who was involved in the Iran Contra and stuff I think really yeah, and he like went to jail for a second. I'm as part of something So anyway, you know, there's just some fuck time these people are in charge of anything I know but what's also I just kind of comical is it like they were like this is what we're gonna do Like you know crazy. This is this is our plan, you know and people were like I don't think so you know like what here was this This is like early mid 90s. Look at this authentication biometric data face fingerprints gate Iris your gate So they're gonna identify people based on the way they walk. I guess your gate is that specific Then automated virtual data repositories Privacy and security. This is fascinating Because if you look at me, obviously no one thought of cell phones back then exactly right This is so this is like kind of amateurish, right? So they're like this is what we're gonna do, you know People were like I don't think you know even like kind of just like guys. I don't think we can like approve this You know like you need a better logo, you know Yeah, for sure, but it's just this whole flow chart Is that what this would be what do you call some point this? What is called flow chart a gas sort of designed to dazzle you and yeah, approving their it's like baffling to figure out what it is Like first of all, what are all those little color tubes? Those are the ones those little cylinders data silos The universe they're all different colors. There's purple ones. What's in the purple data? Gate that's print for gate lives. Yeah. It's all prints is information But so okay, so that you know this this stuff all sort of got shut down right? Yeah, like they're like okay We can't do this, you know And then instead what ended up happening was like data naturally accumulated in different places, you know that You know like back then if you had been you know what they were trying to do is be like our proposal is that everyone carry a government mandated Tracking device at all times like what do you guys think you know it'll make us safer, you know And people were like no, I don't think so, you know, but instead everyone ended up just carrying cell phones at all times Which are tracking your location and reporting them into centralized repositories that government has access to you know and so You know this this sort of like oblique surveillance infrastructure ended up emerging and that was what you know People sort of knew about but you know what didn't really know and that's what Snowden Revealed was like you know instead we all have this instead. It's like all of that all of those things are happening naturally You know your you know gate detection finger, you know like all the stuffs happening naturally. It's ending up in these places and then You know governments are just going to those places and getting the information And then I think you know the next inflection point was really Cambridge Analytico You know that was the moment where I think people were like Explain that to people please. Cambridge Analytico was a Affirm that was doing Like big data using big data in order to forecast and manipulate People's opinions and in particular they were involved in the 2016 election and It was sort of you know, so it's like you know what's done revealed was prism which was the Cooperation between the government and these places where data was naturally accumulating like Facebook Google etc you know and The phone company and Cambridge Analytico I think was the moment of people were like oh, there's like also sort of like a private version of Prison, you know, that's like not just governments but like the data is out there and other people who are motivated are using that against us You know and I so I think you know in the beginning was sort of like oh, this could be scary and then it was like But you know we're just using these services and if you were like oh wait the government is You know using the data that were You know sending to these services and then people were like oh wait like anybody can use the data Against us and they were like oh, you know, it's like I think things went from like I don't really have anything to hide to like wait a second these people can predict and influence how I'm going to vote based on what kind of genes I bought you know And you know, and then you know sort of where we are today where it's like I think people are also beginning to realize The companies themselves that are doing this kind of data collection are also not necessarily acting in our best interests Yeah, for sure. There's there's just two there's also this weird thing that's happening With these companies that are gathering the data whether it's Facebook or Google or I don't think they ever Set out to be what they are They started out Like Facebook for example, we were talking about it before it was really just sort of like a social Networking thing and this was in the early days. It was a business. I don't think anybody ever thought it was going to be something that Influences world elections in a staggering way Like especially in other parts of the world, you know where Facebook becomes the sort of de facto messaging app on your phone when you get it I mean it has had massive Impact on on politics on shaping culture on I mean even genocide has been connected to Facebook in certain certain countries, you know, it's It's weird that this thing that is in I don't know how many different language Facebook How many different languages does Facebook operate under all of them? Yeah, I mean that this was just a social app Was from Harvard right? They were just connecting students together wasn't that initially what the first iteration of it was? Yeah, okay. I mean I think you can say Like no one anticipated that these things would be the significant But I also think that there's you know, I think ultimately Like what we end up seeing again and again is that like bad business models produce bad technology, you know that like The point, you know what we were talking about before like the point You know Mark Zuckerberg did not create Facebook because of his deep love of like social interactions Like he did not have some like deep sense of like wanting to connect people and connect the world That's not his passion, you know Jeff Bezos did not start Amazon because of his deep love of books You know these companies are oriented around profit, you know, they're trying to money and and they You know, they're they're subject to external demands as a result. They have to like grow infinitely, you know Which is insane, but that's the expectation and you know, so what we end up seeing is that the technology is not necessarily In our best interest because that's not what it was designed for to begin with that is insane that companies are expected to grow Infinitely Yeah, I mean they're literally but what is your expectation to take over everything to have all the money and then one day and then more You know if yeah if we extrapolate we we anticipate we will have all the money. There will be no other money If you keep going that's what has to happen. How can you just grow infinitely? That's bizarre Yeah, that's why I mean you know the I think you know Silicon Valley obsession with China is yeah, you know big part of that work people they're just like well That's a lot of people there. Yes That's a lot of people. They just keep growing. Yeah, there was a fantastic Thing that I was reading this morning god, I wish I could remember what the source of it was but it was uh They were essentially talking about how strange it is that there are so many people that are so anti-human trafficking they're so pro human rights They're so anti slavery. They're so all the the powerful values that we ascribe that we We think of when we think of Western civilization we think of all these beautiful values but then Almost all of them rely on some form of slavery to get their electronics. Oh, yeah It's a Acreans of cobalt in your pocket over there. Yeah mind by actual child Someone had to stick us like literally they're getting it out of the ground digging into the dirt to get it out of the ground We were talking about it on the podcast so they were like Is there a way that this could that? Is there a future that you could foresee where you could buy a phone that is guilt-free? Like if I buy a pair of shoes like I bought a pair of boots from my friend Jocko's company. He's got a company called origin. They make handmade boots and like it's made in a factory and main You can see a tour of the fact that these guys are stitching these things together And it's a real quality boot and I'm like I like that I could buy this. I know where it came from I know that I could see a video of the guys making it like this is a thing that I can feel like I am giving them money They're giving me a product like there's a there's a nice exchange. It feels good I don't feel like that with a phone with a phone. I have this like bizarre disconnect I try to pretend that I'm not buying something that's made in a factory where there's a fucking net around it because so many People jump to their deaths that instead of trying to make things better and say we just we're gonna put nets up Catch these fuckers Put them back to work. Yeah Is there is it possible? We could want that we would all get together and say hey Enough of this shit. Will you make us a goddamn phone that doesn't make me feel like I'm supporting slavery? Yeah, I mean I think you know you're asking may you know too much I think you're asking I think that's the same as asking like will civilization ever decide that it wants to That we collectively want to have like this the same scene in sustainable way of living yeah Same and sustainable and I hope the answer is yes. I think a lot of us do you do right? I do you don't want to buy a slave phone right Yeah, I mean I but okay, so You know I feel like it's difficult to have this conversation. Yeah having conversation about capitalism, right because like ultimately You know what we're talking about is like externalities that the prices of things don't incorporate their true cost You know that like you know, we're destroying the planet for a plastic trinkets and reality television You know like we could have we could have a full conversation if you like Let's let's start with phones though. Let's start with because it when most people know the actual From the origin of the materials like how they're coming Are they getting out of the ground? How they're getting into your phone? How they're getting constructed? how they're getting manufactured and assembled by these poor people When most people hear about it, they they they don't like it. It makes them very uncomfortable But they just sort of go La la la they just plug their ears and keep going and buy the latest iPhone 12 because it's it's cool It's new. What would they do instead? Well if there was an option So like if you have a car that you know is being made by slaves Or a car that's being made in Detroit by union workers Wouldn't you choose the car as long as there are both of equal quality? I think a lot of people would feel good about their choice If they could buy something that well, no, these people are they're given a very good wage They have health insurance and they're taking care of they have a pension plan There's always good things that we would like to to have ourselves these these workers get So you should probably buy that car Why isn't there an option like that for a phone? We looked at this thing called a fair phone Yeah, we're going over it. Can you even fucking buy in America? Like no America is no options for fair Like they'll have them in like Holland and a couple of other European countries Yeah, I mean I think uh Yeah, maybe it's good to you know start with the question of phones I think if you really examined like most of the things in your everyday life There is an apocalyptic aspect to them. Yes, I mean even you know even Agriculture, you know Yes, you know the sugar you put in your cot, you know It's like I've been to the sugar be harvest, you know, it's a apocalyptic It's like uh You know so I think there's just like an aspect of Civilization that we don't usually see you think about And it's a non-conscious Not non-conscious, but I mean conscious Capitalism would be the idea that You are willing you want to make a profit But you only want to make a profit if everything works like the idea of me buying my shoes From origin like knowing okay, these are the guys that make it. This is how they make it I got this a good this film makes me feel good. I like this if there was that with everything Like if you if you buy a home from a guy who you know built the home like this is the man This is the this is the the chief construction guy. These are the carpenters This is the architect. Oh, okay. I got it. This all makes sense Yeah, I mean and I think that's the image that a lot of Companies try to project. Yeah, I mean like You know even Apple will say you know, it's like designed by Apple in California. Sure. Yeah, and mine And I think that's the same as like the architect and the builders that you know You know, but those materials are coming from somewhere That's sure the wood is coming from somewhere. Yeah, and You know, it's not just wood. There's like petric chemicals like That's that that holds the fly chain is a apocalyptic and you're never gonna meet all of those people and so you know, I think sure they're I think it's you know It's typical to be in that market like if you if you want to be in the market of conscious capitalism or whatever because it's a market for limits That it's because it's so easy to just put a green logo on whatever it is that you're creating And no one will ever see the back of a supply chain That's a sad statement What about humans? You know that we're that this is how I mean This is how we always do things If you let us if you leave us alone If there's a way, you know, I mean privacy is so important when it comes to communication with individuals And this is why you created signal, but when you can Sort of hide All the various elements that are involved in all these different process all these different things that we buy and use And then you know as you said, there are pockets apocalyptic Which is a great way of describing it if you were me you're at the ground watching these kids pull cultan The ground in Africa. I mean you would probably feel really sick about your cell phone. Yeah, and Yeah, but I don't think I Think it's a little more complicated to say that just like humans Are terrible no, I don't think humans are terrible. I think humans are great But I think if you put humans together and you give them this diffusion of responsibility that comes from a corporation And then you give them a mandate you have to make as much money as possible every single year And then you have shareholders and you have all all these different factors that will allow them to say well I just work for the company, you know, I'm not it's not my call, you know, I just you know You got the guy carving up a steak saying listen so sorry They have to use slaves, but the capels worth five trillion dollars. We've done a great job for a shareholders At the end of the line followed all the way down to the beginning and you literally have slaves Yeah, I fundamentally agree and I think that that's You know that's Anytime you end up in a situation where Like most people do not have The agency they would need in order to direct their life that they would the way that they would want you know Direct their life so that we're living in a sane, a sustainable way Um that I yeah, I think is a problem And I think that's the situation where now, you know, and honestly, I feel like you know the stuff that we were talking about before of you know people Sort of being mean online Is a reflection of that, you know that That's the power that that's the only power that people have you know, it's like You know like you know the only thing that if the only thing you can do is call someone a name You're gonna call them a name, you know, right and I think that it's like yeah, it's unfortunate but I think it is also unfortunate that most people have civil agency and control over the way that the world works that that's all they have to do and I guess you would say also that the people that do have power that are running these corporations Don't take into account What it would be like to be the person at the bottom of the line To be the person that is there's no there's no discussion. There's no like board meetings like hey guys What do we do on about slavery? Well, no, I'm sure that I'm sure that they do talk about that honestly, but they've done nothing They probably done something or they probably done what they think is something but I think it's Even you know even the CEO of a company is someone who's just doing their job at the end of the day You know that they can't they don't have ultimate control and agency over how it is that Comfortable performance because they are accountable to their shell shareholders that are kind of the board, right? You know that it's like I think there is a tendency for people to look at what's happening particularly with technology today and think that it's the fault of the people you know like the Believers of these companies, you know and You know like I think it goes both ways, you know Slava Gjek Always talks about when you look at the old political speeches You know if you look at the fascist leaders Slavo Gjekt always talks about when you look at the old political speeches. If you look at the fascist leaders, they would give a speech and when there was a moment of applause, they would just sort of stand there and accept the applause because in their ideology, they were responsible for the thing that people were plotting. And if you watched the old communist leaders, like when Stalin would give a speech and he would say something that there would be a moment of applause, he would also applaud. Because in their ideology of historical materialism, they were just agents of history. They were just the tools of the inevitable. It wasn't them. They had just sort of been chosen as the agents of this thing that was an inevitable process. And so they were applauding history. And sometimes when I see the CEOs of tech companies give speeches and people applaud, I kind of feel like they should also be applauding. And that it's not them. Technology has its own agency, its own force that they're the tools of in a way. That's a very interesting way of looking at it. Yeah, they are the tools of it. And at this point, if we look at where we are in 2020, it seems inevitable. It seems like there's just this unstoppable amount of momentum behind innovation and behind just the process of creating newer, better technology and constantly putting it out and then dealing with a demand for that newer, better technology and then competing with all the other people that are also putting out newer, better technology. And then look at what we're doing. We are helping the demise of human beings. Because I feel, and I've said this multiple times, I'm going to say it again, I think that we are the electronic caterpillar that will give way to the butterfly. We don't know what we're doing. We are putting together something that's going to take over. We're putting together some ultimate being, some symbiotic connection between humans and technology or literally an artificial version of life, and artificial, a version of life constructed with silicon and wires and things that we're making. If we keep going, the way we're going, we're going to come up with a technology that is going to be ex-mochena. It's going to pass the Turing test and it's going to literally be something that's better than what we are, a better version of human being. I think we're a ways away. Yeah, we're a ways away. But how many ways? 50 years? The moment that I can put my hand under the automatic sink thing and have the soap come out without waving or then I'll be working. That's simplistic, sir. How dare you? Well, here's a good example. The Turing test is the Turing test is if someone sat down with like an ex-mochena. Remember that the joke was one of my all-time favorite movies, where the coder has brought in to talk to the woman he falls in love with the robot lady. And she passes the Turing test because he's in love with her. I mean, he really can't differentiate in his mind that as a woman. That's not a robot. Was it Alan Turing? Was the gentleman's name? Alan Turing. Alan Turing. That came up with the Turing test. You know, he was a gay man in England in the 1950s when it was illegal to be gay. And they chemically castrated him because of that. And he wound up killing himself. That's only 70 years ago. Oh, yeah. This fucking insane. I mean, just think that this man back then was thinking there is going to be a time where we will have some kind of a creation, where we imitate life, the current life that we're aware of, where we're going to make a version of it that's going to be indistinguishable from the versions that are biological. And that very guy by whatever twisted ideas of what human beings should or shouldn't do, whatever expectations of culture at the time is forced to be chemically castrated ones of committing suicide. Just by the hand of humans, fucking strange man, like really strange. I mean, worse than strange man. Oh, yes. Horrible. But I mean, but so bizarre that this is the guy that comes up with the test of like how do we know when something is, when it passes, when you have an artificial person that passes for a person. And then what kind of rights do we give this per? What is it? Like, what is it? Like if it has emotions, what if it cries? Are you allowed to kick it? You know, like, what do you do? Like, that's, but I made it. I turned it on. I could fucking torture it. But you can't. It's screaming. It's in agony. Don't do that. Yeah. I mean, I, you know, I don't think about this stuff that often, but it is, you know, it's an in empirical test, right? So it's like, it's a way to avoid having to define what consciousness is, right? It's just kind of strange where conscious beings and we don't actually really even know what that means. Right. And so instead we have some empirical test words just sort of like, well, if you can't tell the difference, you know, without being able to see it, then, then we'll just call that. I think that is really a lot closer than we think. I think that's, I think that's 50 years. I think that if everything goes well, I think I'm going to be a 103 year old man on my dying bed being taken care of by robots. And I'm going to feel real fucked up about that. I'm going to be like, oh my God, I can't believe this. I'm going to leave. And then all the people that I knew that are live, they're the last of the people. This is it. The robots are going to take over. They're going to be robots. They're going to come up with some cool name for them. Yeah. I mean, I think that there's a lot of, um, most of what I see in like the artificial intelligence world right now is not really intelligence. You know, it's, uh, it's just matching. You know, it's like you show a model, an image of 10 million cats. And then you can show it an image and it will be like, I predict that this is a cat. And then you can show it an image of a truck. And it'll be like, I predict this is not a cat. And I don't, I think there's one way of looking at it that's like, well, you just do that with enough things and enough times and that's what intelligence is. Um, but I kind of hope not. And I, you know, the way that, the way that it's being approached right now, I think is also dangerous in a lot of ways because what we're doing is just feeding information about the world into these models and that just encodes the existing biases and problems with the world into the things that we're creating. And, you know, that I think has negative results. But I mean, it's true. Like the ecosystem is moving and it's advancing whatever. And I think the thing that I think is unfortunate is that like right now that ecosystem, this sort of like really capital driven investment startup sort of ecosystem has a monopoly on like groups of young people trying to do something ambitious together in the world. And in the same way that I think it's unfortunate that like grad school has monopoly on groups of people learning things together. And so part of what we're trying to do different with signal is it's a nonprofit. So because we want to be for something other than profit. And so we're trying to like explore a different way of like groups of people, you know, doing something mildly ambitious. Has anyone come along going, no, it's a nonprofit. Would you like to sell? Well, you can't do that. It's like, nothing to sell. It's kind of amazing though that you guys have figured out a way to create like basically a better version of iMessage that you could use on Android. Because one of the big complaints about Android is the lack of any encrypted messaging services. And we're just good messaging services. Yeah, they've just recently come out with their own version of iMessage, but it kind of sucks. You can't do group chats. There's a lot of things you can't do with it. And it's encrypted. But it's the new met. And I don't think it's rolled out everywhere too, right? It's not everywhere. I don't think it's rolled out at all actually. Oh, you could get a beta, so it does. Yeah, I don't know what the, right. So it's like, you know, Android, so Google for Android makes an app called messages, which is just the standard SMS texting app. And they put that on the phones that they make like pixel and stuff like that, you know. And then there's the rest of the ecosystem. You know, there's like, you know, Samsung devices, Huawei devices, and all this stuff. And it sort of, it depends, you know, what's on those things. And so they've been trying to move from this very old standard called SMS that you mentioned before to this new word thing called RCS, which actually I don't know what that stands for. I think in my mind, I was thinking of it standing for too little too late, but they're trying to move to that. And so they're doing that on the device, the part of the ecosystem that they control, which is the devices that they make and sell. And they're trying to get other people on board as well. And they originally RCS didn't have any facility for intended encryption. And they're actually using our stuff, the signal protocol in the new version of RCS that they're shipping. So I think they've announced that, but I don't know if it's on or not. I have two bones to pick with you guys. Yeah. Two things that I don't necessarily like. One, when I downloaded signal and I joined basically everyone that I'm friends with who was also on signal got a message that I'm on signal. So you've ratted me out. You've ratted me out to all these people that are in my contact list. Why do you want it to be difficult for people to communicate with you privately? Well, me personally, because there's a lot of people that have my phone number that I wish didn't have my phone number. And now I'll send the gun a message from me that I'm on signal. Yeah. And then they send me a message, hey, I'd like this from you. I want you to do that for me. How about call me about this? I got a project. I just wish you didn't like rat me out. I wish there was like a way that you could say, do you want everyone to know that you just joined signal? Yes or no? I'd say no. Another one, those little dot, dot dots, the ellipsis. Yeah. Yeah. Can you shut that off? Because I don't want anybody to know that I'm responding to a text. You can turn it off. Can you turn it off? Oh, okay. So it's in the settings? Yeah. Privacy settings. Oh, try typing indicators. You can turn it off. Oh, you can see it's you can turn off. That's a big problem with aye message. People get mad at you. Like if you see the dot dots and then there's no message. Yeah. You were going to respond. And then you didn't like, why don't you just relax? Just go about your life and pretend that I didn't text you back yet. Because I will. But it's like the dot dot dots, like people are going to go, oh, it's coming. Here comes the message. And then there's no message. Yeah. You can turn that off. You can also turn off reviews. So people don't even know if you've read their message. Yeah, that's good too. Yeah. Yeah. That friend's soccer has it set up so that if you, he texts you, you have 30 minutes, bitch. And then they all disappear. All the messages disappear. He's going to disappear. Yeah. That's kind of sweet. I like that. Yeah. With the, like the discovery question of like can you don't want people to know that you're on signal. It's kind of so we're working on it. But it's a more difficult problem that you might imagine because you want some people to know that you're on. It's like you want some text. So you want nobody to know. Well, me personally, I have a unique set of problems that comes with anything that I do, like with messaging and stuff. It's like I just just too, I have no too many people. I've changed my number once a year. It's just I have multiple phone numbers. Yeah. I got a lot of problems. Yeah. But this is just a unique problem with me that is like all of a sudden I'm getting like how the fuck does he know? And then I had to ask someone to go, oh no, when you sign up, it sends everybody on your contact list that's on signal. A message that says you're on signal. Yeah. Oh. Well, we don't send that actually. Just as a, I know you don't care. But we don't actually know who your contacts are. Right. We know those though. The app does. The app on your phone does. And it doesn't even send a message to those people. It's just that those people know that those people know your phone number and that app now knows that that phone number. Is on signal. Did you do that just to get more people to use signal? Was it an idea of the reason why? Like why when you sign up for signal does it send all the other people in your contact list on signal a message? A lot of people like it. So a lot of people like knowing who that they can communicate with. And so we're trying to make so and the other thing is like we tried to square the actual technology with the way that it appears to work to people. Right. So like right now with most technology, it seems like you send a message and the person you can see it is the person you receive, you sent the message to the internal recipient. And that's not how it actually works. And so like a lot of what we're trying to do is actually just square the way the technology actually works with what it is that people perceive. And so like fundamentally right now, you know, signal is based on phone numbers if you register with your phone number. Like some people are going to know that they can contact you on signal. It's very difficult to make it so that they can't, you know, that like if we didn't do that, you know, they could hit the compose button and see just that they could send you a message. You know, they would just see even the list of contacts that they can send messages to, you know. And then if we like didn't display that, like they could just try and send you a message and see whether like a message goes through it. You know, like it's always possible to like detect whether it is that you're on signal the way that things are currently designed. It's interesting also how it works so much differently with Android than it does with iMessage like with Android it also sent in as an SMS. I noticed that I can use sick. That was my main messaging app on Android and it'll send SMS or it'll send a signal message. It doesn't do that with I with iPhones. Yeah Apple doesn't like. Yeah, I found that would be interesting because I tried to send people messages. I thought it would just send it as an SMS and it didn't. We would if we could but Apple just sent it to the ether loud. It doesn't allow it interesting because Apple scared of you. Say it. Say it. They're fucking scared. No, I mean, they should be Apple is the better version of what they've got. How about that? I agree, but yeah, I mean, they they have a much more complicated answer, but maybe you could just still adopt it. You guys need to just develop your own version of air drop and then no one will need Apple ever again. That's what's holding people back like a universal air drop. Air drop keeps a lot of fucking people on Apple. You think? Oh, it's the best. You make a video like a long video like a couple minutes long and you can just air drop it to me. Whereas if you text it to me, especially if I have an Android phone up, it becomes this disgusting version of the on sample. It looks terrible. Yeah, no, it's true. Yeah, photographs are not too bad. I think that it does a down sample photograph as well. but not too bad. It's like you could look at it. It looks like a good photograph. But video is just gone off. It's embarrassing when someone sends you a video and you have it on an Android phone. You're like, what the fuck did you send me? This is terrible. What did you take this with? A flip phone from the 90s? That's so bad. But I mean, a lot of that is like, I think the reason that the reason why it is that way is kind of interesting to me, which is, you know, it's like these are protocol. You know, it's like when you're just using a normal SMS message on Android, you know, that was like this agreement that phone carriers made with each other in like, you know, whatever before that way. 96? Yeah, exactly. And then have they've been unable to change the way that it works since then because you have to get everyone to agree. Right. And is Apple holding back some sort of a universal standard because if they did have a universal standard that everyone would have this option to use, you could use a Samsung phone or a Google phone, you could use anything and everybody would be able to message you clearly without a problem. Like one of the things that holds people back is if you switch from an iPhone to an Android phone, you lose all those iMessage. Yeah. Yeah, they're probably doing that intentionally because they fucking weasels. They want people to get out of the way. I don't think I would have money. Like Jesus Christ. It's just never enough. That's never enough. That is the problem, right? Yeah. And I think, I mean, it's like, I think the thing that everyone's worried about right now with Apple is like, you know, Apple, you know, when I said before, like bad business models produce bad technology. You know, thus far Apple's business model is much better than, you know, Google or Facebook or. Amazon or, you know, like their business is predicated on selling phones, selling hardware. Yeah. And that means that they can think a little bit more thoughtfully about the way that their software works than other people. And I think what people are concerned about is that the, that that business model is going to change. You know, that they've, they're, you know, approaching an asymptote of how many phones that they can sell and so now they're looking at like software. You know, they're like, what if we had our own search engine, what if we had our own thing, what if we had our own thing? And the moment that that starts to happen, then they're sort of, you know, moving in the direction of the rest of Big Tech, which, you know, who knows how they do it about that. That's what I think people are concerned about. They've done a better job at protecting your privacy, though, in terms of like, particularly like Apple maps, like the map app is far superior in terms of sharing your information. Then say like the Google maps. But the argument you could make is that Google maps is superior product because they share that information. Like Google maps is also ways now, right? Like they bought ways, which is fantastic. Let's, you know, where the cops are, you know, there's an accident up at hand. All kinds of shit, right? But Apple maps was not that good. It's, I use it because I like the ethic behind it. I like their idea behind it. They, they delete all the information after you make, you know, if you go to a destination, it's not saving it, sending it to a server and making sure it knows like, you know, what was there and what wasn't there and how well you, you travel and sharing information. They're not doing that. They're not sharing your information, right? We don't know. You know, it's like, I'm sure that they have a policy. I've ever read the policy and the policy says that. But supposedly, you know, you know, but you're also sort of, you're still in the world of like trying to make computer secure, right? You know, it's like, there's probably data of the data is probably accumulating somewhere and maybe people can compromise those places, you know, we don't know. But I, and for sure, the intent behind us offered that they have constructed, I think has been much better than a lot of the other players in big tech. I think the concern is just that as that software becomes a larger part of their bottom line that that might change. I wonder if they can figure out a way to have an, I don't give a fuck phone or I care phone. Like, you want to have an, I don't give a fuck phone. This phone is like, who knows what was making it. But look, it's really good. It's got a 100 megapixel camera and all this jazz and 5,000 milliamp battery and then you've got an I care phone and I care phone. It's like, like an iPhone 10. But what's the, what's different about the I care phone? I care phone, you get like a clear line of distinction. You get, you get a real clear path. This is where we got our materials. Oh, I see these are the people that are making it. This is how much they're getting paid. Everyone is unionized. They're all getting healthcare. This is, they'll have 401k plans. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It costs a little bit more. I think not as good. If you, if you truly encapsulated all of the social costs with producing that phone, I think we cost more than a little bit more. How much more do you think we can. I think some astronomical number, you know, that it's like that the, you know, it's like it's not like I'm sure Apple would prefer not to have child slaves mining cobalt for the batteries that are in their fun. Is that a thing you can say when a company's worth as much as most countries? Like they have so much cash. Yeah. Can you really say that they would rather not use slaves? No, I'm sure they're like, I don't want to grow. I only have 14 trillion. What am I going to do? What am I going to do? I need slaves. I need someone to dig the, the cold. Well, okay. We'll also want to come with them. But it would. I do. Well, first of all, I could never beat them. It would never work. But if I was, I would say, hey, why don't we open up a factory in America? And why don't we open up the cobalt? Why don't we get all of our cobalt from recycled phones? Is that possible? Because that's good question. I think that's what the fair phones trying to do, right? Is it using all recycled materials? Yeah. I mean, I don't. Any image I've seen in electronic recycling is equally apocalyptic. You know, there's just piles of shit like in some next to some lake in China where people are. You're bumming me out, man. How about we? But I think if you were the CEO of Apple and you were like, this is a priority we're going to spend, you know, however many trillions of dollars it takes to do this. Your shareholders go, hey, fuck face. You're fired. Yeah. Out. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You would have to be the grand poo-ba of Apple. You have to be the ultimate ruler. But it's not like even then if you were just like, you know, I'm willing to take the hit, you know, I'm going to do no one can ask me whatever. I'm the grand poo-ba, you know, then it's like your share price plummets which means that your employee retention plummets because those people are also working for the equity. Right. Yeah. So it's like other options and then they get pushed away by these other companies. And like dirty companies come and steal your clean employees. It's what Apple's website says now. Says they're committed to one day sourcing a hundred percent. Look at that. Completely recycled every bit as advanced. One committed to one day sourcing one day. We're planning on the year 30,000. I mean, you know, it's like I don't. They're not 100 percent. They're not like sitting around twirling their mustaches. You know what I mean? It's just like everyone that likes good things and not bad things. Maybe they are. Let me read that again, Jamie. This is a hundred percent recyclable and renewable materials across all of our products and packaging because making doesn't have to mean taking from the planet. Oh, come on. You guys. It's like Nike. It's the same thing too. Right. They're all committed to black lives matter and all these social justice causes and they're using slave labor too. You know, aren't they in China? They're using slave labor to make nikes. So, back to that thing. What are they trying to do? They have like this row. I remember seeing a row about they have that can do like, a lot of it on the planet right out of the box. The piece is out of it at a very fast rate than like probably human hands can. So that's why I was trying to dig through here but I found that. Well, that would be good. I think that's the robot. That's the piece taking row about. This is Daisy. Don't name her. Name her. You got a problem. You got a 20, 30. You know, 20, 30 means transitioning hundreds of our manufacturing suppliers to 100% renewable sources of electricity. Well, that's interesting. If they can actually do that, 100% resource or use all the, if they can figure out a way to do that and to have recyclable materials and have all renewable electricity, whether it's wind or solar, if they could really figure out how to do that, I think that would be pretty amazing. But who's going to put it together? Are they going to still use slaves to put it together? I mean, I guess the people that are working at Foxconn are technically slaves, but would you want your child to work there? You know? Yeah, I mean, I think you can say that about a lot of the aspects of our economy, though. You know, who would willingly go into a coal mine? Yes. Right. Yeah. You know, there's some element of coercion to a lot of what keeps the world spending. Right. And that's the, when you get into these insidious arguments about our conversations about conspiracies, like conspiracies to keep people impoverished. They're like, well, why would you want to keep people impoverished? Well, who's going to work in the coal mines? You're not going to get wealthy, highly educated people that work in the coal mines. You need someone to work in the coal mines. So what do you do? What you do is you don't, you don't help anybody get out of these situations. So you'll always have the ability to draw from these impoverished communities, there's poor people that live in Appalachia or wherever their coal miners are coming from. Like, there's not a whole lot of ways out. Like, I have a friend who came from Kentucky, and he's like, the way he described to me, it was man, you've never seen poverty like that. Like, people don't want to concentrate on those people because it's not as glamorous as some other forms of poverty. It goes, but those communities are so poor. Like, 40 million Americans, right? Yeah. But the Americans are living in poverty. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if that conspiracies accurate, but that's the one that people always want to do. the one that people always want to draw from, right? They always want to. I mean, I don't think you need a conspiracy, you know, you just have poor people. You have poor people. The structural forces. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's, that's why it's rare that a company comes along and has a business plan like signal, where they're like, we're going to be nonprofit. We're going to create something that we think is of extreme value to human beings, just to civilization in general, the ability to communicate anonymously or at least privately. But this is a, it's a very rare thing that you guys have done that we decided to do this and to do it in a nonprofit way. Like, what was the decision that led up to that and then was there any, how many people were involved? Now. Yeah. Okay. Well, now there's, you know, 20 something people. What do you think that's a lot of little? Um, I think that's a little. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think, you know, it's always interesting talking to people. Like a lot of times I'll, I'll meet somebody and they're like, oh, yeah, you're the person who did like signal or something. Like, oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah. They're like, okay. Cool. What, what are you doing now? Yeah. And I'm like, oh, I'm still working on signal. You know, they're like, oh, what is there like another signal that you're going to do? You're going to do like signal to or something. Yeah. Like, I think it's hard for people to understand that there's, that software's never finished, you know, that there's this, um, which is something that I really envy about like the kind of creative work that someone like you does. You know, that like I am the artist, musicians, writers, poets, painters, you know, people who can create something and be done. You know, that like, you can record an album today and 20 years later you can listen to that album and it'll be just good. You know, it's like, uh, software's never finished. And if you stop, it'll just like float away like dandelion. What happens if you stop? The software is not, um, it's very hard to explain this. It's not. It doesn't exist in isolation. It's a part of the ecosystem of, of like all software. And that ecosystem is moving and it's moving really fast. You know, there's a lot of money behind it, a lot of energy in it. And if you aren't moving with it, it will just, you know, stop working. And also it's like, you know, a project like this is not just the software that runs on your phone, but the service of like, you know, moving the messages around on the internet and that requires a little bit of care and attention. And if you're not doing that, then it'll dissipate. And if you're doing something non-profit, the way you're doing it, how do you pay everybody? Like, how does it work? Yeah. Well, okay. So, you know, the history of this was, um, I think before the internet really took over our lives and the way that it has, there were the kind of social spaces for people to experiment with different ideas outside of the context of their everyday lives. You know, like art projects, punk round of ooze, experimental gatherings, the embers of art movements. You know, that these spaces existed and were things that I found myself in an a part of and they were like important to me in my life. You look like a dude who'd go to Burning Man. Actually, I am not a dude that goes to Burning Man. Maybe you're missing it. Maybe I've been once. I went in 2000, I think. Yeah. And a really adopter. Well, it's funny because at the time that I want people like, oh man, it's not like you used to be. And now if people were like, if you bet, I was like, I won't once in 2000. Like what? really adopt her. I get, well, it's funny because at the time that I want people like, oh man, it's not like used to be what he likes. And now people are like, if you bet, I was like, I want to do that. I was like, wow, wow, that's what it was like the real deal. I don't think so. It's one of those things where it's like, you know, there's like day one and then on day two, they're like, that's not like day one. Yeah, of course. Yeah, of course. But yeah, I don't know. Those things, those spaces were important to me and like important part of my life. And as more of our life started to be taken over by technology, you know, me and my friends felt like those spaces were missing online, you know? And so we wanted to demonstrate that it was possible to create spaces like that. And there had been a history of people thinking about cryptography in particular. And which is kind of funny in hindsight. So in the like 80s, so the history of cryptography is actually not long, like at least in outside of the military, you know? And you know, it really starts in the 70s. And there was some really important things that happened then. And in the 80s, there was this person who was just sort of this lone maniac who was like writing a bunch of papers about cryptography during a time when it wasn't actually that relevant because there was no internet, you know, the applications for these things were harder to imagine. And then in the late 80s, there was this guy who wrote a retired engineer who discovered the papers that this maniac David Chom had been writing and was really... Is he doing this in isolation or was he a part of a project or anything? No, I think David Chom was, I think it's an academic. I'm actually, I'm embarrassed that I don't know. He did a lot of the notable work on using the primitives that had already been developed. And he had a lot of interesting ideas. And there's this guy who was a retired engineer, his name was Tim Bay, who was kind of a weird character. And he found these papers by David Chom was really enchanted by what they could represent for a future. And he wanted to write like a sci-fi novel about... There was sort of predicated on a world where cryptography existed and there was a future where the internet was developed. And so he wrote some notes about this novel and he titled the notes, the crypto-anarchy manifesto. And he published the notes online and people got really into the notes. And then he started a mailing list in the early 90s called The Cypher Punk's Mailing List. And all these people started, joined the mailing list and they started communicating about what the future was going to be like and how they needed to develop cryptography to live their crypto-anarchy future. And at the time, it's strange to think about now, but cryptography was somewhat illegal. It was regulated as a munition. Really? Yeah. So if you wrote a little bit of crypto code and you sent it to your friend in Canada, that was the same as shipping stinger missiles across the border to Canada. Wow. Did people actually go to jail for cryptography? There were like some high-profile legal cases. Nobody... I don't know of any situations where people were tracked down as like munitions dealers or whatever, but it really hampered what people were capable of doing. So people got really creative. There's some people who wrote some crypto software called Pretty Good Privacy, PGP. And they printed it in a book, like a MIT press book in a machine readable font. And then they're like, this is speech. This is a book. It's like, I had my first amendment right to print this book and to distribute it. And then they shipped the books to Canada and other countries and stuff. And then people on those places scanned it back in to computers. And they were able to make the case that they were legally allowed to do this because the first amendment right. And people... Other people moved to Anguila and started writing code in Anguila and like shipping around the world. There were a lot of people who were fervently interested. Why Anguila? Because it's close to the United States and there were no laws there about fursing. I think something in the people's place. They have like three cases of COVID there ever. Oh really? Yeah. It's a really interesting place. I used to work down there. Really? Okay. International traffic and arms regulation. It's the United States regulatory regime to restrict and control the export of defense and military related technologies to safeguard US national security and further US foreign policy objectives. I don't know. Yeah, they were closed and Anguila was closed until like November. They wouldn't let anybody in. And yeah, if you want to go there, they have like... I was reading all these crazy restrictions. I have to get COVID tested and you have to apply and then when you get there, they test you when you get there because they have a... Keep it in real. They have a no desk. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, that's cool. Yeah, I like Anguila. It's an interesting place. Yeah, this was... This was... I was reading their inviting companies to come move here. Like come work here. Oh, interesting. Yeah. We'll test the shit out of you and you can't go anywhere but come here. It's beautiful. It's beautiful. I used to work on boats down there. Yeah. Which do on boats? I was like really... I don't know. I, for a while, was like really into sailing and I had a commercial license. I was moving boats around and stuff. My pants lived in a sailboat for a while. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah, they just decided to just check out and this was like... I want to say like early 2000s somewhere around there. They just lived on a sailboat for a few years. My mom got tired of it. They go around the world. They went. They were in the Bahamas. Yeah. They were all around like that part of the world. And they were in California for a little while on their boat. Yeah. They just decided like it was just live on a boat for a while. Yeah. It's pretty crazy. I discovered sailing by accident where I was like working on a project with a friend in the early 2000s and we were looking on Craigslist for something unrelated and we saw a boat that was for sail for $4,000. And I thought a boat was like a million dollars. Right. The sailboats are forth. And this is just some listing. There's probably even cheaper boats. And so we got really into it and we discovered that you can go to any marine in North America and get a boat for free. Like every marine has a lean sail dock on it where people stop paying their slip fees and the boats are just derelict and abandoned and they put it on these docks. You got a boat for free? Yeah. They have an auction. There's usually like a minimum bid of 50 bucks or whatever. And most times it doesn't get bit on and they chop the boat up and throw it away. Really? And if you show it off, functional boat. Oh, functional. That's a problem, right? You know, you got to maintain the shit out of boats. Yeah. So, you know, if you put some work into it, though, you can get it going. And so we started doing that. We were like, you know, getting boats, fixing them up, sailing this far as we could. And then eventually I got a commercial license and started sailing other people's boats. Wow. And so, you know, it's just on a whim of how much is a boat cost? You can get a boat for four grand whole. You shit. Next thing you know, you're working on boats. Yeah. I mean, I was, it's a really, it's a whole world. You know, it's just like, you know, finding that link on Craigslist was like, you know, opening a door to another reality, right? Where it's like, yeah. Because it's pretty amazing, you know, you know, me and some friends used to sail around the Caribbean and, you know, the feeling of like, you know, you pull up an anchor and you sail like, you know, 500 miles to see the country or whatever. And you get there and you drop the anchor and you're just like, we, it was just the wind. The wind that took, you know, like there was no engine, there was no fuel. It's just the wind, you know, you catch fish and, you know, it's just like, if you want to go real old school, you got to use one of them. What are those fucking sex standards for us? Do you use one of those? No, you didn't. Did you really? I was like really into like, you know, no electronics, like it's just complicated, you know, they're expensive or whatever. So we had a taffrey a log. You see what this is? No, it's like a little propeller on a string that you connect to a gauge. And as it turns, the gauge keeps track of how far you've traveled. What? Yeah. So it's like, you know, propeller on a string. So it's just a thing that turns a string at a constant rate depending on how fast you're moving. So it can gauge how much distance you've traveled. So are the, is the string marked? No, no, no. Like it's just a constant length that's, it's always spinning and it's always turning the gauge. And it reads a number so it's just like how many miles of how many nautical miles you've traveled. So then you're just like, okay, well, we've started here and then we headed, you know, on this heading and, you know, we did that and we traveled 10 months. We must be here. You know, and then, you know, once a day you can take a site with your sex tent and then you can, you know, do some dead reckoning with the compass. Wow. Dude, you went old school. Yeah, I, I once had a job actually. Who did you do this with? Just friends. Yeah. You gotta have some fucking committed friends because like the friends had a, you know, you know, you gotta be all on the same page because they could be like, hey man, what's going to fucking cheap. Yeah, so you guys are assholes. I don't want to die. I'm not going to get eaten by a shark. How much food do we have? People die out here, man. This is the ocean. We didn't really have any money. So it was like, you know, it wasn't like a much of a, I mean, we, you know, it's like splitting the perspective, like, you know, we took a trip to, uh, through the Caribbean once from Florida. The way that we got to Florida was like riding freight trains to the, you know, we like hopped trains together. You know, it's like this was like low travel. You guys were hobos. No, but we, you know, that's a whole bone move. It was low bagger for sure. But like, yeah, I was also like, uh, just really ideological about it. Like, um, I had a job once in the Caribbean that was like, um, I was almost like a camp counselor, basically, whether it was this camp that was like a sailing camp, but it was like 13 teenagers, mostly from North America, showed up in St. Martin and then got on a boat with me and another woman my age. And we were like the adults. And then it was just like we sailed from St. Martin to train a dad over the course of six weeks with these like 13 kids on a 50 foot sailboat. Who left their kids with you? That's what I want to know. Yeah. Was this you? Oh, yeah. So we made a, uh, me and my friends made a video called Hold Fast that was trying to demystify sailing. Well, you've been rocking this whacky hair for a long time. Dude, I know. Me and the other. You know, pandemic. Wow. Uh, well, you had tornadoes out there. Yeah. And you caught fish. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you lived off the fish that you caught, basically. Yeah. Fish, cock. See, weed. So when you prepare, see, we'd do it. You boil it. You get it sharp in your fucking knife, son. I know. That's ridiculous. What do you use in a pencil? Try to kill that poor fish. That's interesting. That's all videos in person. But so thank you for that. Because you kind of did know what you're doing. And here's you with, uh, what are you doing here? You're mapping out where you're at. You're stuck wrecking again. Dead wrecking. That position was 50 miles off. 50 miles off. Yeah. So where you thought you were versus where you actually were, it was 50 miles difference. Yeah. And you're going, how many miles an hour? Very slow. If you're doing really well, you know, you're making five knots, five nautical miles an hour. Five miles an hour. Jesus Christ. So you're walking. You're basically walking on the ocean. Yeah. Yeah. Not walking. Walked. But you never stopped us thinking sail on night. You're a light jog. You're jogging on the ocean. Yeah. I was tiring with these kids. We had like a nice boat. And I just disabled all of the electronics. I like disabled the electric anchor. With less. How long was this boat? How long was this boat? This was 50 feet. 50 feet with 14 kids, you said? I think 13. 50 is a big boat. That's actually a big boat. Yeah. But it doesn't seem like a lot of room for all these kids. Yeah. People are like sleeping on the deck and then the kind of fence. Oh my God. That's insane. Did you feel weird that you're, I mean, you're responsible for their food. You're responsible for making sure they don't fight with each other? Yeah. I mean, I actually enjoy that. I think it was fun. Yeah. Like, so yeah, I have to make it work. There's no other solution. You're on this boat with these kids. Yeah. That's true. Do you still keep in touch with those kids? No. That was sort of like pre-social media. Right. So they're going to reach out to you now. Look at that. I remember that. That was fucking crazy. Can't believe my parents left me with you. I can't believe they did either. So did you have to sign any paperwork or anything like how did you take care of these kids? I'm sure I had to sign something. I don't remember. You don't remember? Yeah. Wow. Was there any time where you were halfway into this trip? You're like, what have I signed up for? Oh, sure. All the time. Yeah. But I never really been in a situation like that either. And who has? I don't know. I don't even have siblings. I don't have siblings. You know, like it's like, oh really? Yeah. But I was pretty, you know, it was interesting. I feel like I learned a lot. And it was, but I was pretty like, tyrannical and a lot of ways. And but you know, a way that I was trying to like encourage, it was fun to see, particularly teenagers who had like a really sort of North American affect about how to be. Just like let all of that go over a few weeks. You know, on the ocean where it's just like, you know, it's just us. We're here. There's nobody else watching. You know, we're sleeping next to each other. You know, it's like the kids just get uncomfortable with themselves. And you know, I would try and like, so I was like, I am really into rock paper scissors. How into it are you? I'm undefeated. So that's possible. So whenever they wanted anything, I would be like, right, rock paper scissors. You know, they would like, can we like do this thing? I'd be like, all right, we'll do rock paper scissors. If you win, you can do this thing. If I win, and then I would like pick the thing that was like their sort of deepest fear, you know, it's like the really shy person had to like write a high coup about every day and then read it aloud at dinner. You know, like the, you know, the person who was like really into like having like a manicure like wasn't allowed to shave her legs for the rest of the trip, you know, like that kind of thing. And so then by the end of it, it was just like, you know, everyone had lost, you know, everyone was like reading the high coup at dinner and do, you know, how are you so good at rock paper scissors? It's just, you know, scale, muscle intuition. Intuition. Can we play right now? You want to play? I only play for stakes. Okay. When do I play for? Okay. How about if I win, I do the programming on your show for a week. No. That's worth a lot of money. You can fuck off. What kind of money? What do you think I'm going to say? I don't understand like the ads or whatever. We're saying we're like programming like who's going to be on? That's not possible. We're booked up months and months and events. You were so confident. No, just not. No, no, no. That's ridiculous to flip a coin on that. There's no chance. I mean, what would be cool? Because then you make me have, Congress, listen, the whole reason why the show works is because I talk to people that I want to talk to. That's why it works. Yeah. The only way that's something to play this game. That's not a risk. That's just one week of life. No, that's abandoning the show. No, you can bring some assholes on here that I want to talk to and I'm like, what am I doing? No, impossible. All right. Do you think that there's something of equivalent value? No. There's nothing. Nothing that I can do. Nothing that you could give me that would be worth a week of programming on the show. What are you going to give me? You would have to give me a spectacular amount of money. I sent you a, like, if you want it, but that's the only way I would be, like the only way, like if you have put a monetary equivalent to that, it would have to be a spectacular amount of money for me to let someone else program the show. I've never let anybody do that before. Not even for one day. No. Those are the big, one of the big things about doing the show on Spotify. They could have no impact at all on who gets on, no suggestions, no nothing. The only way it works. What was up with that dude in the suit outside with the clipboard that was telling me from Spotify? Oh, he's from the government. He's the CIA. No, he's no one out there. He's joking. But the only way the show works, I think the way it works is I have to be interested in talking to the people. That's it. So it's, it has to be, I get a, like, all these suggestions for guests. I go, oh, that guy seems cool. That might be a, what if I read up on the guy for a week, I give you the list of suggestions. No. No input. No, no, not. That's a ridiculous. It's just, yeah. Okay. Impossible. How about five bucks? No. No. No, it's got to be. Come on, man. 20 bucks. 20 bucks. Money is off the table. Money's off the table. Get that. All right. Sounds like someone scared to lose at rock paper scissors. It sounds like someone else is scared to lose. No, you're asking me for something that's ridiculous. You don't have anything, you don't have anything that's worth a week of programming on the show. You don't have it. That's rough. It doesn't exist. No, it doesn't, it literally doesn't exist. Like there's nothing that you can have that you could offer me that I couldn't buy myself. I'll make, I'll make, I'll make it be interesting. No, no, no. You can't, no. All right. All right. Fine. But that doesn't do anything for me. You have, if you win, you would name your thing. I don't have a stake. There's nothing I want from you. That, what you asked for me is crazy thing. Yeah, we can't play rock paper scissors. I don't know. Interesting. Anyway, we were talking about something else for all of this. We were talking about a crypto, crypto, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, I'm telling you with children. I'm telling you with children. Well, first we were talking about inguilos and the fact that we were going to inguilos. Yeah. So how did you learn how to do all this stuff? Was it trial by fire? You're learning how to use all this, I mean, out on a call, ancient equipment, but mechanical equipment to figure out. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Secret is to begin to start. Yeah. I mean, so, where the fuck does one learn how to operate a sextant and then navigate in the ocean? Uh, yeah. Just, I would, you know, I started, you know, me and friends got a boat and we started fixing it up and making a lot of mistakes. And then, you know, started taking some trips and then lost. Yeah. I got a lot of, I took a solo trip from San Francisco to Mexico and back on a little 27 foot boat with no engine. And whoa. That's when I went to that take a few months. And the way you did it, did you stay close? I can see the, there's the, the shore. So if everything fucks up, I can kind of swim. Yeah. Well, no, you can't swim. I learned that lesson too. No. Why? Um, I mean, the closest I ever came to death in my life was just in the bay. In San Francisco Bay, I was on a boat that capsized and I was probably 2,000 yards away from shore. And I almost drowned. And I, I mean, I didn't make it to shore. And, yeah, it's just the water so cold, you know. You didn't make it to shore. No. Yeah. It's a long story. I was like, um, I, a friend of mine was living in San he wanted to learn how to sail. And I was like, you know, you should do, you should get like a little boat, like a little sailing thing, you know. And then you can just anchor it like off the shore in this area that no one cares about. And, you know, you could just sort of experiment with this little boat. And so he started looking on Craigslist and he found this boat is for sail for 500 bucks up in, up in the North Bay. And every time we called the phone number, we got an answering machine that was like, hello, you've reached Dr. Ken Thompson honorary. I'm unable to take your call, you know. And we were like, what is that? Honorary? It's a big doctor. Is he like a judge? Carabra? You know, like, what is it? Yeah. And so finally we got in touch with this guy, we go out there. And it's this, it's the kind of situation where like we pull up and there's like the trailer that the boat's supposed to go on and it's just full of scrap metal. Oh boy. And, you know, and you know, this guy comes out. Oh yeah, this is the trailer. Um, we were going to do a metal run. But if you want the boat, you know, we'll take the metal off, you know, and we're like, okay, you know, it needs like taking us around. He's like, okay, the master's over here and it's like, under some leaves, you know, it's like, and then, you know, the hole is in the water here and it's, he has like a dock behind his house and the tide is all the way out. The boat's just sitting in the mud, you know. And I'm like, well, how would we get this out of here? He's like, oh, you'd have to come back at a different time. You know, and then you take it over there. And we're like, you told us to come now, like at this time. You know what? Anyway, so we go through all this thing, you know, and any, and you know, my friend who knows nothing about us is like, all right, Moxie, like what do you think? You know, should I get this? And I was like, okay, oh, and we were like, so what's it? So doctor of what he's like, oh, self declared, you know, we're like, oh, okay. He's a self declared doctor. Honorary self declared doctor. Can you can do that? I guess why not? It's just an answer to me. Jamie. Yes. Doctor. Yes. I think we should become doctor. I just became one. I tried that for a while actually. Yeah, did you really? Yeah, I mean, I never went to college. Did Hunterist Thompson ever get an honorary degree? Or did he just call himself Doctor Hunterist Thompson? Because he was calling himself Doctor. Same drink. Hunterist Thompson's pulling up how often I was doing this lately. Well, Bill Cosby became a doctor for a little bit. They took it back though. How'd you know he fucked up? Yeah, yeah. It take back your fake doctor degree. So this guy was like, you know, my friend's like, what do you think, Max? And I'm like, all right, Doctor Ken, I would have to consider it. I'm not sure that I would do it, but I would consider taking this boat for free. I'd have to think about it, but I would consider that, you know, and he's like, I might be a minimal to that. You know, so we've gone from like, you know, $500 to free. And so we got this boat, you know, and it was something we had to do with the metal and all this stuff. We got the boat and we were just trying to do like a little, we're just trying to anchor it. Did you bring live-fests? Yeah, I was wearing a PFD, type two PFD. And we took it to this boat ramp and it was the end of the day. And the wind was blowing kind of hard and the conditions weren't that good, but I was like, how are you doing this little thing, this little maneuver? And we were in two boats. I built this little wooden rowing boat and my friend was going to go out and that with one anchor. And I was going to sail out the boat. Yeah, I've applied what it's a stitching glue. But yeah. But it, you know, not the sturdy vessel. So, and so, you know, he's going to go out in this little rowboat and I was going to sail out this, this little catamaran. And we had two anchors and we're going to anchor and then we're going to get in the rowboat and row back. And it seemed a little windy. You know, I got in the boat first and I got out around this pier and was hit by the full force of the wind and realized that it was blowing like 20 knots. It was way, way too much for what we were trying to do. But I had misrigged part of the boat so it took me a while to get it turned around. And by the time I got it turned around, my friend had rode out around the pier and he got hit by the force of the wind and just got blown out into the bay. And so he's rowing directly into the wind and moving backwards. Oh, shit. And I was like, and I'm on this little hoey cat and it was moving so fat. Like it was way too windy to be sailing this thing. I've got just my clothes on and I don't have a wetsuit on or anything like that. I have a life jacket and just my clothes and we don't have a radio. We're unprepared. It's starting to get dark. We don't have a light. And I'm sailing back and forth trying to like help my friend. And it got to the point where I was like, all right, I'm just going to tack over. I'm going to sail up to this boat that was called the sea louse. Sail up to the sea louse. I'm going to get my friend off of it. We're just going to abandon it. And then we're going to sail this hoey cat back if we can. And so I go to turn around and right as I'm turning around, a gust of wind hit the boat and capsized it before I could even know that it was happening. You know, just it's just like, it's one moment you're on the boat and the next moment you're in the water. You know, and the water is like 50 degrees. Like super. It like is a shock, you know, it hits you. And the boat was a little messed up in a way where it I couldn't write it. It it capsized and then the whole it it capsized all the way in and sank. And so it was floating like shit, like you know, three feet underwater basically. And so I'm in the water, but I'm like still I'm like a little bit out of the water, but like in the water. And you know, I had a cell phone that just immediately was busted. And I look at my friend and he's always away now. And he didn't see me. And I was, you know, yelling as loud as I could, but the wind is blowing 20 knots. And it just, you know, you can't hear each other. You know, just takes your takes your voice away. And he just, I mean, I was screaming. I was waving. He wasn't wearing his glasses. And he just very slowly rode away. Oh my God. And so then I was just like floating there starting to get dark. He rode away. Did he notice that your boated capsized? No, he didn't even see me. He thought that I had just sailed somewhere else. You know, because in his mind, he was I was the person with the experience. You still talked to this dude. Yeah, all the time. I feel like you motherfucker. I don't blame him. His mind he was the person that was in trouble. Right. And he thought I just sailed somewhere else. That's crazy. Yeah. I was like, oh, I'm scared of that. Yeah. And then, you know, it basically got dark. I could see the shore. It wasn't far away. There's nobody on shore. There's nobody around. And the wind was blowing directly off shore. So you have to swim into the wind, into the wind wave and all that stuff. And eventually I tried swimming. And I swam directly upwind. And I was, because I was like, okay, if I get separated from this boat. And I don't make it to shore, then I'm definitely dead. You know, like there's just no saving me. So I was trying to go directly upwind so that if I felt like I couldn't make it, I would float back down when I hit the boat again. And so I tried, you know, I swam for probably like 20 minutes upwind and made no progress. You didn't feel like any progress. You know, in 50 degrees you have 30 to 60 minutes before you black out. My arms were just, you know, it's like I consider myself a strong swimmer. Like I freed up, you know, stuff. And I just, you know, it's like you read these stories about how people die. You know, of just like, they succumb to hypothermia on a local hike, or they drown in the bay. You know? And the story's always like, well, Timmy was a strong swimmer. And you're like, really was Timmy really a strong swimmer because you drowned in the bay. And like floating there, you know, it just all came to me. I'm like, wow, this is how this happens. You know, you just make a series of pretty dumb, small decisions until you find yourself like floating in the dark. In the bay, there's no one around. Oh, shit. And it's a really slow process too. Like, it's not like, you know, you just come to terms with the idea that like, you're not going to make it. And it's not, it's not like someone shot you or you got hit by a bus or something like that. It's like this hour long thing that you're getting dragged through all alone. And you realize like no one will ever even know what this was. You know, how this happened. And you think about all the people like Josh with Slocum, Jim Gray, people who are lost at sea. And you realize they all had this thing that they went through, you know, this hour long ordeal of just floating alone. And no one will even ever know what that was or what that was like. And eventually I realized I wasn't going to make it ashore. I looked back. The boat was like way far away from me. I started, you know, drifting back towards it. I was still trying to swim. I realized at some point that I wasn't going to hit it. I wasn't going to hit the boat on the way back downwind. And I had to just give it all that I had to try to connect with the boat, you know, to stop myself from getting blown past it. And in that moment too, you realize that like uncertainty is the most unendurable condition. You know, that like you imagine yourself making it to shore and relaxing, you know, just knowing that it's resolved. Right. And in that moment of like I might not make it back to this boat, you're like tempted to give up because it's the same resolution. You know, it's the feeling of just knowing, you know, the uncertainty has been resolved, you know. And you have to really remind yourself that it's not the same. You know, that like you have to give it everything you have in order to survive, you know, and that that feeling that you're sort of longing for is not actually the feeling that you want, you know. And I just barely got the end of a rope that was trailing off the back of the hole. Pull myself back on it, almost through up. Then I had to, then I was just floating there with the hole, you know, three feet underwater. I tied myself to it. I started to get tunnel vision. And really at the last minute, I tugged about started coming through the area. And it was coming straight at me actually. And I realized that it probably just wouldn't even see me, it would just run me over and not even know that I had been, you know, it's totally possible. And I was just, you know, trying to like wave, I could barely lift my arm, I was trying to scream, I could barely make any noise. And somehow they saw me. And they, they like, it took them like 15 minutes to like get a rope around me. And they started pulling me up the side of the boat. And it was like lining every tugboat is, um, tied. They Like it took them like 15 minutes to like get a rope around me and they started pulling me up inside of the boat And it was like lining every tugboat is Tigers like tires usually as like a fender. Yeah, and I got like wedged in the tires as they were like pulling me up And I knew it was happening, you know, and I was like all I have to do is stick my leg out and push against the Hall of the boat, you know to like go around the tires and I couldn't do it And I knew and I could barely see and they like swung me around it eventually pulled me up They like put me in next to the engines in the engine room I couldn't you know, I couldn't even feel the heat And they called the Coast Guard and the Coast Guard came and got me. It was like really embarrassing You know the Coast Guard like you know, the Coast Guard guys like You know, he's like god these blankets over me and he's like trying to like talk to me to like keep me like alert, you know and You know, he's like so is this he's just your first time sailing And I like a commercial like a 250 ton like master's license, you know Like it's like hot you need 600 days at sea to get this license, you know And I was like no I have a master's license, you know, he was like what? You're a fucking idiot man, you know, like everything changed the tone totally changed God dude that's insane. Yeah Did that change your Appreciation for comfort and safety and just life in general they're like Yeah, don't I mean it changed well You know for sure the next day I was like You know, it's just like any near death experience. I feel like you're just like what are we doing here? You know like what's the why we wasting our time with this you know at the time I was working in Twitter and You know, you know, you know your coworkers are like oh we got this problem the slave lag on the database and you're just like Why do we do it man? You know, should we do something else, you know But you can't I feel like you can't live like that for long, you know that like the what are we doing Man, you know the it's like it's impossible The world will like suck you back into it. Mmm. Yeah. Yeah Unless you go to angula I Mean a lot of those early drink of people are actually still in angula really. Yeah, that's funny. Yeah Yeah, yeah, that's what we were talking about sailing and we really yeah, so those those people the people who moved to angula You know, we're part of this moment of like how much did that shift your direction in your life though Did it change like the way like it seems almost I mean I haven't had a near-death experience But I've had a lot of psychedelic experiences and in some ways I think they're kind of similar in that life shifts to the point where whatever you thought of life before that experience is almost like Oh, come on. That's nonsense. Yeah, I mean it changes your perspective or it did for me and You know cuz also in that moment, you know, it's like You know, I think you go through this sort of embarrassing set of things where you're like oh I had these things I was going to do tomorrow Like I'm not gonna be able to do them You know, and then you're like wait, why why is that the thing that I'm concerned about? You know, it's like It's sort of trivial thing. Yeah, it's true that you know We're just like oh, I was gonna see that person tomorrow You know that or it's just like you know you're like I feel like I remember I was supposed to meet somebody the next day I remember being worried that they would think that I like stood the moppers Like that I you have the awesome as to excuse ever I mean that that story the way you just told it to me and they're gonna be like good dude. It's we're good Shit fuck. I'm glad you're all right. Yeah. Oh my god That kind of stuff, you know, and then and then you you know get more into the Yeah, it changes that the way you think about things and I and certainly, you know, it's like I was Working at Twitter the time and I think It made me think about how I was spending my life I was you know, it's like the I mean even I remember the first day that I was at Twitter the At the time The most popular person on Twitter was Justin Bieber It more followers than the other person, you know Was that when you guys were trying to rig it so that he wasn't trending number one always Because they did do that right. I don't remember that. I was oh conveniently Gonna change me and I were talking about that one day because they had to do something because they didn't do something Justin Bieber would be the number one topic every day no matter what was happening in the world I can believe that they wanted to change that because the problem was At the time Twitter was held together with like, you know bubble gum and like dental floss and whatever, you know So it's like every time Bieber would tweet Like, you know the lights would dim and like the building like kind of shake a little bit, you know, there it goes So they blocked me from trending. This is 2010. I'm actually honored not even Matt. He's also 12 Then I get on and see yet again my fans are unstoppable. Love you. Okay, but okay So there's you know people talk about like invisible labor like the invisible labor behind that tweet It was just kind of comical because it's like when he did that, you know people like you know, it's like my first day there You know, it's like he he tweeted something and you know the buildings like kind of shaking and like alarms are going off People are like scrambling around, you know, and it was just this You know it's like this realization where you're just like never in my life Did I think that anything Justin Bieber did would like really affect me in any like deep way, you know And here I am just like scrambling around to like facilitate what are your thoughts on curating What trends and what doesn't trend and whether or not social media should have any sort of obligation in terms of how things Whether or not people see things like shadow banning and things along those lines like I'm very torn on this stuff because I I think that things should just be And if you have a situation where Justin Bieber is the most popular thing on the internet. That's just what it is. It is what it is But I also get it. I get how you would say well, this is gonna fuck up our whole program like what we're trying to do with this thing What do you mean fuck up our whole program? Well, what you're trying to do with Twitter. I mean, I would assume what you're trying to do is Give people a place where they could share important information and You know have people you know, I mean Twitter has been used Successfully to overturn governments. I mean there's there's Twitter has been used to Break news on very important events and alert people to danger and there's so many positive things about Twitter and if It's overwhelmed by Justin Bieber and Justin Bieber fan accounts and Justin Bieber If it's overwhelmed and the top 10 things that are trending are all nonsense I could see how someone would think we're gonna do a good thing By suppressing that Yeah, I see what you're saying. Well, why do you think they did suppress that? What do you think you worked there? Why do you think they kept him from trending? um Well, I mean, I don't know about that specific situation. I mean, I think I think you know looking at the larger picture right like um You know way, you know, it's like if you think about like 20 years ago whenever anybody talked about like society, you know Everyone would always say like the problem is the media. It's like the media man. Yeah, I've only been changed the media and a lot of people in Who Were interested in like a better and brighter future where really focused on self publishing their whole conference is about underground Underground publishing conference now the allied media conference people were writing zines People were you know getting their own printing presses people, you know, we were convinced that if we Made publishing more equitable if everybody had the equilibility to like producing consume content that the world would change and In some ways like what we have today is like the fantasy of You know those dreams from 20 years ago but in a couple ways, you know like One, you know, it was it was the dream that if you know a cop kills some random person in the suburbs of St. Louis That like everyone would know that, you know Just to do you know everyone knows and also that anybody could share their weird ideas about the world, you know And I think in some ways We were wrong, you know that we thought Like you know the what we got today is like yeah, like if a cop kills somebody in the suburbs of St. Louis like everybody knows about it I think we overestimated how much that would matter And I think we also Believed that the things that everyone would be sharing were like our weird ideas about the world and instead we got like, you know, flat earth and Like, you know Anti-vax and like, you know, that stuff right And so it's like in a sense like I'm glad that those things exist because they're like They're sort of what we wanted, you know But I think what we did when we underestimated is like how Important the medium is like the medium is the message kind of thing and that like What we were doing at the time of like you know writing zines and sharing information I don't think we understood how much That was predicated on like actually building community and like relationships with each other and that like just Like what we didn't want was just like more channels on the television and that's what we got, you know And so I think you know, it's like everyone is like on YouTube trying to monetize their content whatever, you know and that It's the same thing like bad business models produce like bad technology and bad outcomes and So I think there's concern about that, but I think I think like you know Now that there's there's like you know these two simultaneous truths that everyone seems to believe that are in Contradiction with each other, you know like one is that like Everything is relative Is in time of their own opinion all opinion should be fully valid and two like Our democracy is impossible without a shared understanding of what is true and what is false The information that we share needs to be verified by a most trusted institutions Like people seem to simultaneously believe both of these things and yeah They're in direct down tradition with each other And so in some ways I think most of the questions about you know social media in our time are about like trying to resolve those contradictions and But I think you know I Think it's way more complicated than the way That the social media companies are trying to portray it. Yeah, I think there's simplistic methods that they're using to to handle complex realities like for instance like um banning QAnon Right, this is this is a big one right cuz QAnon's got these wacky theories and they're like Jesus Christ is there weaponizing all these Nut bags and we're just gonna ban QAnon, but then more where do you Because you think what they're saying is not true and not correct like how far do you go with that? You've sort of set a precedent And where does that end cuz you know Are we gonna ban JFK theories cuz JFK murders are probably still relevant today? Some of those people are still alive. Do we ban There's theories about the challenger this the space shuttle challenger has a lot of wacky conspiracy theories about that This spares conspiracy theories about the space being fake Have you ever seen hashtag spaces fake? Yeah, okay, go on there. If you want to if you want to really fucking just lose all faith in humanity Look up Space is fake But I think oh my god. There's so many people Yeah, and I think that people get something out of that. Yeah, they do Well people get something out of mysteries and and maybe being on the inside and knowing things with the rest of the world of sleep This is the reason why people love the idea of red pilled You know somebody even suggested I call this room the red pill my friend radio by him said call the red pill like There's a lot right not in that term Too bad cuz I'm a giant fan of the matrix, but that that term has been co-opted forever, yeah, but This idea that you're just gonna ban People from discussing stupid ideas Where does that end? You know, does it end with flat earth? Are you gonna ban that they're gonna go oh they're suppressing us and then they're gonna find these all too This is the thing about all these weird alternative sources of social media whether it's parlor or gab They become Shit fests Shove you if you go to those especially gab. It's just like it's a god damn What have you guys done? It's not even what have they done? It's what have the people done that have all been kicked out of all these other places and Then if you have a place that says we're not gonna kick you out and then all these fucking cretons Compiling into these places and I'm sure there's a lot of good people on gab don't get me wrong There's a lot of people that are they just didn't want to be suppressed by social media Parlor doesn't seem to be nearly as bad. I've looked at that as well. It's a little more like Just super right wing information type stuff and there's some reasonable people on parlor but But I think that there's like a subtle thing though because I don't know how those things work but like I think part of what if you if you Set aside all of the like takedown stuff, you know from all the deplatforming stuff You say like okay Facebook Twitter You know these these companies like they don't do that anymore. They've never done that, you know They're still moderate in content. You know they have an algorithm decides like what is seen and what isn't right? You know and in a way But what how was that all algorithm programmed like what is For Facebook and for YouTube and a lot of these things It's done to encourage viewership. It's got it's done to encourage interaction Right this is the stun to encourage time spent. Yes Looking at the screen. Yeah, so that's how they monetize it. They want more clicks and more more add views and all that jazz um But When it becomes an ideological moderation. That's when things get a little weird, right? But it's it is by definition an ideological moderation, you know that the the If you optimize for time spent looking at the screen You're going to be encouraging certain kinds of content in that others and okay, but that's not always true like I'll give you an example for us We did an a podcast with Kanye West Kanye West was running for president, right? And if you were running for president and you are outside the normal like for instance Twitter banned Brett Weinstein's Brett Weinstein had a He had a Twitter account that was set up for it was unity 2020 and the idea was like instead of looking at this in terms of left versus right Republican versus Democrat let's get reasonable people from both sides like a Tulsi Gabbard and a Dan Crenshaw bringing them together and perhaps maybe put into people's minds the idea that like this idea this concept of It has to be a Republican vice president or a Republican president. Maybe that's nonsense and maybe it would be better We had a reasonable intelligent people together. What is this? There's their video. Yeah, um, well It's a very rational perspective. It's not conspiracy theory driven they got banned from Twitter And for nothing just because they were promoting a third party They were trying to come up with some alternative and the idea was this could siphon off votes from Biden We want Biden to win because Trump is bad. This is the narrative, right? Yeah, I mean, I think that there's There's a lot here, but yeah, but well, it's gonna see the comment. I got sidetracked I'm sorry. We finished yeah the Kanye West thing so we had a podcast with Kanye West It got I don't know how many millions of views, but it was a lot But it wasn't trending and so Jamie you contacted the people at YouTube and asked them why it's trending What was their answer trending? It like it didn't meet the qualifications they decided for trending or something like that and like it didn't include Everything you would assume like you just said all the interactivity comments it had it had more comments than anybody We had the massive amounts of comments massive amounts of views But yet nowhere to be seen on the trending, but I don't think there was a person involved like there was an algorithm at fault That was trying to Optimize for certain things. No, no, you think of this specific case. Yeah, there's a team there there's separate teams that you too both My understanding yeah, and this separate team had made a distinction And I don't even know if they told the person who told me that what it was so he that person may not know either So they just decided this is not worthy of trending so you have arbitrary decisions that are being made by people most likely Because they feel that Ideologically Kanye West is not aligned with I mean he was wearing the Maga hat for a while Yeah, you know, so they just decided this is not trending, but it is trending. It's clearly trending. Yeah Millions and millions and millions of people were watching it whether they're you know It's like whether there are but I think this is the point, you know, it's like whether they're whether it's people whether it's algorithms You know there are forces that are making decisions about what people seem what people don't see and they're based on Certain objectives that I think are most often business objectives, but not in this case This case the business objective was if they wanted to get more eyeballs on it They would want it to be trending and people say oh shit Kanye West is on the jerry people that like Kanye like click on hands or not, you know It's like do people that you know, it's like there's there's a lot There's a lot in there that we don't know Shit come on bro. I don't know. I mean maybe you know, maybe they're making millions of millions of millions in mil When you have a video that's being viewed by that many people there's gonna be a lot of goddamn people clicking on ads The other thing that these platforms want is for their for the content to be ad safe, you know It's like maybe advertisers don't you know, it's like I don't know it's But I think actually focusing on the like the outline cases of like this person was deplatformed this person was intentionally ideologically not Promoted or you know deep deep shadow banning. Yeah, that kind of thing that that like obfuscates or You know draws attention away from the larger thing that's happening, which is that like Those things are happening just implicitly all the time and that like it almost like serves to the advantage of these platforms to Highlight the times when they remove somebody because what they're trying to do is reframe this is like okay Well, yeah, we got these algorithms or whatever don't don't look like that the problem is there's just these bad people You know, and we have to just there's a bad content from bad people and we have to decide You know what to do about these bad content this bad content on these bad people And I think that distracts people from the fact that like the platforms are every and every moment making a decision about what you see and what you don't see That Is not as apparent, you know, I see we're saying So there's more than one problem. There's a problem of deplatforming because in many ways he's deplatforming decisions are being made based on ideology It's a certain specific ideology that the people that are deplatforming the other folks have that doesn't align with the people that are Being deplatformed these people that are being deplatformed They have ideas that these people find offensive or they don't agree with so they say we're gonna take you off Yeah, or sometimes they just find themselves in a trap, you know that like a trap Well, I think that there's like Okay, so like there's I think a tendency for a lot of these platforms to you know Make Try to define some policy about like what it is that they want. They don't want, you know I feel like that's sort of a throwback to this like Modernist view of science and how science works and we can like objectively rigorously define these things And I just don't think that's actually how the world works and that like What do you mean how so Um, I feel like we're just past that, you know that it's not like First of all, I think you know science is not about truth It's just not it's about utility What do you mean? Okay, you know, it's like I was taught Newtonian physics in high school. Okay, why? It's not true, you know, we that's not how the universe works But it's still useful and that's why it's taught because you can use it to predict motion outcomes that kind of thing What's incorrect about Newtonian physics in the sense that they shouldn't be teaching it Um, I mean today, you know people believe that the truth is that you know there's like You know relativity like gravity is not a force There's like you know these planes and stuff whatever you know that like there are other models for to describe how the universe works um And Newtonian physics is considered Outmoded, but it still has utility and in the fact that you can use it to predict the So you're talking about in terms of quantum physics and string theory and a lot of these more Yeah, it's like relativity at like the large scale quantum you know quantum physics at the the small scale and even those things are most likely not true in the sense that they aren't consistent with each other and People are trying to unify them and find something that does make sense at like both of those scales You know that the history of science of the history of things that weren't actually true You know boards model of the atom the jonian physics like you know people have these You know kopernicus's model of the solar system. You people have these ideas of like how things work and The reason that people are drawn to them is because they actually have utility that it's like oh we can use this to predict the motion of the planet Oh, we can use this to send a rocket space so we can use this to You know have better outcomes, you know for some medical procedure or whatever, but it's not actually I don't I think it's not actually truth like the point of it isn't truth the point of it is that like we have some utility that we find in these things and I think that You know when you look at like the the emergence of science And you know people conceiving of it as a truth it became this new authority that everyone was trying to appeal to you know If you look at like all of the like 19th century political philosophy I mean, okay, I think the question of truth is like you know It's even a little squishy with the hard sciences, right? But once you get into like soft sciences like social science psychology Like then it's even squishy or you know that like these things are really not about truth or about like some kind of utility And when you're talking about utility the important question is like useful for what and to whom? You know and I think that's just always the important question to be asking right Because you know when you look at like all the 19th century political writing It's all trying to frame things in terms of science in this way that it seems laughable now But you know at the time they were just like we're going to prove the communism is like the most true like social economic system in the world. Yeah, like there are whole disciplines of that people in You know people had like PhDs in that you know their whole research departments in the Soviet Union people doing that And we laugh about that now, but I don't think it's that different than like social science in the last you know And so I think you know, it's like if you lose sight of that then you can try then you try to like frame Social questions in terms of truths like you know It's like this is this is the kind of content that we want and we can rigorously define that and we can define why that's going to have like the outcomes that we want to But once you go down that road, it's like you know, you're like, okay, well terrorist stuff. We don't like terrorist stuff So we're gonna like rigorously define that and then We have a policy no terrorist stuff and then you know China shows up and they're like we've got this problem with terrorists the weakers You know, we need you know, we see you have a policy you need to it, you know and if instead it was just like I think if people from the beginning acknowledged that This isn't some you know that all of objectivity is just a particular worldview and that like We're not going to rigorously define these things in a way of like what is true and what isn't then I think we would have better outcomes but That's my weird take I mean I think You know from the perspective of signal, you know, it's like do you know what's trending on signal right now? No Not sure. No, okay, but that's it's on the social media platform But isn't it there's a weird thing when you decide that You have one particular ideology That's being supported in another particular ideology that is being suppressed and this is what conservative people feel when they're on social media platforms. They're almost all They almost all of them other than the ones we talked about before parlor and gab and the alternative ones They're all very left-wing in terms of their the ideology that they support the things that can get you in trouble in Twitter on Twitter Did you say about but then the president of the United States just constantly violated every policy that they had and he's ridiculous That's that's a ridiculous example right because he's one person and they they've actually discussed this that he and his tweets are More important it's more important that they allow these tweets to get out so you could first of all you can understand how Fucking crazy this guy is and second of all it's newsworthy. It's he's the leader of the You know and also it would be Very costly from business perspective if yeah Very likely and it kind of amazing that he didn't do anything along the way While he was witnessing people get de-platformed and particularly this this sort of bias towards people On the left and this discrimination discrimination against people on the right There's people on the right that have been banned in shadow banned and blocked from posting things and you Run into this situation where you wonder what exactly is a social media platform when It's just a small private company and maybe of you know Some sort of a video platform and there's only a few thousand people on it and you only want Videos that align with your perspective. Okay your private company can do whatever you want But when you are the biggest video platform on earth like YouTube and you decide that you are going to Take down anything that disagrees with your perspective on how COVID should be handled and Including doctors like this is one of the things that happen doctors that were stating look There's more danger in lockdowns or it's more danger in this than there is in the way we're handling it There's more there's more danger in the the negative aspects of the decisions that are being made Then it would be to let people go to work with masks on there's more And then those those videos just get deleted those videos get blocked. There's people that are Opposed to current strategies with all sorts of different things and those videos get blocked So there's an ideological basis in censorship and so you have to you have to make a decision like What are these platforms are these platforms simply just a private company or is it a Town hall is it the way that people get to express ideas and isn't the best way to express ideas to allow people to decide Based on the better argument What is correct and what's incorrect? Like this is this is what freedom of speech is supposed to be about it's supposed to be about you have an idea These two ideas come together and then the observers get to go home Okay, well this guy's got a lot of facts behind him. This is this is objective reality This is these this is provable and this other guy is just a crazy person who thinks the world's hollow Okay, this is the correct one. There's gonna be some people that go know There's a suppression of hollow earth and hollow earth is the truth and hollow earth facts and hollow earth But you got to kind of let that happen you got out you got to kind of have People that are crazy you got to kind of remember the old do these to be these to stand on the corners with the placards on the World is ending tomorrow like they're still there. Yeah, but those are on Twitter now But those people no one said you got to get rid of that guy you would drive by and go look at this crazy fuck Those crazy folks making YouTube videos those videos get deleted. I don't know if that's good I kind of think that you should let those crazy fucks do that because it's not gonna influence you It's not gonna influence me. It's gonna influence people that are easily influenced and the question is what who will we protecting and why are we protecting these people? well, okay, but I think I think In my mind what's going on is like the problem is that it used to be that some person with very strange ideas about the world wearing a sign on the street corner shouting was just a person with very strange ideas about the world We're gonna sign on the street right now. There's somebody you know with very strange ideas about the world and those ideas are being amplified by a building dollar company Because they're algorithms that amplify that and and what I'm saying is that instead of actually talking about that instead of addressing that problem Those companies are trying to distract fully talking about that. Instead of addressing that problem, those companies are trying to distract, distract that, distract us from that discussion by saying we're just going to remove that person's content. Oh, it's like, oh yeah, yeah, and find that that was probably bad idea. We're going to remove their content. Instead of looking at how to change the algorithms that we're not amplifying things that ultimately don't serve as well. Would the correct way to handle it, would it be to make algorithms illegal in that respect? Like to not be able to amplify or detract to not be able to ban shadow, ban, or just to have whatever trends trend, whatever is popular, popular, whatever people like, let them like it. And say, listen, this thing that you've done by creating an algorithm that encourages people to interact, encourages people to interact on Facebook, encourages people to spend more time on the computer. What you've done is you've kind of distorted what is valuable to people. You've changed it and guided it in a way that is ultimately perhaps arguably detrimental to society. So we are going to ban algorithms. You cannot use algorithms to dictate what people see or not see. You give them a fucking search bar and if they want to look up UFOs, let them look up UFOs, but don't shove it down their throat because you know there are UFO nuts. Don't curate their content feed. Yeah, I mean, I think it's okay. It's complicated because one, I have no faith in like when you say ban or make it illegal, but I have zero faith in like the government being able to handle this. Yeah, in order to run. Every time I see like a cookie warning on a website, you know, I'm like, okay, these people are not the people that this is what they've given us after all this time. You know, like these people are not going to solve this for us, you know, and also I think a lot of what it is that the dissatisfaction that people feel and the concern that people have is a concern about power that right now these tech companies have a lot of power. And I think that the concern that is coming from government is like the concern for their power, you know, that like the right has made such a big deal about deep platforming. And I think it's because what they're trying to, they're trying to, you know, put these companies on notice, you know, they're just like, you fuck with us, you know, like we will take power. But they've done nothing about it. Don't you think that they've actually made a big deal about deep platforming because the right has been disproportionately deep platformed? I think the right is like, don't find. How so? I don't know what the numbers are, I feel like it's like that the fact that though because you're on the left was still on that much. That's Trump. That's Trump. He's not, he's an anomaly. You can't really, you know, I, okay, I think, I guess maybe let me just reframe this to say that like I think it's interesting that we are, we hit an inflection point, right? We're like the era of utopianism with regards to technology is over. Yeah, that it's just like, you know, after 2016, it was just like big tech has zero allies anymore. You know, on the left, everyone's just like, you just gave the election to Trump, you know, and on the right, they're just like, you just removed somebody from YouTube for calling gay people in a bomb in Asia and fuck you, you know, like it's they have no allies. No one believes in the better and brighter. You know, and believes that Google is organizing the world's information, not believes that Facebook is connecting the world, you know, like, no. And I think that that is, there's an opportunity there, you know, that like we're in a better situation that we were before, you know, all the cards around the table under like people more and more understanding how it is that these systems function. I think, you know, we're increasingly see that people understand that this is really about power. It's about authority and that like we should be trying to build things that limit the power that people have. If you had your wish, if you could let these social media platforms, whether it's video platforms like YouTube or Facebook or Twitter, if you, if you had the call, if they they call Jeff and said, Moxie, we're going to let you make the call. What should we do? How should we curate this information? Should we have algorithms, should we allow people, should we just let it open to everything, everything in anybody? What should we do? Well, I mean, this is what we're trying to do with signal, you know, it's like, but it's different, right? Because you're just a messaging app. We're just a messaging app, but I don't say that. It's a very good message. Yeah, that I used. No, I understand what you're saying. But I think, you know, the way that messaging apps are going, you know, there's like a trajectory where a project like signal becomes more of a social experience. And that like the things that we're building extend beyond just like, you know, sending messages, particularly I think it's more more communication moves into group chats and things like that. And the, you know, the foundation that we're building it on is a foundation where we know nothing. You know, it's like, if I looked up your signal account record right now of like all the information that we had about you on signal, there's only two pieces of information, you know, the date that you created the account and the date that you last used signal. That's it. That's all we know. You know, if you looked on any other platform, it would be your mind would be blown. No, it's admirable what you're doing. And this is one of the reasons why I wanted to talk to you. But that, and so I think that foundation gives us, it's like, now that we have that foundation, there's a lot that we can build on it, right? And would you do a social media Well, I think, you know, some of the stuff that we're working on now of just like moving away from phone numbers that you can have like, you know, a user names that you can like post that more publicly and then, you know, we have groups now you have group links and then, you know, maybe we can do something with events and we can, you know, that's like, we're sort of moving in the direction of like an app that's good for communicating with connections you already have to an app that's also good for creating new connections. Would you think that social media would be better served with the algorithms that are in place and with the mechanisms for determining what's trending in place and for their trust in safety or whatever their content monitoring policy they have now or have it wide open, Wild West. I mean, I think it depends on when you say like better, you know, better for what, right? Better for humanity. Yeah, no, I think censorship is better. No, no, no, I think the problem, I think that business models create back to technology which has bad outcomes, you know, that that's the problem we have today, right? So the problem is that there's a financial incentive for them to, yeah, that if we, you know, if you look at like the metrics, you know, we talked about like, you know, what Facebook cares about it just like time that you spent looking at the screen. Right. Like if we were to have metrics, if signal would have metrics, you know, our metrics would be like what we want is for you to use the app as little as possible for you to actually have the app open as little as possible, but for the velocity of information to be as high as possible. So it's like you're getting maximum utility, you're spending as little time possible looking at this thing while getting as much out of it as you can. How could that be engineered do you think? That's what we're trying to do. So you're trying to do that with a social media app as well? Well, I mean, you know, we're sort of moving in that direction, right? And it's like, and I think once you start from the principle of like, well, we don't have to have infinite growth, we don't actually have to have profit, we don't have to return. We're not accountable to investors. We don't have to, you know, satisfy public markets. We also don't have to build a pyramid scheme where we had like, you know, 2 billion users so that we can monetize them to like, you know, a few hundred thousand advertisers so that we can, you know, like we don't have to do any of that. And so we have the freedom to like pick the metrics that we think are the ways that we think technology should work, that we think will better serve all of us. So what would better be served as a bunch of wild hippies like yourself that don't want to make any money at all? I mean, we're, you put together a social media. If you work at signal, you could pay it. Oh, yeah, I'm sure. But I mean, I don't mean the company itself as a, as a corporation. You get paid, but that's it. Yeah, I mean, how do you generate the income? Well, you know, we do it by like tying ourselves to a community of users instead of advertisers. Right? So, but where's the money come from though? From people who you said, no. So similar to like, do they pay for it? No, no, it's like donation. So similar to like Wikimedia, you know, it's like, you know, Wikipedia exists. There's no company. There's no, without being great, if they could figure out a way to develop some sort of social media platform that just operated on donations and could rival the ones that are operating on advertising revenue. Because I agree with you that that that creates a giant problem. And that's what we're working on slowly. Do you think that what? So you just look at in terms of bad business model equals bad outcome. That's how you look at all these. And you don't. It's also by the way, why we have people mining cobalt in. Yeah, yeah. And you don't think that they can regulate their way out of the situation. With technology, I'm, I'm not super optimistic. Yeah. Just based on, you know, even even the hearings, you know, just like, so do you think that? Yes, the hearings were amateur hour. Yeah, when, yeah, there were some ridiculous questions. Yeah, I mean, it's just like, they're talking to the wrong people. They don't understand how stuff works. It's not good. It's wrapped for this. Yeah, but you don't have a team of people who are. Yeah, come on. Yeah, it's, um, it's fascinating to watch, right? It's like your, your dad who doesn't know how to, how do I get the email? It's like these people are not going to say it was, man. You know, it's like, anything that they do will probably just make things worse. Do you think that it's a valid argument that conservatives have though that they're being censored and that their, their voice is not being heard? I know what you said in terms of, you know, that if someone had something on YouTube that said that gay people are on human and they should be abolished and banned and delete that video that the, I get that perspective. But I think there's other perspectives like the Unity 2020 perspective, which is not in any way. Yeah, I mean, I don't know what happened with that, but I feel like what I, I think it could be a part of this thing of just like, well, we create this policy and we have these, you know, we define things this way and then a lot of stuff just gets caught up in it. You know, we're just like, now you're like taking down content about the weekers because you want it to do something else. You know, that if people just be more honest about like, there is not really an objectivity and, you know, we're looking for these specific outcomes and this is why that I think, you know, maybe we would have better results. Well, how does one fix this though? How does one like, you worked at Twitter, you kind of understand these better than most, these social media platforms? How would one fix this? If they hired you, if they said, hey, Moxie, we're kind of fucked. We don't know how to fix this. Well, is there a way because it it seems like they make so much money. If you came along and said, yeah, well, you got to stop making money, they'd be like, get rid of that fucking nut. Look at them. Yeah. God damn sailor. Yeah. What's he talking about? What is he talking about? Fuck out of here. Stop making money. Yeah. Well, you want to play rock paper scissors. You're crazy, man. What do you fix this? I mean, one thing I'm actually a little encouraged by is like the organizing unionization stuff that's been happening in the tech industry. So there's been a couple of walkouts and there's some increased communication among tech workers. Normally you think about, I'm not totally aware of this. Like, what have they been organizing and unionization about? Well, normally you think about unionization as like a process for improving material conditions for workers, you know, and there's some aspect of this in the organizing that's been happening. Were they where have they been doing this? Google is the big where a lot of the activity has happened, but it's happening across the industry. What are their objectives? Google at Google, there were some walkouts. The objectives, you should talk to Meredith Whitaker about this actually. She's really smart. Okay. As long as I say, shout out to Meredith. Yeah. She and other people, you know, working there and they were organizing for like one, trying to apply the protections that full-time workers and benefits full-time workers there had to a lot of the temporary workers like the people who work in security, the people who are working in the cafeteria, the people who are driving buses and stuff like that, who are living a lot more precariously. But also for creative control over how the technology that they're producing is used. So Google was involved in some like military contracts that were pretty sketch. Yeah. Yeah. Like applying machine learning AI stuff to the military technology. And then finally, there had been a lot of high profile sexual harassment incidents at Google where the perpetrators of sexual harassment were usually paid large severances in order to leave. And so they had a list of demands and they like a lot of people walked out. I don't know the numbers, but a lot of people, they managed to organize internally and walked out. And I think I think stuff like that is encouraging because you know, it's like we look at the hearings and it's like the people in Congress don't even know who's the right person to talk to. You know, it's like you know, old people talking about technology they don't understand. The people who really do understand technology are the people who are working in these companies. And all of times they don't feel good about the way that what they're creating is being applied, how they're how what they're creating is being applied. But isn't that another issue where you're going to have people who have an ideological perspective and that may be opposed to people that have a different ideological perspective, but they're sort of disproportionately represented on the left in these social media corporations. When you get kids that come out of school, they have degrees, in tech, or they're interested in tech, they tend to almost universally lean left. Maybe, but I think most like when it comes to the technology, I don't think people are I think you know what almost everyone can agree is like the amount of money and resources that we're putting into surveillance, into ad tech, into you know, these algorithms that are just about increasing engagement that they're just not good for the world. And we put a different CEO in charge like President's just going to get fired. But if the entire company organizes together and says, this is how we want to allocate resources, this is how we want to create the world, then you can't fire all this people. I just want to say that they have to get together and unionize and have a very distinct mandate, like very clear that this is what we want to use this. We want to go back to do no evil or whatever the fuck it used to be. Right. Yeah. Don't really have that as a big sign anymore. Do you think that would really have an impact though? I mean, it seems like the amount of money. When you find out the amount of money that's being generated by Google and Facebook and YouTube, the numbers are so staggering that to shut that valve off to shut that spout. Good luck. It's almost like it had to have been engineered from the beginning, like what you're doing at signal. Like someone had to look at it from the beginning, you know what, if we rely on advertiser revenue, we're going to have a real problem. Yeah. And I think, but I think it's yeah, exactly. I mean, you know, I think you're right. And there's, there's, you know, part of the problem with just relying on tech workers to organize themselves is that they are shareholders of these companies. Right. They have a financial stake in their outcome. And so that influences the way that they think about things. But, you know, I think another aspect to all of this is that I think people underestimate just how expensive it is to make software. And another thing that I think would really improve things is making software cheaper. You know, right now it's moving the opposite direction. It's getting harder and more expensive to boost software. And how so. It used to be that if you made, if you like, read a piece of software, you just read it once, you know, for the computer and then that was your software. You know, now if you want to write a piece of software, you have to write it at least three times. You know, have to write it for iPhone. You have to write it for Android. You have to write it for the web. Maybe you need a desktop client. So it's like you need three or four times the energy that you used to have. And the way that software works. Now we're going to, but it's just it's getting more expensive. And what do you personally use? Are you one of those minimalist dudes? I noticed you have like a little tiny notebook here. Oh, yeah. And then you have two phones. Yeah, I'm like, I have to have, I try to be like, I just want to you're also one of those renegades with no phone case. Oh, yeah, man. I feel like that's like you and Jamie should get to go and talk about he's radical. I mean, it's like people, you know, it's like industrial designers put all of that effort into creating that thing. And you know, just for Apple, you're asking because of thousand bucks. If you drop it with this thing on it, it doesn't get hurt. And see this. This little thing right here, see us stick my finger in there. And then I could use that could text better. Really good. Also, if I want to watch a video that like a little prop it up. Tada. You know how that works. Tada. Not bad. Isn't that better than no case? I mean, some things I actually want to make more difficult for myself. But I have two phones just because I'm trying to I always just want to keep tabs on how everything works everywhere. You know, I see you have an Android and a, an iPhone. Do you keep things stripped down? No, I'm pretty. I mean, I don't actually use TikTok. Well, okay, my problem is that like I spend all day, I think, you know, sometimes I go through this thing where like cryptography will be like in the news or something. There'll be some like geopolitical thing that's happening. And someone like, you know, vice or something will get in touch with me. And they'll be like, they're like, hey, we want to do a thing like a video where like we follow you around for a day, like a day in the life, you know, it's because it's so exciting. Sounds good for them. Annoying for you. Well, the thing I'll usually write back is like, okay, here's the video, me sitting in front of a computer for eight hours. And they're like, oh, we can't make that video. Like, no one would want to watch that. Yeah, what we need to do is take you to a yoga class and you go to an organic food store and you talk to people about their rights and then. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, but it's like, unfortunately, I don't even want to watch the movie in my own life, you know, but there, but so that is my life. So it's like, I spend so much time like, you know, looking at a computer for work that I it's hard for me to continue like looking at screens and stuff. Yeah, I can only imagine. Yeah. But I try to be like a normal like, there's just like in the history of people who were like doing, like building cryptography stuff like that. There was this period of time where the thesis was basically like, all right, what we're going to do is develop powerful tools for ourselves and then we're going to teach everyone to be like us. You know, and that didn't work because, you know, we didn't really anticipate the way that computers are going. So I try to be like as normal as possible. You know, I just like have like a normal set up. I'm not like, you know, I haven't, you know, I used to have a cell phone where I like, you know, soldered the microphone differently. So there was like a hard switch that you could turn it off. Really? You did that? Yeah, because it's like, you know, whatever. You start thinking about like, how well the stuff works. Do you ever fuck around with like Linux phones or anything like that? No, I'm just, I try to be like normal. You know, okay. Yeah. I still do run Linux on desktop just because I've been doing that forever. And you keep a moleskin for what? I just notes and you don't put them on your phone. Sometimes I do, but so I like writing more I guess. Okay, so you just do it just because you enjoy it. Yeah, but I guess, you know, you're right, maybe, you know, like I feel the forces of darkness are not going to. Yeah. Um, does it? Do you feel like you have extra scrutiny on you because of the fact that you're involved in this messaging application that Glenn Greenwald and Edward Snowden and a bunch of other people that are seriously concerned with security and privacy that maybe people are upset at you that you've created something that allows people to share encrypted messages? I mean, maybe I mean, I think, uh, you kind of cut out the middleman, right? You've cut out, you've cut out the third party door. Yeah. And I think, but so in some ways, that means that there's less pressure on me because, you know, it's like if you're the creator of Facebook Messenger and your computer gets hacked, that's everyone's Facebook messages are gone. Um, and, you know, for me, if like my computer gets hacked, I can't access anyone's signal messages, whether I get hacked or not, you know, and so I have sort of less liability in that sense. There was like a weird period of time where it was very difficult for me to fly commercially, like on an airplane. Um, and I don't know why. Uh, I think it had something to do with a talk that someone gave about Wicked Leaks once and they mentioned my name and after that. Yeah, I was very annoying. I would like go to the airport and I wouldn't be able to print a ticket at the kiosk. I had to go talk to a person. They had to call some phone number that would appear on their screen and then wait on hold for like 45 minutes to an hour. And then they would get approval to print the ticket. So you had to anticipate this when you travel. Yeah. So you had to go their way in advance. Way in advance. And then anytime I travel internationally, on the way back through customs, they would seize all of the electronics that I had. The US government would do this. Yeah. Custom support protection. They would seize your shit. And would you get it back? They would eventually send it back, but it's you just had to throw it out because it's not who knows what they did to it. You know, how I would want to give it to somebody and go, Hey, tell me what they did. Yeah. Yeah. Could you do that? Was it possible to back engineer? Whatever. I never I never spent time on it. How much time did they have your shit for? Oh, it'd be like weeks weeks. Yeah. Yeah. Weeks. Did you have to give them passwords and everything? Well, that's the thing. You know, they would stop you. And they would be like, Hey, we just need you to type in your password here so that we can get through the full description. You know, I would be like, no. And they would be like, well, if you don't do that, we're going to take this. And we're going to send it to our lab. You know, and they're going to get it anyway. And I would be like, no, not. And they would be like, All right, we're going to take it. You're not going to have your stuff for a while. You sure you don't want to type your password. I'd be like, no. And then, you know, it would disappear in a comeback weeks later. And then it's like, how bizarre. And with there was no, I mean, they didn't have like a motive. There was no thing you never know why. No, but I'm saying they didn't, they didn't say, Hey, you were, you're thought to have done this or there's some, no, they would always just be like, Oh, no, this is just random or whatever. But there would be two people at the exit of the plane with photographs of me, you know, waiting for me to step off the plane and they would escort, they wouldn't even wait for me to get to the, uh, should you have to have like a burner laptop? I just wouldn't travel with electronics, you know, because it was just even your phone. Yeah, even my phone. Oh, fuck. Yeah. Yeah. That was only internationally though, because they can't do that. But, uh, so domestically, you just had long waits. And then they had eventually give you a ticket. Yeah, they would eventually give you a ticket. And then you have to, you get the selective screening where they would take all the stuff out of your bag and like, you know, yeah, and that's your deck to read every connection. The TSA would come to the gate of the connecting thing, even though you're already behind security and do it again at the connection. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. It was weird. It was just like a connections too. Yeah. Yeah. So they're trying to fuck with you. I think so. Yeah. I don't know. And how long did that last four? That was a couple of years. Yeah. And when did it go away the day went away. We were like, oh, yep. Yeah. One day I just stopped. It was, it's really, it really did change the game. What year did it go away when Trump got into office? Now is way before now. Yeah, I forget. Yeah, I forget. Yeah, I was thinking actually on, I was thinking on the way here. It's funny how like I remember after the last election, everyone was talking about like California leaving the United States. California's the seating. You remember the California. Yeah, well, yeah. And now everyone's talking about leaving California like after this. Yeah. Imagine that president knew some. Yeah. Lockdown a communist state. But do you remember people discover that the Cal exit, the whole Cal exit movement was started by a guy that lived in Russia? Oh, it was one of those IRA things in an at research agency scams. But it wasn't. I actually wasn't the guy down. Oh, yeah. In Moscow one time. You tracked him down. He was just some guy. Well, because he do it for goof. No, he like really believes. The California should leave. Yeah, he like, he lived in California and had been for years like trying to foment this Cal exit thing. And he's all the stats on why would be better for California and all the stuff. You know, and then he sort of thought, wow, this isn't working. And he really liked Russia for some reason. And he, so he moved to Russia just before the election, not knowing what was going to happen. And then when Trump won, people were like, wait a second, fuck this, like maybe California should get out of here. And they just found this like campaign that already existed. And everyone sort of got behind it. And he was just like, oh, shit. And he lives in Russia now, you know. And, but he like didn't really understand optics. I think where he like, he like, the way that people everyone found out that he lived in Russia was that he opened a California embassy in Moscow. So they like announced like, you know, Cal exit has opened the first California embassy like in a foreign country that it was in Moscow. And this was right as all the like Russian stuff was happening, you know. So if you're conspiratorially minded, you would have drawn some incorrect conclusions. Yeah. Yeah. He was just, I think I, I, I met with him. I like having a with him for a day. I think he really genuinely am just. So what was your motivation to hang out with this guy for a whole day? I mean, I was just fascinated. Because like, here's this guy's like doing this kind of ambitious thing. And it's just the optics seems so bad. You know, I think he reminded me of like the Hannah Arend quote that's like, you know, if the essence of power is deceit, does that mean that the essence of impotence is truth? You know, that like, he's sort of believed that just like the facts were enough. You know, it's just like the stats of just like, yeah, we spend this much money on like defense spending. If we, you know, if we stopped, you know, it's like we would have like, you know, so much money. Yeah, California was a country. And we would still have like the fourth largest military in the world. And we, you know, we would have like a, you know, it's just like the numbers actually are compelling. You know, and he was just sort of like, that's, you know, people will just see the truth. You know, and I was like, dude, I think maybe you should like not live in Russia anymore. You know, it was, yeah, why did he go to Russia? I don't, he just, he had been teaching English. And I think he just sort of ended up liking Russia. And so yeah, he just decided to move there. And that was, I was on the way with a friend to have Kazia. He wrote it up, I was. No, it's an autonomous region of the country of Georgia. And it's kind of interesting. There's all these autonomous regions in the world that are essentially their own countries, you know, but they're not recognized by the UN or other countries, you know, but like Texas, you're in one right now. I mean, these places are like, you know, militarized border, like they have their, you know, like, you know, but they're not recognized whether you win. Yeah. And so they all recognize each other. And it's like, you know, it's like, if you want to be a country, like it's kind of interesting, you need a lot of stuff, you know, you need like a flag, you need like a national bird, you need like an animal or whatever. And you need a soccer team. Definitely have to have a soccer team, you know, interesting. These countries all have their own soccer teams, but they can't play in FIFA because they're not recognized by the UN. So people can't recognize them. So they have their own league. It's like the league of unrecognized states and stateless people's. And they have their own world cup. And they have the real in up-causing. How many different countries are there that are like this? There are a lot. How many? I mean, I don't know. I don't know how many people, how many teams are in this league called Kanifa. I mean, it's 20 plus. So there's 20 plus unrecognized countries or autonomous regions. And also stateless people. So like the Kurds, you know, there's a, you know, people from Chagos Islands were basically evicted for US military base. And they're a diaspora. There's, you know, please like Somaliland, Transnistria, South of Sesha, Laplandia, you know, like it's, that's kind of interesting. So I went with a friend to Ocasio for the world cup of all the unrecognized states. How was that? It was awesome. Yeah. It was like, yeah, it was really interesting. I mean, the smile on your face. This is the biggest smile you've had the entire show. It sounds like it was a great time. I mean, it just is so fascinating to me. And I think it's like an interesting, you know, it's like in a way that I feel like, you know, society moves by like pushing at the edges, you know, that like it's, it's the fringes that end up moving the center. I feel like, you know, looking at the way that I feel like society moves by pushing at the edges, that it's the fringes that end up moving the center. I feel like looking at the margins of the way politics works is an interesting view of how everything else works. Then going to up Kazia, it was so crazy getting there. It's like we travel all through Russia, we get to this militarized border, you go through these three checkpoints that aren't supposed to exist, but obviously exist. You get to the other side, and it's just the same as where you just were. You're like, you guys fought a brutal civil war. We're genocide, full on crazy shit. And it's just kind of the same. It wasn't worth it. What's the deal? And I feel like it's this thing you see again and again of the institutions that we're familiar with in the world that exists are the institutions of kings. It's like police, military, illegal apparatus, tax collectors. And that every moment in history since then has been about trying to change ownership of those institutions. And it's always sort of dissatisfied. And just seeing that happen again and just realizing that it's maybe what we should be doing is actually trying to get rid of these institutions or change these institutions and so on. Don't you think there's a very slow rate of progress, but ultimately progress? Like if you follow Pinker's work, it looks at all the various metrics like murder, rape, racism, crime, all these different things. It's over time. We're clearly moving in a better direction. Maybe. And you think it's just like, you know, I was listening to this podcast today. We were talking about religion. And it was discussing the Bible. And they were talking about all the different stories that are in the Bible that many of them that are hundreds of years apart that were collected and put into that. Just stop and think about a book that was written literally before the Constitution was drafted. And that book is being introduced today as gospel and that there's a new book that's going to be written 200 years from now. And that will be attached to the new version of the Bible as well. And then one day someone will come across this and it will all be interpreted as the will in the words of God that all came out in one particular era. It like all came down from God. But now we know these things are like, there's you're dealing with giant spans of time. Yeah. But today, these spans of time are far slower like going from Alan Turing in 1950, being chemically castrated for being gay to in my lifetime, seeing gay marriage as being something that was very fringe when I was boy living in San Francisco to universal across the United States today, at least mostly accepted by the populace. This is a very short amount of time where big changes happened and that these changes are coming quicker and quicker and quicker. I would hope that this is a trend that is moving in the correct direction. Yeah, certainly there are some things that are getting better. And I feel like to me it's important to, for a lot of these things, the things you mentioned, like gay marriage, I think it's important to realize that a lot of that progress would not have happened without the ability to break the law, honestly. Right. That how would anyone have known that we wanted to allow same-sex marriage if no one had been able to have a same-sex relationship because sodding the laws had been perfectly enforced. How would we know that we want to legalize marijuana if no one had ever been able to consume marijuana? Right. Right. So I think a lot of the fear around increased surveillance of violence data or whatever is that that space dissipates. Yes. But on the other hand, it's like we're living in the apocalypse. That it's like if you took someone from 200 years ago who used to be able to just walk up to the Clameth River and dump a bucket in the water and pull out 12 salmon and that was their food. And you were like, oh yeah, the way it works today is you go to Whole Foods and it's $20 a pound. And it's pretty good. They'd be like, what have you done? Oh my god, you used to be able to walk across the backs of the salmon across the whole river. Well, we're trying to avoid slipping even further into that apocalypse. I don't know if you've followed what's going on the Bristol Bay of Alaska with a pebble mine. No. Oh, that's crazy. They're trying to, they're trying. And according to what Joe Biden said when he was running for office, that when he's in office, that will not happen. But they're trying to do essentially the biggest mine in the world that would destroy the salmon population. It would destroy it. It would literally wipe out a gigantic, not just a gigantic industry, but a gigantic chunk of the salmon. I think it's forget which kind of salmon it is. I don't want to say it's Chinook. I forget what kind of salmon it is, but it's the biggest population. What is Saka? Thank you. The biggest population of them in certainly in America, but I think in the world, I think it's responsible for an enormous number of jobs and enormous. And apparently there's fucking billions of dollars worth of golden copper down there. Yeah. Earth works. What's at stake? In average, a 40 to 50 million wild salmon make the epic migration from the ocean to the headwaters of the Bristol Bay every year, like no place on Earth, the Bristol Bay watershed. They've been working to try to make this mine a reality for, I think, a couple of decades now. And people have been fighting tirelessly to educate people on what a devastating impact this is going to have on the ecology of that area and the fact that the environment will be permanently devastated. There's no way of bringing this back. And there's no way of doing this without destroying the environment. Because the specific style of mining that they have to employ in order to pull that copper and gold out of the ground involves going deep, deep into the earth to find these reservoirs of golden copper and their sulfur. Yeah. They have to go through and then they have to remove the ways. Yeah. And mining companies have invested hundreds of millions of dollars in this and then abandon it. Yeah. So they were like, we can't, this is, we can't fucking do this. And then people are like, we can do it. And then they've got, and it's other companies that are, I don't believe the company that's currently involved in is even an American company. I think it's a foreign company that's trying to, I think they're from Canada that are trying to do this spectacular. Very cool. I don't know which company it is, but it's my friend, Steve Rinella, from the meat eater podcast. I want to recommend this podcast because he's got a particular episode on that, where he talks about it. Let me find it real quick because it's, it's pretty epic where he talks to this one guy who's dedicated the last 20 years of his life trying to fight this. Let me just find it real quick because it's, it's really, it's, it's pretty intense. And it's, it's terrifying when you, you see how close it's come to actually being implemented and how, if it happens, there's no way you pull that back. Like once they do it. Yeah. It's like all the, all that, uh, standing rock shit, you know, they were like, no, this is the pipelines going to be fine. No way that it leaks into the water or whatever. You know, it's like sure enough. Exactly. Yeah. Unfortunately, I'm already listened to it. So I'm having a hard time finding in this app. Motherfuckers. Did you find it? I hear previously played. Um, yeah, half life of never. It's the October 5th episode. That's a good title. Yeah. And the, the gentleman's name is Tim Bristol, which is kind of crazy. Just that is his, his birth name. His name is Tim Bristol. And he's dealing with his Bristol Bay situation. It's just a random coincidence. Um, and you read all that shit about the episode two, four, one. Like when they were building all the dams, you know, California, and it's just like the salmon just bashed ourselves to death. Dad, they had to set them on fire. Seattle. Yeah. Same thing that happened up in Seattle, these knuckleheads, they didn't understand the migration. These salmon won't go anywhere else. They have one specific river where they were born. And that's where they will die and spawn. Yeah. It's crazy. But these assholes that just want copper and gold are willing to do this. And there was this one politician in particular that has, as a gigantic windfall, if he can pull this off, um, or lobbyists or whatever fuck he is, but he stands to make, I think they said $14 million. If he can actually get the shovels into the ground, that's how much he, uh, he earns. So what are we going to do that? Kill that guy. That's the destination fall. Yeah. Kill them all. No. I'm kidding. Don't don't get me in trouble. You can get banned off of YouTube for saying something that I'm joking. Um, what we should do, we should make people aware of it and make people aware that this is that there are real consequences to, uh, allowing politicians to make decisions that will literally affect human beings for the rest of eternity. Cause you will never have that population of salmon coming to that particular location that have been going there for millions and millions of years. And the reason why you won't have them there is because someone is greedy. It's really that simple. I mean, you, we are getting along fine without that copper, without that gold. And we are using the, the resource of the salmon and people are employed that are enjoying that resource. And they're also able to go there and see the, the bears eating the salmon and seeing this incredible wild place. Well, Alaska is one of the few really truly wild spots in this country. Yeah. And someone might fuck that up. And if you get enough greedy assholes together and they can figure out a way to make this a reality. And with the wrong people in positions of power, that's a hundred percent possible. Yeah. Yeah. You might even say we've organized the entire world economy to fuck that up. Yeah. Like yeah. But I, you know, I think that it's like the, the question of agency of like, you know, what is, how do we affect these processes? Yeah. Stuff. Well, just, I mean, I was joking, obviously about killing that person, but there was a recent, um, um, one of the Iranian scientists was just fascinated. And this brought up this gigantic ethical debate. And we don't know who did it. Whether it was a Israeli army, Masah had held a press conference to say we didn't do it while wearing t-shirts that said we definitely did it. As Sastian, the Iranian nuclear scientist shot with remote controlled machine gun, holy fuck, holy mid thought. In daylight, which is what I was hearing about. Oh my God. Dude, we're, we're killing people with robots now. Right. That was the other, that, um, the other Iranian guy that got killed, uh, Soleimani, who was also killed with a drone. I mean, essentially, yeah, this is out of another car, but whatever. Oh, so a car was driving behind. There was our remote controlled machine gun. Fuck. Says it was a, he was in a bulletproof car too. Wow. He was in a bulletproof, like they knew they were going to kill this guy. Yeah, I do. Yeah, man. So this is the question we got out of the car. Oh, there you go. You fucked up. Just stay in that bulletproof car. If you, uh, if you know that a man is going to, like, what if someone did the Oppenheimer, you know, what if someone said, Hey, uh, we see where this is going? And we need to find that Oppenheimer gentleman and we need to prevent big boy from, uh, dropping down and killing how many people like, yeah, half a million people. What? He got shot by that remote. It was a 164 yards away shot him in his bodyguard and then the car they were in exploded. Classic for three minute. Like the whole thing was three minute. Wow. So there's this ethical dilemma. Like if someone is actively trying to acquire nuclear weapons and we think that those people are going to use those nuclear weapons, is it ethical to kill that person? Is that person's a scientist? They're not a. Yeah, right. Yeah, I mean, I think the causality stuff is really hard to figure out. You know, um, but I think most of the time it's not about the one person, you know, that it's not, you know, maybe sometimes it is, but I think most it's just like, I feel like assassination politics in the tech arena does not work. You know, that it's like you can get rid of all the people at the top of these companies and that's not what's going to do it. You know, that there are like these structural reasons why these things keep happening over and over again. Yeah, I think they're trying to slow it down though, right? Like this is the reason why. Do you remember when they employed a suck net? Stuck snet? Yeah. You know, I mean, that was for the same reason, right? They were trying to disarm the Iranian nuclear capability. Yeah. That was the same thing where they, but that was kind of like we didn't do it while wearing t-shirts. That we definitely did this. But they did that with computer virus, right? Which is pretty fascinating. Yeah. And people didn't have a problem with that. Well, I think people did that. Some people had a problem with that, obviously. But well, Iranians. Yeah, but also just like, OK, you know, you go down that road and, yeah, and, you know, where things can happen to, you know, I, a great example is, um, so one of the things that came out in a lot of the documents that's known released was that the NSA had worked with standards by the cult NIST in order to produce a random number generator that was back door. So random numbers are very important in cryptography. And if you can predict what the random numbers are going to be, then you win. And so the NSA had produced this random number generator that allowed them to predict what the random numbers would be because they knew of this one constant that was in there. They knew they knew a reciprocal value that you can't derive just by looking at it, but they they know because they created it. And they had what they called a nobody but us back door, no bus, nobody but us back door. And they got NIST to standardize this thing and then they got a company called Jupiter who makes routers and VPNs and stuff like that, junipers are to include this in their products. And so the idea was that like the NSA would have these capabilities, they had developed, you know, these vulnerabilities that they could exploit in situations like this, you know, that they could like take advantage of foreign powers and stuff like that in ways that wouldn't boomerang back at them. But what happened was, in I think, you know, 20 early teens, juniper got hacked and somebody secretly changed that one parameter that was like basically the back door to a different one that they knew the new the reciprocal value to. And it's most likely China or Russia that did this. And then what's kind of interesting is there's a big incident where the OPM, the Office of Personnel Management, I think, was compromised and they have records on, you know, foreign intelligence assets and stuff like that. That their systems were compromised. It seems like maybe by China. And what's sort of interesting is that they were running the juniper uh, networking gear that had been, you know, hacking this one specific way. And so it's kind of possible that like, you know, the NSA developed this back door that they were going to use for situations like this, you know, against foreign adversaries or whatever. And the whole thing just boomeranged back at them and the Office of OPM was compromised as a result. Wow. But this is like, um, I don't know. I think it's, you know, it's easy to look at things like stuck in that and stuff like that. And just be like, yeah, this is harm reduction or whatever, you know, but, um, like in the end, it can't have real consequences. And this is also why people are so hesitant about, you know, like the government was always like, well, why don't you develop a form of cryptography where it like works, except for us, you know, weak and access. Like, content, you know. Yeah. And it's like, well, this is why because, uh, if you can, if you can access it, if anybody can access it, like somehow that's going to boomerang back at you. Well, I remember when there was a terrorist attack in Bakersfield, California, is that where it was? I think it was Bakersfield where, uh, yeah, uh, San Bernardino, San Bernardino, thank you. Yeah. And there was, uh, an iPhone involved and Apple would nope in it for them. Yeah. It wouldn't allow the FBI to have access to it and people were furious. And they were like, if this, this starts here, yeah, this does not end well. Yeah. And I kind of saw their point, but I kind of saw the FBI's point too. Like, did you just open this one guys clearly a murderer has killed a ton of people and created this terrorist, uh, incident? Yeah. But I mean, it was, it was a little disingenuous too. Right. Where it's like the FBI, like the FBI had the entire iCloud backup for this device. Like the only thing they didn't have was like the previous two hours or something like that. And the reason they didn't have it is because they fucked up and like, uh, approached it in the wrong way and got themselves locked out of it. Oh, really? So it was like, they had, it was their own mistake that led to the situation where they didn't have the iCloud backup. So then it's like, what are you really going to go up this phone? You know, it's like the actual possibility of what was there was like extremely marginal. So do you think what they really want is the tools to be able to get into the restaurants where they've just been waiting for like the moment of like, okay, here we go. We got terrorists. We got, you know, like, yeah. That makes sense. What did you think like when the State Department of Whoever it was, banned Huawei phones? Yeah. Do you think there was? I mean, yeah, it's mostly political, right? Like it's, uh, it's complicated, right? Because there's like, you know, companies like Huawei and, um, you know, what the 10th one plus the people make TikTok. Okay. Yeah. Like they're, yeah, they're doing like all this sketchy shit. Um, but it's the same sketchy shit that like all of Silicon Valley is doing. You know, like it's not, um, is it really? Are there, is that a valid comparison to what they're doing in Silicon Valley? Like Huawei did have routers that had third party access apparently. And they were shown that information was going to a third party that was not supposed to be, right? Wasn't that part of the issue? I, I'm reading this wrong. Uh, well, okay. I think there's like a couple. Um, there, there have been incidents where it's like, yeah, there's like data collection that's happening. Yeah. Well, there's data collection happening like all Western products too, you know, like, I mean, and actually the way the Western products design, our design are really scary. I mean, in the telecommunications face, um, there's a legal requirement called Kalia communications and law enforcement actors and like that. The requires telecommunications equipment to have, um, to have eavesdropping like surveillance stuff built into it. Like when you produce the hardware in order to sell it in the United States, you've half done that. Which hardware was like phone switches and stuff. It's like when you make a normal phone call, it has to have a, uh, if we go, they call like a, uh, the ability to tap. Yeah. They call it something else, but it has to have, you know, this ability to, um, uh, record conversations, intercept, uh, lawful intercept. What is this? How does a signal call work? So signal calls and work, uh, not using the traditional telecommunications infrastructure. Uh, it's routing data over the internet, uh, and that data is intended and encrypted. So nobody can eavesdrop on those goals, including us. Um, and, but so communication equipment that is produced in the United States has to have, uh, this, uh, lawful intercept, so called the offer intercept, uh, capability. But what's crazy about that is that's the same, you know, it's like these are US companies and they're selling that all around the world. So that's the shift that gets shipped to UAE and, you know, so it's like, it's the secondary effect thing of like, you know, the United States government was like, we're, we're going to be responsible with this so whatever, we're going to have warrants or whatever. And even that's not true. And then that same equipment gets shipped to tyrants and, you know, repressive regimes all over the place. And they just got it already made things. You know, it's just available everyone's phone calls. Uh, so it's like, I don't know. Uh, it's, it's hard to indict Huawei for acting substantially different than the way then, you know, whatever the US industry acts. It's just certainly they have a different political environment. And, you know, they are much more willing to use that information to do really brutal stuff. Well, it wasn't just that they banned Huawei devices, but they also banned them from using Google. That's when I thought like, wow, this is really like, what do they know? Or what has been Google? Yeah. Yeah. Well, people has, um, no, so, you know, Android, you're talking about like, so so called that they have, they can't use the Android operating system anymore. They have to now they've developed their own operating system. Another, they're on ecosystem. They have their own app store. The whole deal. Yeah. So that's, that's also, um, that's a business thing. You know, where it's like Google's control over, you know, Google is producing this software Android and they're, it's just free, you know, they're, um, releasing it. But they want to maintain some control over the ecosystem because it's their thing that they're producing. Uh, and so they have a lot of requirements about it's like, oh, you know, it's like, okay, you can run Android. Oh, you want all this other stuff that we make that's not part of just like the stock free thing, you know, like play services and, you know, all the Google stuff and increasingly more and more of Android is just getting shoved into this proprietary bit, you know, and they're like, okay, you want access to this. Then it's going to cost you in these ways, you know, and I think it probably a gut to the point where Huawei was just like, um, we're not willing to pay, you know, even either monetarily or through whatever compromise that they would have to make and they were just like, we're going to do our own thing. I thought it was because of the state departments. Oh, it could have also been that there was a legal requirement that they stopped doing that. Yeah, I think I might be Jamie will find out. I think I think I might be right, but I'm not sure though. But it's just made me think like I understand that there's a sort of a connection that can't be broken between business and government in China and that business and government are united. It's not like, you know, like Apple and the FBI. Right. We're in China. They would just give them. Oh, yeah. They developed them. Yeah. They would help. Yeah. They would do it. They would have the tools to get into it. They wouldn't have to have this conversation. Yeah. Exactly. They just send it to the directly to the people. What we're terrified of is that these relationships that business and government have in this country, they're getting tighter and tighter and twined and we look at a country like China that does have this sort of an extraable connection between business and government. And we're terrified that we're going to be like that someday. Yeah. Yeah. Just did it. It is what it is. Yeah. I mean, and that's I think, you know, a lot of what Snowden was revealing. Yeah. I was like, you know, that there are already these relationships, you know, you know, the NSA called it Prism and, you know, tech companies just called it like the consoles or whatever that they had built for these, you know, for these requests. But it's, that's, yeah, it's happening. And I don't also, you know, it's sort of like, I think a lot of people, a lot of nations look at China and are envious, right? Where it's like, they've done this thing where they just, you know, they built like the great firewall of China. And that has served them in a lot of ways, you know, one surveillance, obviously, like they have total control of everything that appears on the internet. So not just surveillance, but also content moderation, propaganda, but then also, like it allows them to have their own internet economy. You know, where like China is large enough that they can have their own ecosystem where like, you know, Google, people don't use Google there, you know, people don't use, they have their own chat apps. They have their own search ins. They have their own social networks. They have their own everything. And I think a lot of nations like look at China and they're just like, oh, that was kind of smart. And it's like you have your own ecosystem, your own infrastructure that you control. And you have like able to do content moderation and you have the ability to do surveillance. And so I think the fear is that there's going to be like a bulk organization at the internet where, you know, Russia will be next. And then every country that has an economy large enough will go down the same room. Was it Jamie? There was a, it seemed like there's a couple of things that happened that are, what you're saying, but directly it seems to be sweeping crackdown on facial recognition tech house and Senate Democrats on Tuesday rolled out of legislation to halt federal use of facial recognition software and require state and local authorities to pause any use of the technology to receive federal funding. The facial recognition and biometric technology, memorial moratorium act, introduce Thursday, the marks one of the most ambitious crackdowns on fate. This has to do with that. It said it was part of this boycott that had to do with Google's like, anti-trust suit that also had to do with Facebook and they were looking into it. This is from like a month ago. I mean, I think this is connected to what you're saying. Just in the sense that like, you know, the people who are producing that facial recognition technology, it's not the government. It's, you know, volunteer whoever sounds services to the government. And then the government is then deploying this technology that they're getting from industry. And in kind of crazy ways, like there's a story of the Black Lives Matter protester who would lay like the police that like NYPD, you know, not like the FBI NYPD, like tracked him to his house using facial recognition technology. And so yeah, it's how do they do that? There's a story about it. I've been fine stories. No one knows that these things are. There's things supposedly all over New York City and Manhattan that are tracking everybody's faces as soon as they go in there. And people I've watched news videos from local New York, local media, asking people, have you seen these? What are they? They get no answers. Well, here's the hilarious crime has never been higher. You're a city crime right now is insane. That shit's not doing anything. Yeah. Well, everyone ran a mass too. That's also probably a problem. But I think, you know, the fear is that like, so there's this like, you know, circle of like, industry producing technology that is going into government. And like stuff like facial recognition technology just, just makes existing power structures much more difficult to contest. Do you use facial recognition on your phone? No, I don't have any answer anything that you use. You don't know with your iPhone. Oh, no, I just have a pen. Yeah. You don't use it. What's going on, Jimmy? New York City Police Department uses facial recognition software to track down a Black Lives Matter activist accused of assault after allegedly shouting into a police officer's ear with a bullhorn. That's it. The man, what about that guy who punched Rick Moranis? You fucks found him. They did. Yeah. There it was. We're not. Jail. But they did find him. How they find him? They have facial recognition jail. But he wear a mask. I don't know. Anyway, um, listen, I think what you're doing is very important. And I love the fact that you approach things the way you do and that you, you really are this idealistic person. It's not trying to make money off of this stuff. And you're, you're doing it because you think it's the right thing to do. And if there is a resistance, people like you are very important. You know, like what you've, what you've done by creating signal, it's very important. There's not, there's not a lot of other options. And there's no other options that I think are as secure or as, uh, as viable. Thank you. Thanks. Um, appreciate you saying that. And, uh, I supported and I try to tell other people to use it as well. Um, last word. Yeah, everything to say to everybody before we wrap this up. It's a lot of pressure. Sorry. Um, can I, can I put out a public, yeah, a plea for a project and trying to work on? Sure. Okay. I'm vaguely obsessed with this thing that happened in the 60s. Um, are you familiar with, uh, the Soviet space dogs? So the first animal in space was a dog. Yeah. Like a, uh, like a diet in space. Uh, sadly. The second animal in space was a dog called Stralka, uh, Stralka, a winter space made a back to earth and had puppies. Uh, whoa, those puppies can read minds. When Chris Jeff came to visit JFK in 1965, he brought with him the ultimate insult gift, which was one of the puppies. That's his insult. Oh, dude. It's like, oh, do you have anything that's been to space? We have extra puppies. You know, do you want one? You know, that's an insult. Dude. It's the ultimate insult gift. Like the United States had no space for a gram had never been, they, so we even was like way ahead of them. They're like, oh, we just got extra animals that have been to space. Like here have one, you know, it's a puppy. Stop being so personal. That's what I tell Kennedy. This had no space for a gram had never been, they had Soviet Union was like way ahead of them. They're like, oh, we just got extra animals that have been to space. Like here have one, you know. It's a puppy, stop being so personal. That's what I tell Kennedy. Just take the puppy. Well, Kennedy took the puppy. Can he take the puppy? The puppy had a cold war romance with one of Kennedy's dogs and they had puppies. Snap that the Kennedy's called the pupnix. And the pupnix captivated the imagination of children across America because Jackie Kennedy said something to you. She was like, I don't know what we're going to do with the dogs. You know, and that ignited a spontaneous letter-writing campaign from children across America who all requested one of the puppies. Jackie Kennedy selected two children in America, whose names were Mark Bruce and Karen House. And she delivered two puppies to each of these people. One of them lived in Missouri, the other lived in Illinois. And I have sort of been obsessed with the idea that those puppies had puppies and that those puppies had puppies and that somewhere in the American Midwest today are the descendants of the original animals in space. The first animal to go to space and survive. They probably been watered down so heavily. Maybe. But like Chihuahua's German Shepherd's shit. Well, they were all, they were. They were there. They were months. They were random dogs that they found from around the like space port because they thought that they would be like tougher. Oh, wow. But they were small. And so, yeah, I've been obsessed with the idea that these dogs could still be out there. And I've been trying to find the dogs. So I've been trying to track down these two people, notably Karen House because she got the female dog. And I think she's still alive. And I think she lives in the Chicago area. But I can't get in touch with her because I'm not, I'm not an investigative journalist. I don't know how to do this. So if anybody knows anything about the whereabouts of Karen House or the descendants of the Soviet space dogs, I'm very interested. My, my goal is just to meet one, you know? How should someone get in touch with you? I'm on the internet. Okay. Moxie. Just like that. I'm on the internet. My name is Moxie. I love it. Thanks, man. I really appreciate it. I really enjoyed our conversation. Like, thank you. Bye, everybody.