The Jerogan experience. I'd say you're honest, I mean this. I think you're one of the most open-minded people I've ever met. Thank you. You have very little like, fuck off in you. I got a little fuck off, but my fuck off is for fuckery. When people just, when it's like openly horseshit, like come on, if someone's like, you know, like fucking psychics or something like that, you gotta meet my reader, like fuck out here. My reader, I've had people say that to me. My psychic reader. Let her read your cards, like no tarytards. No, I'm not gonna let her, not gonna let her read my cards. There might be a miss Cleo, remember, Miss Cleo in the 1990s? Sure. Didn't Deon Warwick have a show like psychic friends network? Wasn't there something like that? Was it Deon Warwick? Was it right? Yeah, Deon Warwick, the amazing singer, had the psychic friends network. That's so weird. He was a singer any to the hedge? A woman. Deon Warwick. Do you know who Deon Warwick? Do you know who Deon Warwick? I know that song. Yes. Psychic friends network. 1992. That's Deon Warwood. Yeah, look at that. Deon Warwick would sit you down with a bunch of people that were lying and they would pretend that they knew things and they would sit there. Oh, there's Linda Jones. Oh my God. Yeah, that guy is psychic and she's psychic and they were, oh, these are people from one life to live in days. So there's soap opera stars that were like, this psychic changed the way I do my readings. Now when I like character, who called those psychic friends? The voice of the voice of the group. Let me hear that. Give me some of that. Go back. That voice of the end of our relationship. I mean, it's just going to ultimately destroy. No, no, go back. Go back. I need to hear what this fucking nonsense is. Here would one of our psychics head to say about daytime TV's hottest couple. is this going to be the end of our relationship. I mean, it's just going to ultimately destroy our, I asked her. Yeah. Me, others. I'm not fucking, imagine that's the commercial. She's like, you asked her that. What the fuck is wrong with you? Don't you know we're going to be together forever. You're such an asshole, Mark. Oh my God. How the fuck did you ask the psychic? Something you already know. We're going to be together forever, right? Goddamnit. That, uh, first of all, 90s info commercials are glorious. What about Dion Warwicks hair? How about that? That was something special. You never heard Dion Warwicks saying? No, I, the song that you just sang I've heard before, but I know who the fuck sang it as a nickname. It's beautiful for us. It's always sad when someone's like genuinely talented and you wind up, you see them wind up like doing something like that. Like, oh, yeah, people off. Just stealing. That is because it really is. The psychic within. Oh my God. Oh boy. What is that a game? It's a psychic kit. Oh my God. Oh no. Do you remember? No, Dion. It's only 2195, Joe. I feel like we should order it. It contains a full color video featuring Lingeed Blinda, Georgia. That's that lady. Go back to that so I could see what that said there. Full color video featuring Lisa, Georgia, Linda, Georgia and the master psychics. Oh, look, they're taking in two eyes. How about they spelled taking wrong? I don't trust them. They're, they're tack-a-ing. Talk to you. Talk to you. Talk to you. They're taking you step by step, but they're spelling taking with an extra eye. Nobody even caught that. Wonderful. Go back to that in a week and they're going to talk and shoot about those. It changed the wording. The psychic within. Do you remember crossing over with John Edward? Oh, that guy was a real charlotte. All right. You know, I think he got fired when he tried to do it with like 9-11 victims. I don't know if I am I am I right about that Jamie. I think that's what happened. I'm going off memory on that one. Oh my God. Yeah. The audacity. Oh, I know. That's what happened. The network was like, you're doing what? Oh my God. The audacity. Oh, that guy's terrible man. That sounds about correct. Wow. That was all memory too. It makes sense though. I mean, if you're a thief, you're a thief. Yeah, that's all they are. They're just thieves. They're just doing it in a different way. They're stealing and lying in a different way. It's just instead of like breaking into someone's car, they're pretending that they have an earpiece in and they're pretending they can sense. where your childhood trauma comes from. You lost your father in your tent. Oh my God, we did it. Some of these people it was less than two months after it. Wow, imagine that holy fucking shit. Imagine that he was like, I know what we're going to do. We're going to capitalize on this. This is going to take our show to the next level. They caught one of these guys remember. I think the guy's name is Peter Popoff. He used to have all these infomercials at night where he's like, buy the holy water and it'll save you. Oh, and then they caught him. I think somebody did this thing where it was like a sting operation. They had he had a earpiece in and he was listening to people and he was like telling them stuff that they thought he couldn't know but he heard it earlier. That's them. Look at that fuck. He looks evil. This fucker. Yeah, he definitely grows. Whoa. Wow. He looks demonic. He does doesn't he? Like a ghost. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.