[Music] All right, Jason Georgian Johnny, thank you for coming, man. Good to see you, brother. It's a pleasure to see you again, Dan. Our last podcast was bananas. We covered all kinds of crazy. What have you been up to, bro? Writing. Yeah. You know, I mean, uh, one of the few silver linings to being banned from academia is it leaves you all your time to do writing. That's right. That's the convenience of being a Nazi mad agent. Yes. Yes. Go figure. As you're famously accused of. Yeah. Being defamed in both of those ways simultaneously. Right. Um never had any dealings with Nazis as far as I'm aware. Did meet with probably four different Mossad agents, but I never accepted their offer for shekels. So, I'm a free agent. So, what uh what kind of stuff you have you been writing? Well, uh, my latest book is, uh, Satan, which has a lot on the simulation theory in it that we'll get into. And, um, then the latest one, the cover is up there in the background. It's called metapolmos, which is a Greek word, ancient Greek word meaning uh, super struggle or metawar and or uber in German, metapolamos. And that one is a overview of my entire philosophical project divided into the domains of ontology, epistemology, ethics, aesthetics and politics. So it summarizes my whole uh philosophical project in terms of different domains of philosophy. And I wrote it to be a kind of companion volume to philosophy of the future which I brought you last time. Yes. This one is an overview of my work in terms of the original concepts that I've developed. philosophy of the future was and this one metapoleos is in terms of the different domains of philosophical thought. So they're they're kind of good companion volumes for one another and they're either a really good introduction to my work as a whole or a kind of executive summary. What is the um general idea of Satan? The general idea of Satan. Well, the term means uh the aon of Satan. the Aon of Satan or the Aon of Satana. And so I'm playing with this term Satana. It's the name of a um I guess you could call her a goddess really. She's more a tightness. You know, there was this distinction between the gods and the titans, which you see in Greek culture. You see it in ancient Hindu culture as well with the Davas and the Asheras. Satana is a titanus who was conceived of as the mother of the gorg guns. You know, Medusa. So, these these uh Yeah, I just read your article. Snakehaired uh feminine deities. They were called They come from Medadia, right? Well, no. Medadia was the chief priestess of them, right? She was they were like her minions. She was a witch who basically um did the most to institutionalize and organize the cult of these gorgans. And the chief gorgun, the kind of mother of the coven of gorg guns is Satana. This was a cult that existed in the caucuses going back to probably at least a thousand BC. Mhm. And uh what's interesting about first of all the name originally Satana in uh old Iranian language it means mother of a hundred because she was believed to be the initiatric of heroes. She would take these champions under the Caspian Sea into what was believed to be an underwater city. and she would train them and initiate them and confer a broad sword on them and also potentially allow them to look into this grail that she was the keeper of. So much much later like 1500 years 1,800 years later this mythos would eventually make its way into Europe together with the migration of the Skyian and Sarmatian people and it would become what's known as the Arthurian mythos in Europe where this figure Satana becomes the lady of the lake and then you know Arthur King Arthur becomes the archetypal hero uh who is initiated by this grail mistress and who's given the broadsword and so forth. So the mythos of Satana is the most primordial form of what later becomes the Arthurian grail mysticism of Europe of Gothic Europe and Celtic Europe. And it's brought there by these uh Caucasian Iranian people, these northern Iranian people called the Skyians and Sarmatians. The Greeks also called the Sarmatians Amazon. Their whole legends about the warrior women come from this culture because they had uh female warriors. In fact, I mean they were arguably a matriarchal culture with female rulers and female warriors. Very unusual culture because they also I think were the first people to invent iron warfare implements and chain mail armor. In any case, they worshiped this figure, Satana. And round about, I think 700 800 BC, they mass invaded the Middle East, and it said they went all the way up to uh Egypt. So I've made an argument in some of my work that the he what we believe is the Hebrew term Satan Hassatan the adversary probably comes from this satana in origin because the serpent symbolism associated with Satan from the book of Genesis onward, right? in various aesthetic representations has a distinctly female connotation like the serpent in Eden was depicted in female form often throughout the history of art and the serpents are of course associated with the gorgans they have serpents in their hair right which is really a it's a reference to the fact that viper venom was used right in this cult right yeah so the title comes from that okay it's a play on the cult of Satana but the way I use this from the opening chapter chapter onward is uh in terms of the contemporary debate over whether the UFO phenomenon is demonic. Right? So you have these Collins elite people. Yeah. Who think that you know either angels or more probably demons are what's behind the whole Collins elite. The Collins elite. Yeah. The Collins elite. I think we got into this briefly the last time I was here. Okay. But some people think that the Collins elite was an unofficial inter agency organization with representation from the CIA, the Air Force and various other military intelligence organizations that was formed they think some people argue like Nick Redern I think in his book uh on what was that book called? Is Tucker Carlson a part of the Collins elite? You say that you say that h you know probably more than half jokingly. No, I don't think Tucker's part of the Collins elite, but I think that they've gotten to his head. I think that these are the people who put this in Tucker Carlson's head and he's been talking to too many of these folks. Yeah. Um so anyway, some people think they were formed in 1947 to basically between 45 and 47 to spy on Jack Parsons and investigate what Jack Parsons, the occultist and rocket scientist, was doing. uh you know with Elron Hubard and others in the middle of the western desert right I have argued uh they had a spot in Florida they were working on some stuff didn't they were all over the place matter fact I think it was in Florida that Hubard you know the founder of Scientology stole uh Parson's yacht and his girlfriend what I think that was off the coast of Florida that he did that he had a bad falling out I told you right that the flag building for Scientology their primary headquarters where he parked his yacht is like 20 minutes from here. I think that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think he used this as his launching point for his uh various off the radar activities in the oceans of the world later in his life, right? Yeah. So anyway, but let's not go into Hubard land. Yeah, let's not. So some people think it was formed in 47 to investigate Parsons and so forth, but I actually argue in Satan that the Collins elite probably goes back to the 1896 1897 airship mystery. Yeah. Where there was this um patent attorney who claimed to represent the inventors of the mystery airships, right? And this guy's name was Collins. And look, I don't want to be one of these guys who says the same thing every time. And I think we did discuss this last time, but very long story short, in a nutshell, this patent attorney, George Collins, gave an extensive testimony to the San Francisco Chronicle in I think it was 1897 about, you know, what how what these airships were, how they were going to be publicly declared, you know, the company was going to publicly declare itself on the stock exchange and and, you know, come forth with this technology and so and all this. And then like three days later, the San Francisco Chronicle got back to him and wanted to have another conversation with him at which point he said, "I I don't remember saying any of that stuff to you." And it turned out that he gave this entire testimony in a trans state. So this George Collins was possessed and delivered the story. And then it turned out that the supposed airship inventor was some dentist who invented dental bridges who had dreamed of building airship from his childhood. Right. So, so this uh paranormal angle starts to emerge in the story where you wonder, you know, are these airships psychic projections of some kind? Are people's perceptions being manipulated? And I think from that time onward is when the feds got involved and started to develop theories about what kind of diabolical intelligence might actually be behind this phenomenon. This reminds me, Steve, can you pull up my Twitter page real quick? I want to show you this photo I found of Jacques Valle last night. I think it's uh very appropriate. Just go to X and just go to my my uh account page. There's a whole article about it, too. You know, I knew Jacqu Valet at one point. Oh, that's not it. That That's it right there. That's what you were saying last time. Scroll down. Scroll down. Right there. Up. Right. Click that photo. Look at that. File with Alistister Crowley. Oh, wow. No, that's Anton Leave also. That's what I meant. That's what I meant. I'm sorry. Crowley was long. That's what I meant. Jacqu Valet and Anton Ley. Yeah, that doesn't surprise me at all. First of all, they both lived in San Francisco, right? And Yeah, it doesn't. Apparently, they would have dinner parties and play Donkey Kong together. Donkey Kong. Yeah, that's what the article says. Well, but that's fascinating because Jacqu Val always talks about how, you know, he seems to be hyperinterested in the whole angels and demons stuff. Yeah. Well, the opening line of Satan, the first chapter is called diabolical disclosure. And the opening line is uh how does one disclose the devil? That is without ending the world. Yeah. And it comes back to this idea that the Collins elite see themselves as holding back the apocalypse because they think that if these phenomena are predominantly demonic, disclosing that would mean disclosing the antichrist, which would then precipitate the second coming or accelerate the second coming. So they think they're somehow doing the world a favor by maintaining the secrecy regarding the phenomenon because it's essentially buying us time and holding back the end of the world. So I play with that idea at the opening of my first chapter in Satan. So these people are religious types. They fanatically religious fanatics. Yeah. From the air force have to maintain this worldview or this view of the phenomena. Yeah. And you know, I think that probably in, you know, going back to maybe 47 or the 1950s, they've been recruited from among evangelicals or traditionalist Catholics. But if you go back probably to the 1890, late 1890s with the airship mystery, I don't know whether they started out that way or whether they were spooked into having these kinds of beliefs. Right. But look, think about it this way, Danny. If airships that look like constructions from out of Jules Vern sci-fi novels are showing up not just in the sky over tens of states. Yeah. But they're landing in people's fields and sheriffs and judges are coming up to these things and touching them and interacting with the airship pilots. Yeah. If it turns out that those things aren't real, meaning they're not constructed objects, they're some kind of a projection. Mhm. Whether it's a psychoinetic projection like a a material what they call materialization in psychical research or whether it's some kind of a solid hologram. In any case, as a gentleman in the 1890s or frankly even, you know, this would this would be how most people today would read it in in America. You would probably consider that a diabolical deception, a machination of the devil, right? to engage in the manipulation of perception on that kind of scale. Mhm. Uh people tend to associate that with I don't know, you know, satanic deception. Oh my god. Seems silly. Yeah. Well, the prisms through which many people and institutions look at this phenomena are silly or simple-minded, right? And dangerously so. Mhm. All right. We were going to talk about the moon. Yeah. Yeah. Let's go to the moon because what what's what's so interesting? What what um first of all, what made you start to pay attention to the moon? You know, I think this is a good place to start. It's it's was the start of my interest in it in a serious way and it's actually a good place uh a good trajectory by which to go to the moon. and that's that I paid close attention to Stephen Greer's disclosure project back when he was first starting it up in the 19 I think it was the late 1990s a long time ago I think it was like 93 or something it was yeah I I might have become aware of it in the mid to late 90s okay so we're talking when I was like 17 16 17 years old from early on I paid attention to the testimony that he amassed from all of these people who have been involved with the military with defense contractor actors. Do you believe all the stuff that he says? Short answer, no. Imagine 6 months from now, what do you look like? Now, imagine you had HIMS the whole time and how much better that could be. Who says your hair can't get better with age? With Hims, you're allowed to have fuller, thicker hair. And HIMS is the perfect solution to make your hair great again. Try Hims hair loss solutions and you'll be joining hundreds of thousands of subscribers who found their hair again without ever leaving the couch. Here's the deal. Hims offers doctor approved clinically backed treatments like finasteride and minoxidil. The good stuff that's proven to actually regrow hair in 3 to 6 months. Whether you're into chewables, pills, sprays, or serums, they've got a solution that fits your vibe. No awkward doctor visits, and no waiting rooms. Just answer a few quick questions online and a medical provider will see if the treatment is right for you. If it is, they'll ship it straight to your door for free. No insurance? No problem. One low price covers everything from treatments to ongoing care. And with hundreds of thousands of happy customers, HIMS is pretty much my go-to for getting thicker, fuller hair and my confidence. Why wait? Hims has you covered, literally. Start your free online visit at hms.com/danny. That's hs.com/dny for your personalized hair loss treatment options. It's hs.com/danny. Results vary based on studies of topical and oral minoxidil and finasteride. Prescription products require an online consultation with a healthcare provider who will determine if a prescription is appropriate. Restrictions apply. See website for full details and important safety information. Make your hair great again with hymns. But look, I think in the case of Steven Greer, and maybe we can come back around to this because I saw parts of your show with him. In the case of Steven Greer, you have to draw some very um significant distinctions between the testimony he's getting from people who served in sensitive positions in the military-industrial complex versus his interpretations of those testimonies which is being filtered through his own worldview and ideology and then furthermore his own personal experiences because Greer came out like what was it 20 years ago saying he himself was a contactee I think from childhood Mhm. And he started doing these C5 like protocols for summoning entities and so forth, right? Yeah. So there's a great deal of difference between those kinds of claims versus amassing testimony from basically expert witnesses. Yeah. Right. And I find the, you know, the stuff he did early on to be much more convincing and much more solid. the the whole the the origin story of being an ER doctor to all of a sudden getting a call to go to dinner with the head of the CIA seems a little suspect to me. I don't know. But I'll tell you what I found very interesting about some of that early testimony. There was this one case and here we're going to get into a case of murder also. Let's do it. There was this one case of a uh I think he was Sergeant. Yeah, Sergeant Carl Wolf, who although he wasn't fairly high ranking, I mean, you know, this is how compartmentalized uh information works in the military. You can be relatively low ranking person, but if you have technical expertise in a particular area, you have to be given a high level security clearance because you need to work on some technical aspect of a very sensitive subject. So in the case of uh Carl Wolf, he was a photographic technician and repair man. And I think it was 1965, so a few years before we went to the moon, right? We've got the lunar reconnaissance orbiter going around the moon preparing for the Apollo mission. And Carl Wolf is called in in his capacity as a photo technician, photographic repair man. He's called into what they told him was an NSA facility and I think he was stationed on Langley Air Force Base at the time and they say, you know, we need you to come over to this NSA facility and work on this uh photographic processing machine. In 1965, nobody knew what the [ __ ] the NSA was. It was so secret that people didn't even know it existed. So Wolf assumed that it was a NASA facility. He heard NSA as NASA. Okay. And it also makes sense in terms of what he saw when he got there, which is that when he walked in to this place, first of all, he saw scientists from all around the world. U and he could tell because they were of various ethnicities. He saw Japanese people, Indian people, people from multiple countries speaking multiple languages, European languages. Sure there's a few Germans in there. Probably more than a few. And so he's taken into the photo lab, right? And there's another guy in there who's the same rank as him, I think also a sergeant. And before he gets to work on repairing this machine, this sergeant, and the two of them are in there alone, right? This sergeant can't help himself and he breaks protocol and he shows Carl Wolf the photographs that have been coming off this machine he was brought in to repair. And they're mosaic photographs where you know they take the orbiter will take a bunch of images, bunch of shots and then they'll lay them next to each other and form a mosaic of a larger site that's been targeted for satellite photography. Right? And the sergeant says, "We found a city." and he starts showing him these mosaics, putting them next to each other, and they're highresolution photographs of a megalithic city on the dark side of the moon. Spherical buildings, polygonal buildings, obelisks like the, you know, needles in Egypt. Um, and dishes, he said, like that looked like, you know, radio telescope dishes. Hm. Huge structures which I guess the resolution of the photographs was so good that he could tell that they weren't made of metal. They were made of something like a poured stone, kind of like concrete, which is interesting because a lot of ancient sites on Earth are made from that type of material, right? these enigmatic megalithic structures on Earth seem to have a similar construction as what Carl Wolf uh at least what was what was you know um presented to him as a city on the dark side of the moon and so he's looking at this thing and um he then then the basically the somebody walked in and so the sergeant cuts off his uh you know cuts off this the you know to illegal legally volunteering this classified information to Wolf and he goes to work repairing the photography machine. But anyway, he said he went home and he expected that either that night or like sometime in the next week or sometime in the next year, we would hear about this city that had been photographed on the dark side of the moon. And of course, it was never revealed. Right? So this was uh one of the most striking early testimonies that I heard from out of Greer's Disclosure Project that got me really interested in the moon. And what's really creepy is that that was 60 6 what? 655 a few years before Apollo. And what's really disturbing is that uh this disclosure wave that we're in the midst of right now began in 2017, right, with that New York Times piece, right? So round about 2018, there are serious discussions about subpoening people to get testimony from them. And then later than that, Grush now, you know, spearheaded this initiative to have people come and testify in front of Congress and release individuals from their security oaths, right? Well, guess when uh poor Carl Wolf met with an untimely end 2018, one year after disclosure starts, his bike was run over by a truck. How old was he? Young, I mean, relative. Can you find Can you find the story of Carl Wolf? He might have been in his 50s or something. Wow. And uh I mean, this is what happened to John Mack, too. This is how they murdered John Mack. They had him run over on the road. Yeah. But isn't it Yeah. I I understand that that's sketchy about John Mack, but do do you think it's do you think it's probable that that he was whacked? 71% not really. Oh, yeah. I do think so. I do think so. He was 74 years old. The 74y old uh he was in good enough shape that he was riding his bike regularly. Can you click on it? Page not found. Just search Carl Wolf with a K. Oh, it's not this one. No. Well, it has it correct underneath there. Yeah. Oh, Carl. I see. Carl Wolf with a K. Claimed to have top secret NASA photos showing alien structures on the moon. He worked uh with a tactical air command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia and had top secret clearance. In 20 Okay, in 2001, Wolf made a startling claim that NASA was hiding evidence of artificial structures on the far side of the moon. He died in a bike accident on October 10th, 2018 in New York after being hit by a tractor trailer. So, I think it's awfully convenient that just when people are going to be subpoenaed to testify under oath and released from their security clearances, this guy gets has an accident. Okay. So, let's let's go further down this this uh path to the moon. Quick little Sure. Quick quick quick question. I don't want to derail this. Yeah, go ahead. But have you heard of a guy named um Hal Pavvenmire? Okay, continue. Okay, so they had these photographs, right? Those photographs went somewhere. I mean, there was a whole room full of international scientists that Carl Wolf ran into was on on his way to repair that machine. So, these photographs went somewhere. Well, guess what? These photographs show up again later in the history of military intelligence. In the 1970s, uh, when Ingo Swan started to work for the Stanford Research Institute on contract for the CIA, some guy who identified himself as Lambert Dolphin, which is probably a pseudonym or code name. this Lambert Dolphin basically um he he pulled Ingo Swan from out of the unit that he was working with. This unit that was basically a CIA unit, right? So this Lambert Dolphin, whoever he was, and Swan was never able to figure out what outfit in the US government this guy was really working for, he had the authority to take a CIA asset out of the CIA remote viewing program and put him on another task. And Swan was blindfolded. He was flown in a helicopter to a classified facility. It was one of these deep underground facilities. And he recounts having gone down in an elevator like Lord knows how deep. This is in Swann's book penetration. So Swan says he goes down there and they want his, you know, talent as a remote viewer and they start targeting him, you know, on these photographs that are inside envelopes. and he basically starts describing the moon, but he's standing in the middle of a nexus of roads inside a city on the moon. And he describes these gargantuan buildings, huge titanic scale of construction. He sees the same obelisks that Carl Wolf describes, you know, like the needles in ancient Egypt. And he said, "By the way, I got the impression that those were purely ceremonial. They didn't have any particular function." M but he saw other buildings that looked like reactor domes like as if they were you know nuclear power plants or something like that and receiving dishes and antennas and so forth. So he describes this Titanic city and you know it stands to reason that whatever was in those envelopes were probably the photographs that were taken by the orbiter back in ' 65 before Apollo. the photographs that Carl Wolf had reported seeing while he was repairing that machine. Wow. So now you have a second point of confirmation. Now here's the really creepy thing, Denny. What else Ingo Swan saw on the dark side of the moon were masses of people huddled together in ramshackle shelters. People who were naked and who were being used as slave labor. This is what he said. He said that and now the fact that they were naked and apparently breathing while working inside craters on the moon, who knows, maybe mining helium 3 or whatever, suggests that there was some kind of an artificial atmosphere that maybe where they were working was underneath a transparent dome that wasn't, you know, visible to Swan. Sure. But in any case, that that's not the important point. The important point and the disturbing one is that he saw slave labor on the moon and the people who were directing it were these tall Nordicl looking fellows, one of whom could see Swan. And this has been reported by other uh remote viewers where sometimes when they're sent to a target, whether it's a contemporaneous target or whether it's some event in the past, they're witnessed by whoever's there as if like they're a ghost and and those people are seeing a ghost. Yeah. Well, this Nordic on the dark side of the moon saw Swan and he got the distinct impression like the guy was telling him telepathically, "Why the [ __ ] are you here? You don't belong here. Get out of here." Interesting. Okay. Now, that fits with something else that I was told. I was told this by a an officer in the CIA who had read my book, Closer Encounters, and he had he wanted to have a conversation with me because he told me that basically when was this? This was in two two years ago, two and a half years ago. This is his call. He's like, "Yo, I work for the CIA. Can we talk?" He knew someone I knew. Oh, okay. And he got in touch through that person. and he b anyway I don't want to go off on a tangent but long story short he he was like how did you put all these jigsaw puzzle pieces together do he was looking to see if there was a leak and whether it needed to be plugged it's springtime that means going out more staying out longer and getting stinky but that's where our sponsor Mando shines the only thing greater than Mando is the satisfaction I get knowing I can't offend my guest's nose unlike Steve unlike all the other basic deodorants we've all tried from the grocery store. Mando lasts longer than any of them. I keep one in my jiu-jitsu bag. I keep one in my gym bag. I keep one here at the studio and one to throw at Steve when the guests complain about his cheesy feet. What makes Mando so different? It's a cleansing bar and it controls your odor for 72 hours. And that's perfect for long hours at work or hiding from the feds. It's safe to use on your pits package cracks and feet. And it comes in bourbon leather, clover woods, Mount Fuji or Pro Sport. My favorite is Mount Fuji. And don't forget, this was made by a doctor who saw firsthand how normal BO was being misdiagnosed and mistreated. But Danny, why should I choose this over soap alone? 12 hours after a shower, the average man's grundle odor was a 5 out of 10. After using Mando, it was 0 out of 10. Sniff on that, Steo. Mando is so good, you can now get them in Walmart and Target. But for the best deals, go to shopmando.com. Mando starter pack is perfect for new customers. It comes with solid stick deodorant, cream tube deodorant, and two free products of your choice, like mini body wash, and deodorant wipes, and free shipping. And as a special offer to our listeners, new customers can get $5 off the starter pack with our exclusive code. That equates to over 40% off your starter pack by using the code danny at shopmando.com. That's sopo.com. Please help support the show and tell them we sent you. Smell fresher. stay dryer and boost your confidence from head to toe with Mando because he said that there were too many things in my book that were the same conclusions that they had reached based on having access to classified information and he was wondering how the hell I put these same pieces together in the same way about this moon stuff all kinds of things the subjects that I discuss in you know this book closer encounters okay and uh but the moon came up among other things and he said, "Listen, after Swan was sent, we kept sending people to the moon, remote viewers, and we distinctly got the message from these guys on the moon. Do not keep sending people here. This is off limits." And we didn't listen to them. And the last viewer that we sent up there, his soul is trapped on the moon. His body is in a coma in a special medical facility run by the CIA. and his family has been given like medical compensation or whatever. They they told him like they told his family that the guy had died in the line of duty or whatever. And he's been held in stasis for years and years as they wait for his soul to come back from the moon where apparently there's the capacity to lure and trap somebody's consciousness, which they finally did to one of these CIA remote viewers after repeatedly telling them not to not to surveil whatever is going on up there. Strange. We had a guy on here named David Mohouse. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He was a psych. He was a remote viewer a part of the as a he was a part of these programs for a long time. I think it was in the 70s. I read his book Psychic Warrior. Psychic Warrior. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And he said that he remote viewed the moon and there was nothing. He's like it's all [ __ ] There's nobody there. I don't know whether he was being blocked or what, but I can tell you some other things about the moon that are much creepier than a city on the dark side of it. Well, and and here's another thing. If there was a city, why is it only on the dark side? Well, because that side faces away from us all the time. So, because whoever built it doesn't want us to see it. Of course. Okay. Of course, that's the convenient place to put it. There's also another reason that's technical, which is that if you if you put, you know, we've been studying this in terms of potential lunar colonization, that if you put um listening telescopes uh you know, like the Araibo dish, Yeah. that's meant to convey signals across. If you put it on the side of the moon that faces the earth, there's too much interference with radio signals coming from the earth. So, if you want to have uh basically interpace communication from the moon to elsewhere, it's better to put something on the on the side that always faces away from us so that you're not bombarded with radio signals that are being transmitted from the earth. Right? That's a technical reason why you would do it. mainly I think it's you know for concealment purposes. Okay. But the story of of what's going on on the moon uh is is a lot more um it's a lot more startling than finding a a city on the dark side of it. Right. Because you could be dealing with a natural satellite that has been colonized at who knows what time by whatever space fairing civilization. No. It looks like it looks like there's a a much more disturbing scenario here. Uh and you know, our government became aware of this during Apollo 12 and 13. During Apollo 12, I think it was the lander uh that impacted the moon um in a way that set off a seismometer that had been prepositioned there. There was a seismograph that was pre-positioned on the moon. And when the Apollo 12 lander hit the surface of the moon, the signal that came from the seismograph was consistent with the ringing or vibration of a hollow object. Right? So the way that the shock wave passed through the moon suggested that there was very little inside the moon. Right? Okay. It rang like a bell as they described it for a while. Right. In the first case, it was for almost an hour. Mhm. So then they got curious about this and in Apollo 13, they deliberately crashed the third stage of of Apollo 13 into the surface of the moon to carry out a test to see whether this was a repeatable phenomenon. Right? And this time the seismograph not only confirmed the uh the the resonance passing through a hollow object, but the moon rang like a bell for 3 hours. So, and they were able to tell like how much more or less of the moon, you know, is apparently hollow, right? And it's it's uh it's really shocking. It's like the moon goes down for about 20 miles as a solid structure and then on the inside there's a distance of about a,000 miles radially 1,000 miles from the interior of the shell to the core radially in every direction. In other words, the distance between Los Angeles and Seattle or New York and St. Lewis or Paris and Prague out from the center is hollow inside the moon. There was a recent NASA article that came out. I think it was on the NASA website where they said they discovered caves like underground caverns in the moon which would suggest that it was like maybe like a honeycomb structure on the inside or something like that. I suspect that it's not natural caverns, but that what they're seeing are the hollows between all kinds of comp uh complex machinery that are inside that structure. One of the other things that they noted with these impact tests was that the moon sort of it seemed to compensate and correct for the impact in a way that suggested there were oscillators inside the structure. Right? So, I think probably there's machinery inside this thing. Now another uh data point that corroborates that going back to the remote viewers sure is that um Joe McMongle was tasked with uh remote viewing Mars in 1984 and this was a CIA operation run at the Monroe Institute. So it was CIA he was working on contract for the CIA and this was done at the at the Monroe Institute. He was the first remote viewer, right? I think he might have been. Well, no, I think Ingo Swan was the first remote viewer, but I think he had the designation 001 or something like that. Yeah, maybe it was two. I don't know. Yeah. But in any case, uh in 1984, Monroe Institute, and this has since been released. This is one of these classified documents um that uh has since been declassified. It's called like Mars 1 million BC. You can look it up. Joe McMondon. Mars 1 million BC. Yeah. Joe McMongle and um so look Joe McMongle is tasked to look at he doesn't know of course he's working blind to the target that's how remote viewing is right but what's inside these envelopes are the photographs that the uh that the Viking um probe took on Mars in 1976 okay where we got back these images of the pyramids and the the fort and the face infamously, right? So, there are all these apparent man-made megalithic structures in the Sedonia region of Mars which were first photographed uh by uh the Viking mission in 1976. And that's what was inside these envelopes, okay, when McMongle was doing this remote viewing session. and he described being in the midst of the ruins of a megalithic city with gigantic pyramids. He said they they seemed like they were maybe three times the size of the Great Pyramid in Giza. Wow. And he described uh part of the Stargate project. Yeah. He described a maze of structures under these pyramids like subterranean tunnels and hallways. Mhm. At one point he walks through one of these hallways and it leads to an opening and he finds himself on the outside of the pyramid looking up at it. Mhm. Looking up across the face of the pyramid. And he describes uh also these um these highways that are trenches. They're these perfectly geometric trenches cut across miles and miles of Mars's surface. And he said his impression was that they were used for craft. Like you know there are bad storms on Mars, right? So if you had hovercraft, hover cars or whatever, you would want them to be uh transiting through something that had high walls on either side that was a you know sunken channel basically to avoid a sandstorm. To avoid a sandstorm go passing over the top of your head. Yeah. Like some Star Wars. So this is this is basically he describes this okay during his remote viewing session. But he says, "Look, the civilization is long dead. I'm seeing, you know, the ruins of a civilization that once was eons before this." And he was tested at 1 million BC. So they said to him, "Okay, so go back to when these people were still alive and thriving." And he goes way, way back. Now I we can infer from another data point that I'll come to you know how far back he went okay but he doesn't say in the session but he goes back to when these people were around and man he describes Nordicl looking super tall people in skintight jumpsuits people people who look like Scandinavians except he said they're they had more like a I don't know like between an Olympic swimmer and a football player's physique with very broad shoulders, not an ounce of body fat. He said he could see all their musculature through their skintight suits. And what McMmon relates is that these people were facing the end of their civilization. And some of them had this uh what he describes as very philosophical sense of resignation where they were like, well, we had our time. It's, you know, it's not fair for us to ask for more time. We've had more time than than we should have had, some of them. And some of them are still trying to survive and endure. And the ones who are trying to survive, he says, they've looked for a way out. And no matter what they do, they can't seem to find a way out. So, just pin that somewhere. Right. Then he says they designed and and got into a spacecraft that was cylindrical and which is is very much the description of a lot of these cylindershaped cigar-shaped UFOs, metallic cigar- shaped craft. And they went to another planet which they were scouting out to see uh whether it was a viable world for them to relocate to. And this other planet was it was nothing like Mars. It was very green. overgrown with vegetation in fact. But there were constant storms on it, electrical storms, typhoons. There was a lot of volcanic activity on this planet. And they basically concluded that they couldn't settle there without altering the planet, without terraforming it in some way to make it more habitable. So this is a long conversation to have during a remote viewing session. Yeah. So they got all this out of him, right? I think and those are all the important points and very detailed. Yes. So now you put this next to what uh Dr. John Brandenburgg discovered regarding Mars. Dr. Brandenburgg uh who I got to spend a few days with in in um uh New Mexico a number of years ago. He worked on the Clementine mission for NASA and at one point he was working at Sandia Labs which is where I think a lot of the nuclear weapons are designed and he was looking at um isotopic data from Mars. So, you know, every planet has uh you know, certain um amount of isotopes of different materials and and metals and so forth on it, right? And apparently the isotopic ratio of xenon 129 is consistent across the entire solar system except for on Mars and our thermonuclear test sites on Earth. There's a deviation from the norm of the isizotopic signature of xenon 129 at our thermonuclear test sites on Earth. And we find the same thing at Sedonia on Mars. Why is it different on nuclear test sites? There something happens when and it has to be not an atomic bomb but a thermonuclear bomb. When a thermonuclear bomb is detonated, that leaves a trace of xenon 129 in that area, which is not the normal basically distribution of that isotope that you would find, you know, on Earth or on any of the other rocky bodies in the solar system. Okay? And according to Brandenburgg, it's a very distinct signature. It's unmistakable and it's very specifically associated with thermonuclear weapons detonation. Then after you know uh he discussed this with one of the scientists at Sandia Labs whose expertise is working on nuclear weapons. He checked for other isotopes and he saw that the isotopes of the the isotopic ratio of thorium and uranium was also off at Sidonia in a way that matched thermonuclear test sites. And so he came to the conclusion that and he even did the the math like how many nukes would you have had to detonate in this place to produce this kind of a deviation. Turns out that an Empire State buildings worth of our highest yield thermonuclear warheads would have had to have been detonated there to produce this kind of isotopic signature. And this is exactly the same place where we find these blasted megalithic structures on the surface of Mars. So there's a nuclear war on Mars. So Brandenburgg's thesis is that there was a nuclear war on Mars. I cover this in my book, Closer Encounters. And did that basically get rid of the atmosphere? Is that responsible for how like the atmosphere is almost non-existent on Mars? It would definitely have been a contributing factor. I want to come around to what I think might have been another factor in that. Okay. But definitely would been a contributing factor. Um but we were on about the moon. So why am I going on this on this uh this detour to Mars? Yeah, because it's when you put Brandenburgg's research next to what Joe McMongle saw. And by the way, while we're on this subject, Inggo Swan was also tasked independently of Joe McMonagle to look at Mars twice. Once was in 1976, I think, and the other was in 1984, same year that McMongle did his. But Swan's team and McMongle were unaware of each other. These were you I mean obviously this makes sense as protocol. They wanted two sets of remote viewers on the same target to get you know corroboration. And uh Swan did his with a whole team of people. Mcmongle worked alone at the Monroe Institute. Swan had like five or six people working with him. And in 1984 and also in the viewing in I think 76 or so Ingo Swan and his team described exactly the same thing as John McMmonle. They described a civilization on Mars, most of which was in ruins and was vastly ancient, but other parts of which still survived under the surface. He described the honeycomb of cities under the surface of Mars and some structures on the surface which were like relaying information and being used as transportation beacons and had been built by this civilization that is still active under the surface of Mars, cities that are subterranean. So, so but okay, but this all came from out of discussing the moon. Mhm. When you put the remote viewing data next to Brandenburgg's thesis, what it suggests Oh, and Brandenburgg, his estimation was that this nuclear event in Sedonia took place maybe a 100 million years ago. Maybe a 100 million years ago. Jesus. When were the dinosaurs killed off? 6 million. 65 65 million years ago, right? So, it's a ballpark. And when you put these two sets of data together, as I did in my book, Closer Encounters, the conclusion that emerges is that the moon was constructed by these survivors of some kind of apocalypse on Mars. And it probably had at least two functions initially. One was to transport a [ __ ] ton of people over here, the moon, and the other one was to act as a terraforming device. So if we didn't have the moon where it is in this extremely stable orbit that it's in, right? Yes. We would have 8 hour days. The earth would be spinning much faster than it is right now. The earth would also not be as stable as it is. There been calculations done that show that the earth would be prone to toppling over at you know at odd intervals. Well, all planets have moons, right? Yes. But only our moon stabilizes a planet to the extent uh you know only our moon stabilizes our planet in the way that it does and only our moon has as stable an orbit as it does and none of the other moons in the solar system create the beautiful eclipses that we have here because the moon is the moon is get this 1/400th the size of the sun. Yep. And it's 1/400th the distance to the sun. So the fact that it's 1/400th the size of the sun and 1/400th distance to the sun produces this perfect eclipse. You put the moon directly between us and the sun, it perfectly oludes the diameter of the sun. Exactly. Is are there do we know if there's any other moon? No, there's no other moon that produces none. But what's what's even more significant is that our moon has an extremely stable orbit. No other moon in the solar system orbit orbits its planet with as little deviation as our moon does. Yes. And so it appears there's something inside the moon stabilizing that orbit which is also stabilizing the earth. And what did it give us? It gave us a climate, an environment, a a biosphere that rendered this planet habitable for humans. Remember what McMondon said? He said they sent a scout ship to another planet. It was overgrown with vegetation. It wasn't arid like Mars. There were volcanoes going off. There were electrical storms and they were like, "This place is too volatile. We can't settle here the way that it is now." So, the moon was probably used in order to terraform the Earth into a habitat that humans could humans, Martians could settle in to become the human race. So, uh, now there are other pieces of data. We're talking about we're talking about roughly how long ago? 100 million. 100 to 65 million years ago. Now look, the dinosaurs would probably have had to have been killed off for this, right? So one, you know, hypothesis that follows from this is that the impact that killed off the dinosaurs was deliberate, not you know, some accidental asteroid impact. It wouldn't have been very easy to coexist with them. Right. Right. Okay. But look, there are other data points that really nail this case. Mhm. For example, the craters on the moon on Earth when you have impact craters from meteorites, for example, right? The craters are roughly proportionally deep as they are wide. They dig into the earth. On the moon, you have these utterly bizarre craters which are like over a 100 miles wide like the Gregaran crater or the Clavius crater. You could fit Switzerland and Luxembourg together inside some of these craters. They're over 100 miles wide. They're never more than four or five miles deep. That doesn't make any sense. The inside of these crater basins are all convex like the surface of a contact lens. Right? So, think about this. Why would a meteor impact, meteorite impact, produce a crater that's so much wider than it is deep? And then in the especially wide craters like Clavius, you see that the surface of that crater is convex. It's because it's hitting a hard shell that's underneath the regalith. And the regalith is like astroturf that's been put on the surface of that space station to make it look like it's a moon. They knew the Earth was there. It was too volatile, too unstable. I'm sure the pro the equinox is not as stable as it is now. There wasn't any. We didn't have seasons. That's a product of the moon. The equinox is the equinox is only because of the moon. So this 23°ree uh deviation that we have between the our uh equator and the celestial equator, right that produces the equinoxes and the solstesses as a function of the moon. What other things about the moon like other than like we mentioned the distance from the sun to the moon and how it perfectly oludes the side the sun from our perspective but like what other things about our moon are exclusive to us. So first of all there's the extremely bizarre ratio that you just mentioned right where this 1/400th size of the sun 1400th distance from the sun and that's what produces these eclipses. Then there's incredible stability of the orbit of the moon. Okay. Then as we mentioned, these craters don't make any sense, right? These craters don't make any sense. And the basin of them seems like it's revealing a shell of some kind, spherical shell. Y then there's the impact tests, right? The Apollo 12 and Apollo 13 where the moon on a seismograph registered like a hollow object, right? And by the way, there's no moon that's a hollow object. Back before Carl Sean became such a skeptic, he even commented on this and said that it's terrifying because no natural satellite is hollow. Back then, we know that no other moons are hollow. Yes, we know it. It moons. How do we know it? It's just not what moons are. Moons are like, you know, they're like rocky bodies that are trapped by a planet and they're rocky all the way through. And do we know do we do we observe the craters on other moons to see how similar they are to our moon or how different they are than our moon? Yeah, we have detailed like for example Phobos and Arab the moons of Mars. We have detailed images of them. And first of all, how many moons does Mars have? It has two two moons. Uh Saturn and Jupiter have a bunch, right? And you know the other thing about these moons are they're all weird shaped. They look like deformed potatoes. You know, a lot of them they're not beautiful spherical objects like ours is. Um but there is another interesting thing and that's the mascon. So there are these, you know, the moon has a lower gravity than Earth generally, right? remember the golf ball thing? Yep. So, and the the Apollo astronauts, we'll get to them, too. The Apollo astronauts hopping around, you know, in the lower. But there are places on the moon where there's a much stronger gravity. There's earthlike gravity or stronger than Earthlike gravity. And it's actually a problem for navigation because when they pass satellites over, they have they can't fly too low because the craft will be pulled by these gravity wells. M there are places on the moon, they call them masscon, mass concentrations, where the gravity deviates from the standard on the moon. And guess what? They're all perfectly circular. So, one thing I hypothesized in closer encounters was that if this thing is a space station, it's possible that they built saucers into the surface of it. Look that mascon, short for mass concentrations, are regions of the moon's surface with a higher gravitational pull than the surrounding areas. These anomalies were first identified in the 1960s. Holy [ __ ] Yeah, they have to compensate for those when they fly anything around the moon. Anyway, look, here's the thing. We got to make sure we just we we got to we got to we got to keep you on point here. So, uh we can't be just letting George fly by. possibility is that when they built the space station, they built saucers into the surface of it. Remember, all the maskons are circular. Mhm. A saucer is going to have a zero point energy drive generating an in a flying saucer. Yeah. A flying saucer. Okay. Is going to have a local gravitational field. Yeah. And if there's people in the saucer, it's 1g. Yes. which is greater gravity than uh the rest of the moon. So, one possibility is that what these maskons are are saucers embedded in the space station underneath the regalith as a potential evacuation protocol. Suppose there's a d like some giant asteroid is coming that might hit the earth or it might hit the moon and they need to evacuate this station, right? Well, these saucers could just peel off the surface. So, that's one possibility of what these maskons are. are, you know, saucers with zero point energy drives running embedded into the surface of the object. What do you make of the postgame press conference after the moon landing where all the astronauts are sitting there? They look they they look like they're on a hostage table. This is where I wanted to go next. We mentioned the astronaut, right? So, you know, these guys don't even remember what they did up there. 420 is coming and that's a great excuse for you to expand your wellness with Vaia. Feeling your best starts with a great product, and that's why I'm super happy to have Vaia sponsor this episode. If you haven't tried them yet, you're seriously missing out. There's a good reason Vaia is trusted by over half a million happy customers. Vaia's changing the game in natural wellness. They blend powerful hemp derived ingredients to deliver real tangible benefits. Whether you're looking to sleep better, have better libido, improve focus, recovery, or simply relax, Vaia has a tailored solution for your situation. With products that range from zero to high in cannabonoid levels, Vaia lets you fully customize your experience. Whether you're looking to support your daily routine, enhance focus and clarity, or unwind with a deep relaxation, Vaia has you covered. I personally take their gummies and I like them so much I'm always breaking them into little pieces and giving them out to all my friends. I love the focus gummies for doing podcasts and working out. And I love the relaxation gummies, especially at the end of a long day when I'm really wound up and I just need to relax and unwind and spend time with my family. From their award-winning gummies to premium THCA flowers and calming drops, every Vaia product is made with lab tested hemp, sourced from their trusted American-owned farms. And it ships legally across the USA right to your door. No medical card required, and backed by a guarantee. Not sure where to start? Take Vaia's product finder quiz and get recommendations tailored to your needs in less than 60 seconds. If you're 21 plus, check out the link to Vaia in our description and treat yourself to Via's annual spring 420 sale. This is Black Friday level savings up to 35% sitewide right now and up to 50% off packs and bundles. And get a free gift plus more savings with your first order using my exclusive code Danny DNY. Plus, enjoy free shipping on orders over $100. That's code DNY at the link in our description. After you purchase, they're going to ask you where you heard about them, and please help support the show and tell them we sent you. Enhance your everyday with Vaio. When you ask them, they've done interviews with these astronauts, and when you ask them, you know, so what did you do on such and such a day? They basically re rehearse a mission log. We did this and then we No, no, no. I mean, how did you feel like when you were standing on the edge of that and then they freeze up? They start to look ill. And so, like you're saying in that press conference, right? They don't look like national heroes coming back from having been the first men on the moon. They look like hostages. They look like they've had the [ __ ] scared out of them or, you know, Yeah. So, uh I think that these people saw some terrifying things up there. And that's also what Soviet intelligence thought in Timothy Good's book um above top secret British UFO researcher was close to Admiral uh Norton Admiral Lord Hill Norton British Navy um was one of the people who endorsed his uh Timothy Good's work. Mhm. And in his book, Above Top Secret, Timothy Good recounts a meeting between British intelligence and Soviet intelligence back during the Cold War. And the Soviets said, "We were listening to the medical channel during Apollo. They had a channel that they would use to report back like medical emergencies, things they didn't want the public to hear, a separate channel from the one that was being broadcast across television. And you know, unsurprisingly, the KGB had found access to this. They they Okay. They they weren't supposed to. Even our ham Yeah. Even our ham radio our ham radio operators were listening to this in America. Some ham radio operators said that they were able to pick up on this, too. So, the Soviets said, "We heard Armstrong and Apollo 11 say, "These babies are huge. They're huge. They're warning us off. They're on the edge of the crater." And there's this whole conversation on the medical channel about how the Apollo 11 astronauts were effectively assaulted and scared off by huge spacecraft on the moon which were not there to greet them. They got the sense that they were there to say get the hell out of here. So you know people have all these who was the person that said this and this was a it was a somebody it was a conversation between British intelligence a British intelligence officer. You can find it in Timothy Good's book Above Top Secret. Above top secret. Okay. Yeah. And it was a British intelligence operative who during I think toward the end of the cold war was meeting with a Soviet counterpart. Okay. And the Soviets said, "We have the record of this conversation between Armstrong and ground control on the medical channel where he they were saying they saw the now that would scare the [ __ ] out of you." Yeah. Moreover, by 1960 by 6970, they had already done this MK Ultra stuff. Yes. Right. So you think they you think they wiped their memory somehow? Yes. Exactly. Exactly. We had already done this MK Ultra stuff. And I think these poor guys were MK Ultra when they came back to try to get them to forget as much of what happened on the moon as possible. And that would also explain why they all wound up with dysfunctional lives. These guys all became alcoholics. Their wives divorced them all. Their their personal lives became a disaster. So yeah, that's another piece of corroboration that you know the moon is inhabited and it's also probably an artificial satellite. And why haven't we been back since? Exactly. Exactly. There was a we we've watched this interview multiple times on previous podcasts where there is I think it's the head of NASA is being uh talked he's being interviewed in front of the Senate and um they're talking about China how they had a a plan to map or explore the dark side of the moon or whatever and they asked him like if they if we plan on doing it too and he goes, "No, we're not interested in doing that. We have no interest in the dark side." You know what I find profoundly disturbing about that is that humiliation is the worst thing in Chinese culture. The worst thing. Okay. So, the Chinese are not about to go up to the moon and have their asses handed to them. Moreover, the Chinese are going to the moon in collaboration and cooperation with the Russians. The Chinese and the Russians plan to build a space station that orbits the moon and then send astronauts from the space station down to the surface of the moon. Right. If there's that degree of cooperation between Russia and China on the moon, it means the Soviet dossier has been handed over to the Chinese. The Soviet dossier. Yeah. Soviet dossier on the moon. Oh, okay. Okay. What's in that? Right. Everything the Americans encountered on the moon, which is why the Soviets never went to the moon. Remember, we were competing with the Soviet Union to go to the moon. Yeah. Why is it that uh we went up there and then all the Soviets just decided to cancel their moon program? No. They knew. Of course they knew. They knew. And and also there were discussions in the Soviet Union at that time that okay if America makes it to the moon first we'll go to Mars first. They figured it out. Neither are for the taking. Neither the moon nor Mars. So what's really disturbing about the Chinese initiative is that if the Chinese of all people are planning to go up there and I don't know if not colonize at least do some scientific research or whatever, right? It means they've gotten clearance from the people that are there. That's right. That's right. Now, what and notice how the balance of power is shifting in the world toward China. Is it really? It is. Now, people have different opinions online. I don't know who it believes. Look, I mean, it it has been. Now, whether that can be reversed is another question. But if you wanted to manage a global totalitarian state, yes, with ubiquitous surveillance and an extremely technocratic form of government, uh with little personal freedom, right, a control society on a global scale, the Chinese would be the optimal people to put in charge for that. Yeah. Because it fits the values of Confucianism. Yes. Okay. So if someone on the moon potentially also on Mars Mhm. wants to impose a totalitarian world government on Earth, they're not going to make a deal with the United States. They're going to make a deal with China. That's what I find most disturbing about Chinese plans to go to the moon. I actually don't think we would even be going back there if it weren't for the fact that Chinese already are. Yeah, but okay, maybe. But who would they who would they make the deal with in the United States? That's the thing. There's there's two parts of the United States. There's the idealistic view of the United States and then there's the real people who are running the show behind the scenes, the United States. And they probably are very envious of China's totalitarian surveillance state that they live under. So, you know, I'm not sure. It's very easy to make these kinds of moral judgments. If I were in Lockheed at a high level with security clearance to the special programs that are dealing with zero point energy and electrogravitic drives. Yeah. Uh I'm not so sure that considering the kind of society we have in this country let alone in the world at large I would publicly disclose that technology. I mean we t we talked about this last time. I think the weaponization implications and dual use potential of such technology is extremely socially destabilizing. So the thing is with China you can manage technology and control information in that way. Yes. Totally. Based on the ideals of the Bill of Rights and the United States Constitution, you can't. It makes it way harder. Right. So they have a good negotiating partner in China. Oh yes. That that makes a ton of sense. It does. So even if you're in Lockheed, you're, you know, you're stuck behind all these walls of classification and these security oaths that you've taken, you might still believe in the ideals of the Bill of Rights. Mhm. And you might not be ready to sell out, you know, at least the American citizenry to a uh a foreign power or an alien power that intends to subjugate the planet and, you know, subject us to a global tyranny. M so yeah I'm I'm not convinced that even people in the the deepest strata of the deep state are so how can I put it callous and nihilistic and and self-erving that they would make a deal with people who want tyranny over to the planet. In fact, I wouldn't be at all surprised if for a long time they've kept these technologies close to the chest in order to develop some kind of a um deterrence capability or to to approach parallegal and military parody with what? With them. With Yeah. With the people on the moon. What do you think it would be like to be a person who is at the highest of levels in one of these secret super compartmentalized private aerospace companies that has and you you are aware of the deepest darkest secrets of reverse engine whatever reverse engineered spaceships alien contact where they are everything like to be that person going to work coming home having dinner with your wife tucking your kids in What would that do to you? What would that do to your your psychology? Okay, great question. Permit me to answer it in a little bit of a roundabout way because I want to give you a a substantive answer, right? And so here's where I want to go into the idea of the simulation theory because the deepest darkest secret that somebody in that position and Loheed or Northrup or even at some of let's say at IBM and some of these you know uh computer companies tech giants that have been in bed with the defense contractors and the government for decades the deepest darkest deepest darkest secret that they would know isn't even anything to do with zero point energy drives or even with the psionic aspects of say piloting UFOs which is another whole this new stuff that's coming out with these new whistleblowers it's been it sound it by the way I predicted it this is one of the reasons why that guy in the CIA contacted me after closer encounters came out because one of the things that I argue throughout this whole book actually it goes back to even my first book Prometheus and Atlas is that I said that book was published in 2016 right I said there's not going to be any UFO disclosure without disclosure of psychic abilities. And there's not going to be any substantive scientific mainstream acceptance of psychic abilities without UFO disclosure. These two things are completely inextricable. They're going to find that there are psionic aspects to the guidance systems of UFOs. Yeah. And that basically the pilot interacting telepathically with the system is part of how the thing uh is piloted. Yeah. The story of that guy Michael Herrera that he tal that is straight out of Stranger Things. We'll come to that. So that goes to your question about what's the ethics of a person. Yeah. Who's, you know, deep inside the system, right? How has their worldview been shaped by the horrific things that they've been apprised of, right? So to me, the most horrific thing isn't and and not only that, but like how does that shape your mind when you're almost living in it? It's like that new show that came out called uh Severance where they they basically they have a chip installed in their head and when they go to work, they go up the elevator. It like shuts them off from their mind in the in the in the uh civilian world and they wake up in their their mind in their work environment on their floor where they're severed. So it's like they're living these two parallel lives. Yeah. You got to develop a split personality. Yeah. Exactly. Mhm. Very much so. Or like the the doctor in Stranger Things, the one who works closely with 11. Yes. You know, the the papa figure, right? Like some of these guys are family men and you know they go home, they have to deal with their wives, they have to deal with their kids. Mhm. And you know they have to somehow dissociate from what it is they do at work every day, right? In any case, what are the deepest darkest secrets that these people, you know, have been apprised of? You remember how I said in the remote viewing of uh the of Mars by Joe Mcmonel, there was this very curious thing he reported about how these people on Mars kept trying to find a way out and they couldn't find a way out no matter what they did. What were they trying to find a way out of? So they they got to Earth. I mean, if if the theory that I'm proposing is correct, they made it to Earth and they used the moon to terraform the Earth and so forth, right? So, they weren't trying to get out of Mars or get off of Mars. What were they trying to get out of? That's a good opener to this question of, you know, the simulation and what evidence there is that we might be living inside of a simulation. So this is something that I discuss at length in in my book Satan on and you know I I've discussed simulation theory in closer encounters and and other books of mine before but I discovered something recently that's much more rigorous uh from a mathematics and physics perspective and consequently also more compelling and disturbing and that's this okay so bear with me this gets a little bit complicated so we start building computers in the 1940s, right? Allan Turing, the big wall-sized computers, and we're competing with the Nazis and Maniac and the Iliac Aniac. And uh at that time in the 1940s when we're building the first computers, there was this guy Claude Shannon who developed a science known as information theory. Subsequently came to be known as information theory. Because before computers were built, nobody thought of mathematically formalizing the transfer of information. We had phones at that time. We had radio transmissions. But nobody thought about what was being transmitted over phone lines or over telegraph lines as data transfer. That concept didn't exist. But once they started building computers, it stands to reason that somebody would mathematically formulize what data is and what it means to transmit and transfer data. So this guy Claude Shannon does this and he comes up with the idea of a binary digit binary digit bit where data is conceived of according to the binary of one and zero. you know data as being a construct built from out of sequences of ones and zeros. Claude Shannon is the first person to conceptualize this. And Shannon also makes the point that look we live in a universe bound by the two laws of thermodynamics. The first law of thermodynamics is that energy can never be created or destroyed. Energy E= MC². This is going to be important for what I'm about to say. So as as Einstein you know showed us energy and mass are interconvertible E= MC^² so energy can become mass and mass can become energy but we we can't identify anywhere in the physical universe energy being created or destroyed. That's the first law of thermodynamics. Okay. Net total energy remains the same. Yep. Okay. So then the second law of thermodynamics is that we notice everywhere in nature even you know like when you you pour like a dye into a a glass of water that there's a tendency toward disorder in the cosmos over time. And so the second law of thermodynamics is that in a closed system uh the level of disorder or entropy either remains constant or increases. It's never the case that entropy decreases in nature. You never have uh more order emerge over time in large scale physical processes as things age. As things age, more disorder happens to our bodies. it happens to the whole universe. Okay. And so this is where they postulate the so-called heat death of the universe that at a certain point the entropy will become so great that first you know galaxies are pulled apart then solar systems are pulled apart then planets are pulled apart and eventually atomic structures are pulled apart and life becomes nonviable in the universe. Heat death of the universe and victory of entropy that's the second law of thermodynamics. So Shannon says look if bits binary digits meaning information is flowing through a computer system that computer system is in the physical world meaning it's bound by the laws of entropy meaning it's bound by the laws of entropy okay so then there's this German Jewish physicist Ralph Landau he came over with the other German Jews who were fleeing the Nazis And in 1961, Roth Landau builds upon Claude Shannon's uh groundwork in information theory. And he comes up with this equation which I have in Satan. He comes up with this very short elegant equation uh extrapolated from out of the second law of thermodynamics which says that if you delete one bit of information there should be an increase of entropy outside of a computer system. So, think about it this way. On a microchip or a magnetic tape, when it's blank, when it's blank, you've got the equivalent of 0000 0 or 1 one11. There's no data, right? When you record data on it, you get 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1. So actually the blank tape has more order than when you start encoding information on it when conceived in physical terms. So because information is meaningful to us and like a file has a book on it text on it and the text has meaning to us or a photographic image has a meaning content to us. We think of information as let's say decreasing entropy because it's we think of it as highly ordered because it's meaningful to us. But when you think of it as bunch of ones and zeros, sequences of ones and zeros. When you think of it inside of a physical system, the blank magnetic tape or the blank microchip has more order in it than when you start to record ones and zeros on it. That's more chaotic. Yes. 011 0 0. So Ralph Landau was saying if we erase the data we're increasing uh I'm sorry if we erase the data we're decreasing entropy inside the computer. Now according to the laws of thermodynamics if you decrease entropy inside somewhere inside a closed system meaning the universe you have to pay for it with an increase of entropy outside the outside the computer. So you're decreasing entropy inside the computer by deleting [ __ ] By deleting [ __ ] Okay, that's got to result in more entropy outside the computer. Okay, because the net energy has to remain the same. Okay, so he came up with an equation that expresses this where if you delete one bit of information, certain amount of energy is released. Got it? Okay, now here's where it's going to get weird and creepy. Okay, but that was all necessary background. So we we think that information is this abstract thing. We think we think it's like not physical, right? That's in the realm of ideas. Yeah. But what this equation is saying is the following that if you amass enough data like on these huge server farms that we have in Silicon Valley that we have in China, right? And you're amassing not bytes or megabytes, not terabytes, pabytes, whatever, right, of data. And you erase all that data, you're going to have to give off a [ __ ] ton of energy. That's what Landau's equation is saying is that if you erase a large amount of data, terabytes of data, there's a significant measurable energy release that's going to take place. Now according to E= MC^² right the interconvertability of matter and energy what does that mean conversely it means that if energy comes out of the computer when the data is released terabytes and terabytes on some server right what was it when it was inside the computer mass it was mass so it's been proposed that we could weigh a hard drive before data is encoded on it and then again after data is encoded on it or take a hard drive that has data encoded on it. Weigh it, erase the data and then weigh it again. Right? There will be a mass differential. Okay? So there's mass inside a computer that's not anything to do with the microchips or the transistors or magnetic tapes or anything. It's a hidden mass. This has been done this weighing. No. Here's why. Because currently, according to Landau's equation, if you were to calculate the mass of all of the information in the world today, on all of the largest server farms that we have in here and you know that AI is being run off of in China, the total mass according to that equation comes to 1 kilogram. Less than less than 1 kilogram. Less than 1 kilogram. meaning that we don't have sensitive enough weighing equipment to weigh a hard drive, let alone even a server, right? I mean, we couldn't even weigh a server, let alone a hard drive, because the mass currently is too little. However, the rate of data increase per year, the the rate at which we're accumulating information per year is approximately 25%. Okay? And if you think about where we're going technologically, we're headed toward this technological singularity where we're going to have artificial intelligence, artificial intelligence inside of robots like the Tesla robots. We're going to have these systems constantly accumulating all kinds of data, right? And so it stands to reason that as we approach the technological singularity the rate of data increase per year is going to uh going to exponentially take off way beyond 25% maybe close to 100%. Okay but get this even if it were to stay 25%. which it won't but even if it were I did the calculations they're in my book Satan in something like 340 years the amount of information that will exist in the world at the current rate of data production will equal the mass of the moon now go back to our conversation about the moon the moon was brought here to terraform the planet potentially in other words the moon has massive gravitational effects on the massive. It It took us from having 8 hour days to having 24-hour days. It controls the ocean tides. It's responsible for the tilt of the Earth's axis. The moon has tremendous gravitational pull on the Earth. And the moon only weighs 1.23% of the mass of the Earth. It weighs only, which by the way, and what's the size? What's the size comparison from the moon to the Earth? I I don't have the number. Can you find it, Steve? Yeah. So, 1.23% 1.23% 23% mass of the Earth. Okay. So, so get this. I did the calculations and something like I think it was like 340 years from now, something like that. We're going to wind up with a a a mass equivalent. The moon is one quarter the size of the Earth in diameter. Yeah. So, isn't that weird? Also, by the way, that find the m see if see if see see if chat GPT will give you the mass mass or no you need you would need to the ma the percentage of the mass of the earth. Oh yeah right. The moon is approximately 27% the size of the earth in diameter volume 1.23 it's actually a volume of about 2% right 1.2 1.23 23 is the specific number. Anyway, so listen, I did these calculations, Danny. And so it says to illustrate if the Earth were hollow, it would take 15 minutes to fill it. But it's one it's it's less than 2% the volume. Yeah. Which, by the way, doesn't make sense in and of itself in terms of, you know, the moon would have to be hollow. There you go. Anyway, I did these calculations. Yes. something like 340 years from now. Okay, there's going to be a moon's worth of mass in the data centers on Earth. So, the the Earth is going to weigh about a moon more than it weighs now. It'll start to tear apart the planet. Imagine if you were to take the moon, look, the moon is at a certain distance from us, right? It's pretty far. Yeah. And from that distance, it's having this massive gravitational effect on us. Uh-huh. Imagine you took the moon's mass and you distribute it to Silicon Valley to the major data centers of China. You put that mass right on the surface of the Earth. It will start generating tidal forces toward that gravity well. It will start attracting objects toward the gravity well. Okay? I I realize it sounds bizarre, but metal chairs and knives and forks will start to go towards servers. The servers will become a gravity well. There will be so much mass inside them that it's as if the moon is on the surface of the earth. It gets worse. So all the data on Earth right now, if you could combine less than one kg, less than a kilogram, but because the exponential rate of data increase is so high, 25% per year right now 300 years. In 300 something years, we're going to wind up with a moon's mass worth of data on the Earth. And what's worse is that like 20 years after that, I think it was 20 years exactly after that, we wind up with an earth's worth of mass on the earth. It will go from weighing equal equal to the moon to weighing equal to the earth itself, which means at that point the planet will be completely torn apart. Unless we can find another way to store data like off the earth maybe or sure sure or in maybe we like tap into you know some sort of consciousness and we store everything there. You could build super massive structures out of like nanom materials and whatever potentially to do something like this. But here's where I want to go somewhere else with this. Where I want to go with this is in simulation theory, right? So, so think a little bit about this. Like you accumulate this much data and this is what it would do to the earth, right? And um you uh so you I if you weigh a hard drive before you record data on it, it weighs less than after you record data on it. Okay, but we can't see this mass. You you open up suppose you're one of these very technically adept computer geeks and you take the uh you know you take the screwdriver to your computer opener. Where the [ __ ] is the mass? You can't see it, right? Even in these giant servers 340 years from now, once there's a moon's worth of mass in terms of information on the Earth, right? You can't see it inside the servers. Is there any other example of mass that we can't see in the universe? Yeah, it's called dark matter. Now, okay, I got it. Here's where it gets creepy, man. Here's where it gets really creepy. So, how was dark matter discovered? It was discovered through three different types of experiments in the in the 1970s. First, in the early 1970s, when we started to be able to observe galaxies, we noticed that they don't obey the spin rate that they should according to Newtonian mechanics. According to Newtonian physics, since most of the mass of the galaxy is concentrated toward the center of the galaxy, the inside of a galaxy should be spinning at a faster rate than the outer arms are. Mhm. That's not what we see. We see a mostly even spin rate in galaxies. So that really got the, you know, physicists scratching their head like what this suggests for for most of the visible galaxy to be spinning at the same rate. It would mean that there's a lot of mass outside of the galaxy that's distorting or flattening the spin rate. Then they did another kind of um they they they made another kind of observation of distant galaxies that has to do with the refraction of light. So you know we have galaxies that are further from us and galaxies that are closer to us. And the mass of the galaxies closer to us bends the light of the galaxies that are far from us. So based on how at what angle the light is bent as it reaches our telescopes from distant galaxies, we can estimate the weight the mass of the galaxies that are closer closer to us. You follow? I mean kind of. Yeah. You got you got galaxies that are far far from us, right? We're trying to look at them. Yeah. Yeah. They the galaxies have different masses and they bend. The light coming from them is bent by the galaxies that are closer to us. Yeah, that I understand that. Yeah. It's like they're going around the rim of a black hole. It bends the light, right? Okay. So, they observe this and they said, "Wait, this doesn't make any sense. We know the mass of such and such galaxy. It's bending the light much more severely than it should based on what we think that galaxy weighs." So, then they did a third observation where they said, "Okay, well, maybe there's gas. Maybe there's a bunch of gas in these galaxies that's giving them more mass than we can see." Okay? So they look to the same galaxies with spectrometers that can detect gas and estimate the masses of gas. Nope. Doesn't account for anywhere near the amount that this light is bent by. Okay. So putting these and these observations were all made in the 70s. The first one in the early '7s, the second in the mid to late '7s. Putting all three of these together, they came to the conclusion that there's a ton of mass around these galaxies that we can't see. It's not electromagnetically detectable. H and yet it has massive gravitational effects. Okay. So massive. So well well look it the amount of mass that we can't see that we can't electromagnetically observe that ensconces galaxies surrounds them is such that it flattens the spin rate of a galaxy. The inside should be spinning much faster than the outside and yet it's spinning at the same rate. Okay. So, that's a ton of mass that's not electromagnetically observable, but it's so gravitationally powerful that it's altering the spin rate of a whole galaxy. Okay. Okay. Well, so we have a form of mass that we can't detect electromagnetically and yet it has massive gravitational effects. There's dark matter, right? That's what's inside your computer. Dark matter. information is dark matter. It's the same thing. It's the same thing. And once you realize that, one of the first people who I think realized this was John Archold Wheeler. I think he worked at Princeton, American physicist John Archbold Wheeler. He made this formulation um it from bit. Okay. He said look if we want to say that information is a third state of matter and energy in other words that it's not only the case that as Einstein realized matter and energy are interconvertible matter and energy are both also interconvertible with information. So when you delete the data on the computer it increases entropy by giving off energy. So you have three terms in this relation. It's not just matter and energy. It's matter, energy, and information. And they're all interconvertible into each other. And the kind of matter that information is before you delete it is dark matter. You cannot electromagnetically detect it, but it has massive gravitational effects when it gets dense enough when it reaches a critical mass. So Wheeler said, John Archbald Wheeler, well, why don't we just say that energy and matter are forms of information and that we live in anformational cosmos and it things solid things come from bit it from bit. Well, that's very useful in terms of reconciling, for example, physics with parasychology, right? I mean, one of the reasons why parasychology has been marginalized for so many decades is because no one's been able to come up with a physical model that can explain telepathy and clairvoyance and precognition. And a lot of physicists have tried. Dean Raiden, for example, somebody came from out of the physics community relatively recently, tried to model Sai, you know, in a rigorous enough framework to accommodate uh quantum theory and so forth, but no one's been able to do it. Well, if you change your paradigm and you consider that actually we're living in an information matrix and that what we think of as matter and energy are forms of information, then the data from parasychology makes a lot more sense because an information system is one where consciousness is fundamental and intrinsic. An information processing system is one that's meant to have meaning for minds. You're not starting from physics from protons, electrons, and neutrons, dead unconscious matter, and trying to build up to consciousness from that and figure out how consciousness interacts with that. You're starting from the understanding that we live in an information processing system. And by the way, this suddenly then makes sense of all the paradoxes of quantum theory like the the uh wave particle duality. So you know this the double slit experiment. Yes. Why would it be the case that only if you turn on a detector meaning that there's a person observing the experiment? Even if you observe observation means checking the data that was recorded later. Yes. It's still observation. Yes. Why would it be the case that only when you turn on the detector, you make an observation, do you get a particle with a distinct location and before that it's a wave form, meaning it's a probability distribution of something that could be a particle. Mhm. In computer science, they call that rendering optimization. It's used in video games all the time. Yeah. Things that aren't being looked at aren't rendered. It conserves processing power, right? that supports the simulation theory totally that we're living inside of a computer program. And and so what is dark matter? Dark matter is the the program that we're living in. Yeah. But the dark matter around the galaxy is the one that we have physically observed through all these different observational mechanisms, telescopes and so forth. It's a computational cloud. It's a computational cloud around the galaxy and it's probably projecting what we see and experience. We're detecting the computational system when we detect dark matter which nobody seems to know what the [ __ ] it is. which you're saying is the same thing as data that we store information that is stored on hard drives. So yeah, this is in my book Satan and the chapter is called catastrophic information because there's a physicist uh recently who's looked at all of this and he um conceptualizes this as an information catastrophe. Melvin Vapson, he's working at a university in Britain, I believe. He's I think Romanian originally but he's working in in uh UK and he calls it the information catastrophe because look at a certain point we're going to reach a critical mass of data which will have geoysically catastrophic effects. Oh here's the other thing. So I investigated what would be the geohysical effects of reaching a critical mass of data. Guess what it turns out to be? Every single catastrophe that's been held responsible for the destruction of Atlantis. So all these all these you have all these theorists from like Plato all the way back Plato to Senator Ignatius Donnelly in the 1800s with his book Atlantis the antidolivian world to Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson all these people talking about the various catastroph the various catastrophes that might have destroyed the civilization and by the way just on a quick quick side note You cannot argue with 1,300 ton megaliths in Battlebeck, Lebanon, which are fitted together with razor precision. And you can't even slip a razor blade between the joint. You cannot argue with that. Okay. Or those. Exactly. The Egyptians had those two. And you know, who knows who they got them from, right? And with what tools they perfectly symmetrical on a computer. Yeah. So this civilization existed. Okay. And there there are all these geohysical catastrophes that have been postulated as the cause for the destruction of this worldwide highly advanced technical culture. Right? Guess what? If you wind up with a moon's mass worth of data at Silicon Valley or in China, you know what winds up happening? Every single thing that anyone's ever held responsible for the destruction of Atlantis, number one, the crust sinks underneath the data center. Number two, it creates a tidal force like the moon does. So the oceans get pulled in toward the data center. Crust sinks. There's a massive flood. It causes earthquakes because it activates the the gravitational pole from the servers activates all the tectonic plates. So you wind up also with massive earthquakes. The same gravitational pole sets off volcanoes. So you get volcanoes going off all over the planet. M potentially the gravitational disturbance would also even tilt the axis of the earth which is something that many people from Charles Hapgood onward have postulated was responsible for the destruction of Atlantis that potentially Atlantis was Antarctica that's one theory and that it was suddenly pulled into the south polear region due to a crustal slippage well that's also something that would happen so I mapped out what would be the geohysical implications of such a critical a mass of data and it's every single thing that anyone's ever thought destroyed Atlantis. Not one or the other of them, all of them at once. So then you got to wonder what what actually destroyed that civilization? Could it be hard drives? You know, it sounds funny, man. But you know, it look, it stands to reason if we're headed for an information catastrophe, what if it crept up on them without them realizing what they were doing? And that's what actually destroyed that civilization. Oh my god. I had um I had this guy on here from the NSA, Tom Drake, and he was explaining that they have what was do you remember, Steve, what he said? He said they have like acres and acres out in the desert somewhere. I want to say like in Nevada or in Wy, it was somewhere in the Midwest where they have just like farms after farms after farms of these of these massive hard drives that are collecting all of the surveillance data that they're using. Yes. From satellites, from from phones, from literally every single every single potential way the NSA can collect data on people. Is it Utah? Is it? Yeah. Utah. That's it. the Utah data center known as the uh the Bumleheave location. The facility spans 1 million square ft and includes 100,000 square ft tier tier 3 missionritical data center designed to store vast amounts of data estimated to be on the order of exabytes or larger to support comprehensive national security initiative. The data center uses the Cray XC30 supercomputer capable of scaling workloads of more than 100 pedlops or 100 trillion calculations each second. Look at the picture. Can you pull up a photo of it like on the images? Uh I'm on Brave right here. Oh, we absolutely not. Oh, that's terrible. Here, I I'll get it for you. Crazy. Yeah, they're not going to want to, you know, have detailed photography of that site available, but I bet you if you Google image search that, you'd be one of these places that's blocked out. Is that it? That's it under construction. Yeah. It's only recently constructed, I think. You know, that's another thing is that So, so this crust is going to sink under that one day, right? Right? If this theory is correct or it's going to create it's going to start it's going to become a magnetic anomaly and throw off the spin of the earth somewhere. That's right. That's right. You know, so there'd be early warning signs compasses would start malfunctioning in the vicinity of it. This is so crazy, man. So, how did we get here? You asked me what would be the effect of knowing the deepest, darkest secrets on somebody. let's say in the NSA who has that level of clearance, somebody inside Loheed who has that level of clearance, right? Even IBM IBM's done a lot of dark [ __ ] IBM, you know, IBM made the punch card computer equipment that allowed the Nazis to process juice through the concentration camps. Yep. Yeah. So, well, I mean, there's a lot of companies that were still around today that had a lot did a lot of dark [ __ ] with the Nazis, right? Oh, yeah. Well, but those people are all dead and like the company's still alive. Sure. The question is, is the idea dead? And that really speaks to what you asked me. Uh, look, it's one thing, what does it do to your worldview to know that there are people living in underground cities on Mars or to know that the moon is an artificial satellite, right? And you're one of like a dozen people on Earth who have this information. Yeah. But it's another thing if what you know is that we're living in a simulation. And not only are we living in a simulation, we're living in a simulation with a computational ceiling, meaning that it's inbuilt that we cannot exceed a certain level of data production. You understand that's a cap on our civilization. It means that you look Card remember people talk about the Cardesev scale. You ever heard about the Cardartesev scale? No. Mishokaku used to talk about it a lot. Not that I want to reference Mishukaku because his con artistry promoting, you know, string theory really damaged the physics community for decades. But Mishokaku is somebody who he wasn't the only one. He brought back brought back this idea of the Cardartesev scale. It's this Russian scientist who basically came up with this scale of the level of civilization, type one, type two, type three based on their amount of energy usage. Oh yeah. Okay. But the thing about the cardv scale is that okay you could one metric is energy usage but another is the level of data production right so we're living in a simulacum that doesn't allow anyone to even become a type two cardartesev civilization which by the way would explain why there look these u the skeptics always say where are all the aliens how come there are no aliens here right right yeah fmy paradox They they never when they keep citing the Fermy paradox, they like to turn a blind eye to the UFO phenomenon. But even if you consider all the data of the UFO phenomenon, there's actually no really hard evidence that anyone's coming here from outside our solar system. Right. There isn't. Right. And these entities, at least the ones who seem to be in charge, look human. Yes. And the little grays, those are humanoid robots. In all said, I'm sure you've heard of Mike Masters. You've read his books. That's the best that is the best most comprehensive explanation as to why these things. My problem with Mike Masters is that he he adheres to the uh block universe idea of the way time is closed timelike curves. He thinks it's not possible to change history when you time travel. Whereas I've made extensive timelines. Yes. And that would mean multiverse. Yes. According to how Mike Masters understands the dynamics of time travel, we would not have any free will. we would be living in a universe where the future is already determined. Anyway, that's that's a metaphysical argument for us philosophers. Sure. But generally the idea coming coming from an anthrop anthropological background is that for a being to come from another star system or another another Goldilocks planet to have two arms, two legs, upright homminid, brain sits on top of the eyes. It would have to be the exact same ex with the atmosphere, with everything like that. And it would be like as to how rare we are on Earth. We're like 00001% of the species on Earth that look the way we do and were able to develop technology get off the earth. So you extrapolate that into the universe, it's like virtually impossible to have another being that looks so similar to us. I find that a useful argument uh because I actually do think that we're dealing with um descendants of the human race and other versions of the human race in this phenomenon. However, I have to say in defense of Greer, I watched some of your interview with him, not all of it. And he did bring up a point that was legitimate, but he expressed it in a way where I think he wasn't making himself clear. remember where he came back and said to you, "No, actually it's very likely that there would be humanoid life on another." Here's what he was trying to say. Rupert Sheldrake, he said something about um uh morphic resonance. Okay. Rupert Sheldrake, British biologist who has looked at a lot of different empirical evidence for another form of causality in nature besides efficient causality. Efficient causality is like billiard ball causality. Bing bang bong you know things colliding with each other on an atomic subatomic level. Okay. Right now the view that the whole universe works only according to efficient causality. The materialist reductionist mechanistic model of the universe it's only a couple hundred years old. Mhm. Back in the day, even in the Renaissance, let alone in classical antiquity when people like Aristotle were formulating how the universe functions, there were other forms of causality like formal causes where forms were considered a cause, a a shaping influence that um guided biological and physical development. Okay. So form was considered a type of cause in and of itself. And in Arisilian view of the world, there were also final causes. In other words, purposes in nature that you know embedded in the seed of a plant is a purpose to become a certain type of plant there and to to absorb light from the sun and to alter the nutrients of the earth that the plant is growing in and to grow fruit that nourishes people is part of the purpose of a plant. Kind of like the soul of something. Yeah. The aim. The aim of something. The soul of an axe is to chop. The aim of something. The aim. Okay. Part of the soul of the plant is also the form of the plant. The form. And they thought that forms were causes. So you had in Aristotle you had a material cause which is what something's made of. Then you have the formal cause which is like what the thing is supposed what shape the thing is supposed to take and it's embedded in the seed. And then you have the purpose of the thing. And then efficient causality, which is the only one we're left with in modern physics, is just how these other causes shape the thing. Okay? And that's all we're left with in in modern physics. What Rert Sheldrake found is lots of evidence for formal causes. And he calls it formative causation or morphic resonance. Morphe is the Greek for form. Okay? Morphic resonance. Resonance of form or formative causation. So for example, this is what Greer was trying to get across. It turns out that in a pharmaceutical laboratory, when you try to crystallize a a compound for the first time to make a drug, let's say, right? The first time you try to crystallize a chemical compound, it takes a very long time to cohhere. It's very hit and miss and takes a long time to cohhere, to crystallize. The second time you try to synthesize that compound in a completely different laboratory, let's say on the other side of the planet, it forms instantly. Much faster. Yeah. So, it's as if when something works and takes shape in a certain way for the first time, something about the world remembers that it works that way. And so the second time it's attempted, it takes that shape much more quickly. It's a resonance of form across space and time irrespective of space and time. And there a lot of evidence that has been found in biology where they call it convergent evolution also. This is another name for this convergent evolution where you have two completely distinct species like let's say a species of dolphin and then you have um a certain kind of um land mammal or whatever you know and there are certain solutions to evolutionary stresses that are arrived at in these two completely distinct species whose common ancestor is like millions of years in the past and because it seemed to work in one species evolution seems to uh evolution seems to adopt that solution in a completely unrelated species. So what Greer was suggesting is that if these uh if if this type of causation morphic resonance or formative causation works irrespective of spaceime it could be the case that on planets that are slightly different from ours I mean not so radically different that they you know you don't have anything more complex than bacter bacteria but in a planet slightly different than from ours because the anthrop anthropoid form worked here or maybe worked on Mars a 100 million years ago. The memory of the cosmos stores that solution and implements it again as an efficient solution in a different evolutionary context. You're talking about like the dark matter memory. Well, I'm saying it's that, right? Sheldrake is an Anglican Christian. I got into an exchange with him once. You're combining your theory with So Sheldrake wouldn't want to believe this, right? He thinks that he thinks these forms exist in the mind of God. Basically, he won't say that as a biologist. Okay. But uh he's an Anglican Christian. So he thinks these forms this this memory Uhhuh. that stores evolutionary solutions or stores suitable pharmaceutical like crystallization formulas. He thinks that's like in the mind of God basically. I think it's in the simulation. It's a computer system. When something works, the system remembers, right? M and it's not going to waste processing power next time it sees something as grappling with the same problems. It remembers, oh, here was a solution to that. Let me implement it again. Yeah. So, what Greer was trying to say is that it could just turn out that the two arms, two legs, brain on top. It's a very efficient solution. And so, the system remembers that and it implements that solution on another planet, you know, in another galaxy, right? Halfway across the universe. Okay. So, that's possible. That's a possible. Yeah, he the word he used was he he tried to use the word quantum entanglement for it, saying that. Um, anyways, I got to take a leak real quick. Let's take a quick break. We'll be right back, folks. All right, we're back. We were getting deep. Where were we? We were We were in dark matter. Yes. Yes, we were. Okay. Dark matter and we were in the uh resonic or morphic resonance. Morphic resonance. Okay. Yes, we were talking about morphic resonance because you know I was saying like how a monkey can figure out how to make a tool in Australia and simultaneously it happens in North America at the same time. The 100th monkey phenomenon. Look, they found this with rats too. They would run rats through mazes where you know they're shocked or rewarded depending on whether they, you know, can navigate the maze successfully. Yeah. And um they run the same kind of test with a completely different group of rats in a different country. And if the first group of the first set of rats learns the maze successfully, the second set of rats in a different country picks up where the other group left off in their learning curve. So it suggests that there is this morphic resonance. Also, I don't know if this has anything to do with it, but there was also studies that were done where they taught the rats the mazes and then they like chopped out a portion of their brain and they were able to accurately figure out the maze again after or they flipped their brain upside down. They like completely scrambled their brains and they they remembered. Yeah. Carl Carl Perbrum studied this in I think the 1980s '7s 80s. Carl priedram and it he developed what's called a holographic brain theory that information is encoded in the brain including you know skills are encoded in the brain both both um content memory and behavioral memory in a way that's similar to how an image is encoded in a hologram where you can slice up the hologram any number of times. a true hologram. The one the kind that you need a laser beam to shine on for the image to pop out of. Not the shitty cheap holograms that they they distribute everywhere. Like really good holograms where if you go to I don't know a museum or whatever exhibit and you see super high fidelity like the Tupac thing where they got the Tupac performing in front of the crowd and they they put a hologram right. Have you seen that? No, I haven't seen that. Show them that. Show them the Tupac the Tupac. Let's not put Don't I don't want Tupac winding up in the middle of this podcast. Why not? What do you got? What what's what's your problem with Tupac? Anyway, listen. Laser beams laser beams, right, are shown on a holographic film and an image pops out. Okay. Okay. Now, it turns out that if you slice the hologram into fours and you shine the laser beam on any quarter of that hologram, the whole image still pops out. It's a little bit blurriier. Okay, put it cut it into eighs. Whole image still pops out of any fragment of this hologram. And what PBR said is that the brain seems to work the same way. So that's some trauma victims, some who have some level of physical brain damage still remember things and and have certain abilities even though some of the parts of their brain that you would think are most relevant to that skill have been physically damaged because the brain records information holographically. Now this is relevant to what we were talking about in terms of the simulation. Uh and I mentioned this in my book Prometheism in the chapter on the end of reality. Um David Bow took this data uh that Carl Pbram uh basically analyzed in terms of how the brain works and he applied the same model to the whole universe. and Bow, David Bow, the physicist, argued that certain uh characteristics of quantum theory like what we discussed earlier, wave particle duality and also quantum entanglement suggest that the universe functions like a hologram that we're living in in a universe that has holographic properties. And uh Michael Talbot gave a very sort of uh compelling popular presentation of this in his book the holographic universe great great text from the 90s. Now that's another angle on the simulation theory. This idea that the universe like the brain has holographic properties. In other words, it's an information storage and processing system. And in that metaphor, the laser being shown on the holographic film is consciousness. The laser is Yeah. So for example, in the double slit experiment, right? Yeah. When the when the um laser particle beam whatever, yeah, is not being observed and it passes through the double slits and registers on the photographic film as as a wave form, right? Meaning that it passed through the double slits as a probability distribution of whether it would go through one slit or the other. Mhm. That's like a piece of holographic film without a laser being shown on it where all you see are swirls in the film. In a true hologram, when you look at a holographic film, you can't see any image in it. It's a bunch of swirls, right? You need the laser beam to shine on it for the image to pop out. I understand what you're saying. That's like observation in the double slit experiment where consciousness is akin to the laser beam that's being shown on the hologram. That makes sense. So what BM and then Talbot were saying is that it's consciousness that makes the universe pop out to us as a phenomenal experience from out of code from out of mathematical wave functions right in an information process. So then what is consciousness exactly? You ask that question on the other side of two 300 years of conditioning in a reductionist mechanistic physical model. Yeah. From the time of Newton onward. Mhm. Where it's expected that consciousness should be explained as a phenomenon reducible to some kind of physical mechanism. Well, if Wheeler was right in his interpretation of, you know, this information theory that we were talking about, beginning with Claude Shannon, continuing with Ralph Flandower, if Wheeler's interpretation that it was Wheeler's first name, John John Archald Wheeler. Okay. By the way, he had security clearances and worked with people deep in the deep state, including on the UFO subject secretly. So, this goes to your question like, what does it do to your worldview when you know this [ __ ] about how the universe works, right? Right. Then not only are we living under the Death Star, but actually we're living inside a simulation. What does that do to your view of the world and your sense of ethics? Yeah. But point being if you you ask what is consciousness coming from out of this physicalist reductionist conditioning this established mechanistic paradigm we've been living in for two 300 years. Yeah. Well if wheeler is correct and it comes from bit it's a nonsensical question. What is consciousness? Consciousness is irreducible uh precondition of any physical phenomena whatsoever. the univer the the existence of any other experiencable phenomena is predicated on the fact of consciousness. If we're living in an information processing system, Danny, right? For whom is the information being processed? And the information processing system is there to render meaningful content to a mind or to minds. Okay? Meaning the consciousness is intrinsic to the system. Got it? And by the way, that should be the intuitively correct view. Like this is some bizarre counterintuitive thing to imagine that consciousness is some derivative phenomenon that needs to be explained in terms of gears and like billiard balls that we need to build consciousness up from out of mechanistic physics. That's not intuitive at all. What do you make of Jung's idea of consciousness? How he explained it as like this archipelago? He explained consciousness, human consciousness, as like this giant connected big thing, this big rock b or big island or whatever. And there's water above it. And there's all these little islands sticking out. We are each individual islands of our own consciousness, our own ego or whatever. But below the ocean, it's like this it's this whole archipelago island that's connected, right? And it's all one thing. People say these things about Jung. When you actually look into Jung, it's a little bit more nuanced than that. And it's connected to other ideas that are more complex and more disturbing. So what you're talking about is the collective unconscious. What Young called the collective unconscious. Okay. But what often isn't quoted from out of Jung is that Jung believed that different races had different collective unconscious. So he's not talking about the collective of humanity. He makes this point very distinctly that for example the German people have Won or Odin as an archetype that guides their collective unconscious, the Germanic collective unconscious. So, you know, really as World War II was starting, Jung wrote about how he thought that the Nazis exploding onto the world stage were an eruption from out of the collective unconscious of the Germanic people and that it was the god Odin as an archetype coming back into the world. And this idea is not unique to Jung and he didn't come up with it. Actually, if you dig deeper into the German intellectual history, you find this in the philosophy of mind of Hegel, Gayorg Hegel, who you want you want to think talk about somebody hard to read. I mean, Hegel, man, like uh yeah, there there's there's no more cryptic and dense writer probably in the entire human intellectual history than that [ __ ] But I've worked through some of Hegel and in his philosophy of mind it's very clear that one of the things he's saying is that different races closely knit ethnic groups have a something like unconscious telepathy going on right and actually you can see this very clearly in isolated tribes people who've done anthropological research on tribes in Australia or in certain parts of Africa have seen that not only is there are telepathy connecting members in the tribe. There's um a lot of clairvoyance and stuff too like they they they function you know primitive tribes function in a way similar to schools of fish or flocks of birds. Okay. Okay. Yeah. And so an extension of that is that even as civilization arises certain closely knit ethnic groups share a collective unconscious. So Jung wasn't saying that like on some kumbaya mystical level we're all one right he was describing properties of the collective unconscious of different groups of people but it could be that that's a nested hierarchy you know a nested hierarchy in other words you have very tightly knit collective unconscious of different races yes but then there is a a level of kind of telepathic communication among humanity in general Right. And and this goes to morphic resonance what we're saying about morphic resonance earlier. So that if there were humans somewhere else like let's say there are also humans on Mars there might be a kind of telepathic link between humans on Earth and humans on Mars. That is not in any way, shape, or form saying that all sentient life in the universe is fundamentally interconnected, which is a claim a lot of sort of new age people want to make that we're all one and it's all one and it's all God and whatever. That makes sense. The collective unconscious is actually a testable claim. It's hard to test, but it's a reasonable postulate in psychology and anthropology. What do you think makes um some of these individuals who are able to do some of this consciousness stuff? Like whether whether it be people in the Stargate program doing remote viewing or whether it be some of these folks that these whistleblowers are talking about doing these psionic um psychic takeovers of UFOs. What is there something fundamental about certain people that gives them this ability? Like I know for example this guy David Mohouse came in here he he got shot in the head right he got a stray bullet hit him in the helmet like knock knocked him unconscious and he had to had severe TBI and that's when they admitted him to the Stargate program like so but other people seem to like um like Ingo Swan or like Erie Geller seem to be just like innately born with this ability. I think there are three different things going on. First of all, Gary Nolan claims that the research he's done in the in the research he's done at Stanford that he's found that there are structural properties of the brains of these people, the basil ganglia involving the basil ganglia that are significantly different from the average in the population. So there could be elements of the physiological development of the brain which is genetic. Yes. and to some extent environmental. Okay, that um I say to some extent environmental because like radiation for example can mutate people, right? It can mutate their brain development. So and and also um I think Michael Herrera was saying that some of the people that they they got in that on that mission like had just survived an earthquake in well that that comes to another reason another factor a distinct factor. I would imagine that that was because they were uh not a part of this civilized technical world that we live in. and they're more in tune to nature. Okay, in that case there are four factors. Good, very good point. This goes back to the Australian Aborigines and the people tribes in Africa that I was just referencing. So four different factors. One, so Gary Nolan's research suggests that there are physical differences in the brains of these people. They're slight, but they're significant involving the, you know, significant to to the level of psychic ability that someone demonstrates. and it involves the basil ganglia. Another factor is trauma and we we're going to come back to that. There's definitely a huge correlation. Yeah, there definitely a huge correlation between trauma, especially trauma from childhood and the degree of someone's extrensory perception. Another factor is level of civilization which you're just referencing that there's a clear correlation between the rise of technical intellect, the hypertrophy of our analytical mind and the atrophy of psychic abilities. Yes, I talk about this in my first book, Prometheus and Atlas, that it's very obvious studying primitive tribes that they have much stronger psychic abilities, which stands to reason because animals have much stronger psychic abilities than humans. Studies on dogs and on horses and on fish and birds have shown that they they have much stronger psychic abilities than humans. So it stands to reason that primitive tribes who are still living close to nature also would not have experienced an atrophy of their psychic abilities because they're relying more on analytical reasoning and on the technology that comes from it. Right. Right. So as we've separated ourselves from nature both through analytical thinking and through material technologies to do [ __ ] for us we've this is atrophy. It's interesting. I've heard people who've come on the podcast describe the experience of going down to like the Amazon rainforest and being down there for weeks or even months. And they're saying once you're down there isolated from this hyper evolved technical world we live in in America and you get out of it into nature out there, something happens to you where your body just becomes in tune with the jungle where you it's weird where you can sense dangers like not just I'm not talking about ESP type stuff where I'm saying like there's something built into us like deep buried deep inside of us where we automatically can like sense the way the birds are chirping that there's danger near, right? Mhm. Little thing like little sure things in nature that we didn't even know were there inside of us. Yeah. Well, people say getting in touch with your instincts. What does that mean? Right. Okay. I'm sure it's like some deep evolution uh that's that's in us that comes out when we're put back in those environments. Someone who wrote a lot about this in a in a fairly sophisticated way was the French philosopher Henri Bergson. Bergson was a early 20th century philosopher who also by the way got involved with the League of Nations and he you know the organization that today is called UNESCO the United Nations Econ uh United Nations Educational and Scientific Organization UNESCO which Trump is defunding. I don't blame him given what UNESCO's become. But back in the day, before the UN was even formed and it was still the League of Nations, remember the predecessor organization, uh, Bergson helped set up and I think he Yeah, he was the first director or he was a director of UNESCO. So he was not just a philosopher like you know in an ivory tower. He made a big impact on public intellectual culture. Anyway, Bergson in his book Creative Evolution and also in his book Matter and Memory, he discusses the evolutionary bifurcation of intellect and instinct. And he shows how various species that operate entirely on instinct because of their morphological structure because the way their bodies are constructed like certain insects, they don't have the potential to develop technology because their bodies are too well suited to grappling with their environment. It's like they're born ready to handle the world. Humans are born crippled, right? And therefore we need technology, right? And so we as we develop technology and as we develop the model building intellectually that allows us to engineer technology, in other words, as we develop a scientific analytical mindset, our instinct atrophies. So there's this evolutionary bifurcation between instinct, I'm sorry, intuition, sorry, no, instinct and intellect. And what Bergen says is that what we call intuition is the resurgence of instinct in the context of a life form with a dominant analytical intellect. Mhm. So our intuition is us getting back in touch with the instinct that these other animals operated according. Isn't that interesting too like with human beings how long it takes us from birth to be to be able to survive in the environment. like we we're literally helpless for years. Yeah, for sure. And and that goes to the heart of the myth of Prometheus that's been central to all of my work because, you know, one of the elements of the myth of Prometheus that a lot of people neglect because they don't really, you know, look into it. I just think about, oh, Prometheus stole fire from the gods to give men the power of ingenuity. Okay, that Prometheus brought this fire to be a forge for all kinds of technical innovation and invention, right? But part of the myth of Prometheus is that he so Zeus lets Prometheus design humans. Humans are creations of Prometheus, not of Zeus in Greek mythology. Right? Except Prometheus whose name means forethought has this forgetful brother Epimetheus his name means afterthought and Promethe Epimetheus kind of begs Prometheus to be involved in the project of the creation of man and Prometheus subcontracts part of the design of humans to Epimetheus. Epimetheus forgets to endow humans with an essence particular to our species. So according to the Greek way of thinking all different various animals had a species being an essence that defines that species as what it is gives it its purpose. Remember we were talking about final causes earlier. Yeah. Tilos purpose aim of a species or an organism. So Epimetheus forgets to give a purpose a tilos to man. It means we're not born with any purpose. that's designed, that's embedded in us the way that it is in the case of certain insects or any other non-human uh animals. And therefore, we're left to define our own purpose through the development and use of technology. So, the human is an existentially uncompleted being, right? who necessarily has to complete himself through the use of technology. This idea is at the heart of the myth of Prometheus and it's very beautifully symbolized where when Prometheus finds out that [ __ ] my dumb brother, my forgetful brother didn't give these creatures any purpose, any essence. Athena comes and helps out. She has a special relationship with Prometheus. Athena, he tried to seduce her at one point and Athena comes and helps out by giving man his soul in the form of a butterfly. So what substitutes what you know for the our lacking essence is a butterfly. That's the soul of man. Well, what's a butterfly the symbol of? Metamorphosis. Metam the caterpillar becoming the butterfly. Is this like Marshall McLuhan? Is this tie into his idea of the electronic caterpillar? I don't know. human humanity, humans are basically creating this um we are like the electronic caterpillar building technology into this. Yes. Yes. Our our purpose is to build this. Yes. Yes. Yes. Perfectly. And so, you know, it's another way of saying that it's up to us what we make ourselves. It's up to us. We have the freedom of a butterfly and we have the metamorphic potential of the caterpillar. And through technology without which we cannot survive, without which we wouldn't even be human. You know that prehuman homminids evolved into us by using technology. fire made it easier to chew food and the hum the shape of the human skull changed because of that since we didn't need huge chomper jaws anymore. Right? So the very morphology of the homo sapien was in the first place defined by a certain technological innovation. So we're intrinsically technological beings with a metamorphic potential that's unique in nature and that means that our evolutionary horizon is open. We can decide what it is we want to become which is very freeing but also incredibly dangerous. What do you make of the stoned ape hypothesis that we ate a mushroom which which accounted for the extreme growth in our brain size? Well, that's also techn so you know Haidiger uses this word techn which comes from ancient Greek to express the essence of technology and it means craft and cultivation of psychedelic substances is also craft. Mhm. So yeah, it's a form of technology and undoubtedly at various junctures it contributed to the evolution of human consciousness and probably will continue to. I mean DMT what you know we're talking about earlier off the record. Yeah. About experiments where people are given DMT and they look at laser beams. Yeah. Yeah. And they see the code of the matrix inside the laser beam. Right. Well, you know, if that starts to happen on a large enough scale and it's considered in the context of all this data that we've discussed regarding the possibility we're living in a simulation, yeah, that's certainly going to result in some kind of immutation of human consciousness, grappling with that fact existentially is going to involve or require a further evolution of human consciousness. Yeah. what that that um that DMT study with uh Danny Gler did that. He was just on here again recently and um Andrew Gallamore did a review of it and I think he's now working with with Gallamore uh doing further studies of it. I think I found out about it through reading Gallamore. Yeah. So Galamore is doing the DMTX, extended state DMT stuff. And one of the things that Gallammore talks about is there's history a history of people um under this under the influence of psychedelic drugs seeing code in and specific things. And and one of the things that he described in regards to that laser experiment where you do DMT and you shine the laser on the wall, you look at the laser and you see that code is that it's like a the laser sort of acts like a microscope. Like first of all, when you're doing DMT, what it's doing is in his hyp in his view is it's breaking down all these filters that we have in our brain. Our brain is filtering out what we normally have every day to be able to eat, sleep, survive, and get through the day, right? And when you take DMT, it breaks down all these filters. So, you're seeing maybe this code, maybe you're seeing more stuff that's really here that we can't normally see in a normal state. And when you bring in the laser while you're in that state, it's like hyperfocusing on one part of that. And maybe that explains why we're seeing this specific little code. And everyone or I think a vast majority of people who have done that exact DMT laser experiment have reported seeing the same exact code. Yes. And the code looks like this um this type form, this Japanese text form that's called katakana, which is very similar to what's in the matrix to the matrix dripping rain code, which is a human that was designed by humans. So why are how do you explain that what we're doing, we're going into the state and seeing this thing that must have been there before humans were here, right, is a human invention. You know what else is really creepy about that is that some people who've been inside these deep underground facilities where whatever you want to call it I don't know why what you even call these things these days alien technology. No, it's not really alien off-world technology. No, they're coming from under the ocean. It gets hard to, you know, even label these things. Whatever. They've seen weird [ __ ] right? Tech that's deeply classified in these underground facilities. And they say that this exotic technology in some cases involves a script that like like on UFOs there's a script printed in certain places or they found there's this one one uh case where a guy was shown a gauntlet like a a big glove. Yeah. That had an information display on it and when he looked into it the holographic display was showing this these symbols. They're the same symbols that people see on DMT in the laser beam. This is the claim that's been made by people who've done DMT. Yeah. And who've also been in these classified facilities and seen this script imprinted on UFOs or on displays that they've recovered from inside UFOs. And it's the same script. So, what does that tell you? It seems to suggest that the people who manufactured that technology have long since cracked this code and they use it themselves. Hm. As some kind of a symbol system, right? Yeah. Well, that's disturbing. Um, yes. By the way, speaking of lasers and laser beams, you know who invented those? Was it really the Nazis? They invented lasers for the sake of enriching uranium. Steve, ask Chad GBT who invented the lasers. is probably going to give us a a uh a politically correct answer, but I've read the history of this and it was done. So, look, the Germans, Theodore May, first working laser in 1960 at Hughes Research Laboratories in Malibu, California. Yeah. Look up uh look up uh if he can do this in the background while we talk. Yeah. Laser isotope enrichment. the history of laser isotope enrichment. Okay. So, the first really functioning coherent lasers, as far as I understand, were invented by the Germans in the 19, I don't know, late 30s, early 40s for the sake of uh enriching uranium. And you know what we're told is that Verer Heisenberg, you know the German physicist Verer Heisenberg? Yeah. He wrote a great book called Physics and Philosophy. He was a very deep thinker. But what we're told in the official history is that Heisenberg was running the atom bomb program for the Nazis and that they were using heavy water enrichment. They were using, you know, what what uh they're so worried about in Iran today. Gas centrifuges. Yeah. To enrich uranium. That's the official narrative that this is the nature of the Nazi atom bomb program and that we sent some operatives from Norway or something to blow up their uranium plants and it ended their atom bomb program. Well, there have been some alternative uh researchers like Joseph Farrell who've who are citing other more technical sources. There's the name of this book escapes me. It's a whole book on the German atom bomb program which Farrell cites extensively and the there's an argument that the Germans had a second parallel atom bomb program based on laser isotope enrichment and this was the reason why they invented lasers. And these researchers point to two incidents that took place in 1944 where it appears that the Germans successfully tested an atom bomb. One over the Baltic Sea where there was this pilot who was flying uh Allied pilot who was flying, you know, across the Baltic Sea area and he saw this explosion which involved all kinds of different rainbow colors inside of it. And supposedly this is a characteristic of nuclear explosions that very few people know about. You have to actually like have seen one uh to know that this happens. It's the file material like continuing to react inside the mushroom cloud and it produces a certain display of like multicolored lights. Okay, we don't see it in any of those test footages. Remember those old atom bomb tests? Because it's all black and white footage. And but so he described seeing this inside this explosion and only a nuclear explosion could produce that. Then there was another one at a place not all that far from Berlin. I forget the name of the small town that it was near, but it caused an EMP blackout of all the electricity and communications in Berlin for like I don't know 24 hours or something. Mhm. So point being, you know, that's something very disturbing to consider that like if the Nazis had actually successfully tested nuclear weapons in 1944, why did they lose the war, right? What is that about? What is that about? Yeah. this I mean so do you think it's possible that there is a civilization of humans or something that is here inhabiting this planet that we can't see or interact with typically I'm sure there's exceptions that would be analogous to like us compared to an unconted tribe living on an island that is so technologically advanced. I think it's a bad analogy because the level of interference in our societies on their part is such that it's nothing like anthropologists trying to study an unconted tribe without disturbing it. I mean they're basically socially engineering our entire world. Mhm. Okay. Okay. So, if you look through the history of religions, Mhm. right, I think we talked about this in our in our first conversation. Mhm. I cover it at length in closer encounters and in Prometheus and Atlas working from sources like well, first of all, I mean, I talk comparative religion myself. So, I've read the Bible like in depth and read the Quran and various religious scriptures. But also uh you know I've read Jacqu Valet's works Passport to Monagonia, The Invisible College. An excellent book by um William Braramley, which I can't mention enough times. Everybody in the UFO circle should read this book. The Gods of Eden, William Braramley. Okay, nobody wants to think about these things. William Braramley. Anyway, I don't want to repeat myself from the first show, but he started out studying war profiteering throughout the course of history. And he came to the conclusion that the uh the the beings behind the UFO phenomenon have been socially engineering all of our cultures from the earliest that we have any historical records and that they're responsible for all the major wars. And that basically what's going on is mass exploitation of the human population by a hidden elite. Mhm. So looking at all this, you see that they've been not just interfering, they've been designing human societies going back thousands of years. How does this fit into the simulation hypothesis? Good [ __ ] question, right? Because there's more than one way you could interpret that. And this goes back to your question of if you're a person who has all the security clearances and you know all the darkest secrets. Yeah. And you've had to internalize that as part of your worldview, what's it do to you? Yeah. Right? Cuz one possibility is that the the designers of the simulation themselves that they're like the okay either like the architect or like the agent smiths in the matrix, right? That's one possibility. Okay, but there's another possibility. And by the way, I hope that one's wrong. I hope they're not the designers of the simulation because if you look at some of the [ __ ] up [ __ ] that these entities have done, like for example, the cases in Brazil, nobody seems to like to talk about those these days. No, no, no. In the 1970s in the Amazon basin in Brazil, these Nordic UFO pilots terrorized and mutilated the population. They would burn them with lasers. They would chase them through the forest. They would kidnap people. They left mutilated bodies. There were people I don't want to describe some of the things that were done to some of these people. Doctors went in there and they were horrified by there. Name of this event. Um I discuss it in closer encounters where I cite extensively uh you know primary sources on it including Jacques Valet. Okay. Who wrote a forward to a book about this. Okay. I think it was called UFO danger zone in Brazil or something. And Jacqu Valet wrote the forward to that. Okay. And yet he I've never heard Valet in all these years bring up those cases again. And I think it's because it conflicts with an implicit agenda. Yeah, there you go. Holy [ __ ] Forward by Jacqu Valet. Terror and death in Brazil. And yes, it really was terror and death. I mean, with utter contempt for these natives of the Brazilian backwater, these Nordics came in and treated them as less than slaves. Almost as if they were engaging in sport, hunting these people and just like sadistically terrorizing them. Some Westworld [ __ ] There was no uh constructive purpose. You understand? Like it's not like they were abducting these people to experiment on them. No, no, no. They were just terrorizing the [ __ ] out of these people coming up from out of the rivers in the Amazon basin and doing this to them. And they were described very clearly by all the inhabitants there because the people down there, you know, mostly Indian DNA, you know, Amazonian Indian DNA. And so they say, you know, Elre Blanco, you know, they're they were white people, blondes, white people, right? They even they even thought maybe gringoes were behind it, right? But unless the US military had advanced so much, you know, from the 1950s until the 1970s that we had fleets of UFOs underneath the Amazon rivers coming up, you know, and I don't buy it, right? Uh, and besides, like I said, you see this all through human history. It's in the record of every single religion from from the Hindu scriptures, the Mahab Marata and the Ramayana and the wars between the Davas and the Ashuras and how they nuked and leveled whole cities all the way to what's in the Bible in the book of Ezekiel, destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. It's all there same beings. Abraham deals with them and they're so beautiful that when they first show up, he's so impressed by them that he's like, "Wife, take care of these people." Like, you know, they're they they're very they seem like they're very important. Those aren't aliens. And the same people go to Sodom to retrieve Lot right before God is going to destroy before he's going to nuke Sodom. And these guys are so attractive. They're such beautiful men that these uh lechers come around the house of Lot and they all want to rape these guys. And so Lot, the great prophet, the pro chosen prophet of God, volunteers to give his daughter to be raped by these men instead of allowing them to be by the crowd that's amassed outside his house. Anyway, point being, they were tall, beautiful people. Okay. Wow. Those are not aliens. Those are humans who are up to no good and have very advanced technology. So, point being, I hope they're not the designers of the simulation. There's another hypothesis that they're people who figured out they're in a simulation a long time ago. Remember what we were saying about Mars? Yeah. And McMle was saying they're trying to find a way out. No matter what they do, they can't find a way out. And remember you said to me I was talking about you know Brandenburgg's study of how many nukes had to have been detonated in Sedonia and you're like well then the nukes destroyed the atmosphere right well there's another possibility that this was the first version of something like the destruction of Atlantis where these giant pyramids on Mars were data centers and the Martians started to experience this geoysical information catastrophe and they nuked their own servers trying to stop the thing as it was getting out of hand, but you know, they got to it too late. Wow. So, point being, the people behind the UFO phenomenon, and I I belabor that point, people behind the UFO phenomenon. Yeah. Could be the first people who figured out we're in a simulation and it totally [ __ ] their heads. And as far as I can see it, they became very sadistic. Now, one of the things Greer was explaining to me is that if there are people or organizations, private companies, aerospace that have figured all this out, they hypothetically would be more powerful than any world government. maybe all the world government, maybe Russia, China, US combined militarily wise. And that would explain, I mean, he also goes on to say how like top J2 generals cannot get access to this stuff. Meaning basically the highest levels levels of the US military can't even get clearance on this technology. Meaning they're like holding it hostage from the US. How do you suppose such a structure would have developed? I would imagine it would have started with the United States and DARPA when after the World War II. Yeah. And through paperclip and through other stuff we were doing and it got so out of hand because obviously they wanted the government didn't want to have accountability over this stuff. So that's why they put it in the private sector. And basically they figured it out to an extent where it maybe took off and got so powerful that they realize, look, we don't need to [ __ ] answer to the US government anymore. We control this stuff. And maybe they're running around the world right now with impunity doing things that we have no idea what the [ __ ] they're doing. And maybe they're like I think you made a you described it in a way as if potentially these are the people that are waiting for China and Russ China and Russia and the United States are like fish in a pond fighting and they're waiting for them to get worn out and just take like a cat like a cat waiting for the fish. Eat the fighting fish. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Sikha height din national security agency it's a Nazi term it's a Nazi term was imported into this country national security act of 1947 established the national security agency the CIA and basically the entire infrastructure of our deep state that's also when we changed the name of the department of war to the department of defense yeah very cute so So, get this. Um, and we created the CIA. Yeah. So, a lot of people talk about paperclipip. We brought thousands of Nazi scientists over here. And people talk only about the physicists for some reason. The rocket scientists, which we'll come to them, and the bizarre [ __ ] that was going on with them. But there were also psychologists we brought here. We brought biologists here. We brought all kinds of people. The psychologists who developed MK Ultra eventually starting with Project Bluebird in the 50s and became MK Ultra in the 60s. Bluebird was worse. They were experimenting on children. These were Nazi psychologists who were brought over here to develop these behavioral sciences. They had been doing these things in the concentration camps. So we bring all these thousands of Nazi scientists over here between 1945 and 1947. Okay. You know what else is happening at the same time that nobody seems to talk about? You read the Spanish newspapers at the time and they're saying bizarre [ __ ] that Otto Scorzani, you know who he was. Remind me. So, so Mussolini, so Italy fell before Germany. Right. Right. Most of Italy except for the Salo Republic which was in the north. And Mussolini was arrested and he was taken and made prisoner on island of Panza. The Nazis used psychics, remote viewers, to find Mussolini. They pinpointed him. By the way, the Nazis used to use this to track naval fleets all the time. They would find the positions of destroyers and, you know, American naval ships using remote viewers. Anyway, they used this to find Mussolini, the island he was held on, and they sent this super commando special forces uh leader Otto Scorzani, guy with a mustache and a real real badass fencing. Find a photo of him. Yeah, he's creepy looking guy. Yeah, Scorzani. They sent him to retrieve Mussolini. So, there's these pictures where Mussolini has been freed. He's been extracted by the Nazis and he's with Scorzani and Hitler. He's been brought back to Reich headquarters, right? They took care of their boy. They found Mussolini, pulled him. Yeah. Look at some of the ones with a Yeah. Yeah. Look at that giant fencing scar. Yeah. Now, let me tell you a little bit about this guy. So So, look. So all these people were prosecuted in Arberg, right? Yep. Somehow this guy gets loose and he's in Spain from 1945 to 1947. Mhm. Under Franco. So remember there was one fascist regime that survived the end of World War II. Italy and and Germany fell, but Spain survived. Spain was a fascist regime that survived the end of World War II. And moreover, as the mother country of the Spanish-sp speakaking world, the fascist regime of General Franco was connected to the fascist regime of Argentina, and there was a pipeline between Spain and Argentina in terms of Nazi personnel and assets, right? So this guy shows up, the Spanish newspapers are writing between 45 and 47, and he's with Franco on the Mediterranean coast of Spain, and they're launching saucershaped rockets. They didn't know what to call these things at that point. They only knew what rockets were. Saucer-shaped rockets toward America. What happens in 1947? Roswell. Roswell. Where is Roswell? the only military base at that time housing nuclear weapons. The base from which the Anola Gay flew to drop the bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Right. Okay. So, here's something really disturbing about Roswell. Corso's descriptions. Exactly. Corso's descriptions don't fit anything from an alien craft man. The guy was in charge as he had had a foreign technology division of uh understanding foreign countries technologies. Right. Right. And what did he say was pulled out of the wreckage and then reverse engineered Velcro night vision. Um what else? Um Kevlar. Come on, man. aliens coming here from another like star system are using like velcro and kevlar and night vision. That's like their state of the art technology. Nobody talks about this stuff. There's a reason why nobody talks about it. Danny, there's a reason why Corso, how did Corso describe this stuff and where's it documented for people to read it? Day after Roswell. Day Oh, it's in Day after Roswell. Yeah. And he says Kevlar night vision. Now, Joseph Farrell wrote a great uh study of Roswell and other associated incidents in the context of Nazi psychological operations. It's called saucers, swastikas, and scops. By the way, I have big problems with, by the way, don't think I'm like trying to promote Joseph or something. I spent a couple days with the guy. I got big problems with him. He's an Orthodox um Christian, high up in the the Orthodox Christian apparatus and so forth. So you know Joseph Farrell's worldview at a deep level and mine couldn't be more opposed right but I have to say he's done some very rigorous research and the stuff that Farrell swastikas saucers and scops is on the cover of that book actually yeah wow and so Farrell is commenting on Corso and what Corso wrote in Day after Roswell and he's saying there's no way this is alien there's no way this is alien in Nazi technology was anywhere between 5 to 10 years in advance of ours. We know that. We know that looking at the history of technological innovation, for example, in computers, the Nazis had very small transistors already in World War II. It took us another 5 to 10 years to develop those. Uh IBM had a German subsidiary called Dehomog. It was the German branch of IBM. the information was so compartmentalized the German IBM was ahead of American IBM the parent company and they had transistors that were much smaller right so you can look across all the different uh fields of of technology and see like for example the Germans testing night vision goggles in the African desert in 1942 they were like 5 to 10 years ahead of us then when you look at the saucer technology itself you know electrogravitics and the saucer airframe. Who are the brothers that were working on this stuff? The Jacobson brothers. Horton brothers. Okay. So, when you read the Twining Memorandum, General Nathan Twining's memorandum um about the saucers about um flying discs as they called them in those days. There was a fake version of that that was modified and it was leaked in the leaked in the UFO community like I don't know a couple decades ago and it changed a few sentences to make it out like Twining thought these were aliens. The original twining memorandum has since been excavated and where you read, you know, at the end when he's drawing his conclusions and making recommendations, he says basically this looks a lot like not Nazi [ __ ] and we really should find out where the Horton brothers are. Okay. So Annie Jacobson talks about this a lot in her Area 51 book. Yeah. And I I've asked a lot of people about it and no one seems to buy into it, but she I mean I I know you're familiar with it. Basically the idea is that there was the evidence is very good. Mangallay manglay surgically altered some children to go in that thing and they remote controlled here. Progeria children. Progeria their heads get all swollen up and they look old even though they're they're you know neotenous looking but they look old at the same time. Their heads get all swollen. And there was an EG&G engineer who told Annie this and she goes, "Why why wouldn't you guys make this public if you found out that this was Russian Stalin flown or Nazi stuff?" Like it would make them look terrible on the world stage and the re he said the reason we didn't let it out is because we continued the research. We continued the research. Absolutely. Absolutely. So where is this all coming? The point of departure was our conversation about the deep state and like yes if there is an entity as Greer says and here I agree with him that's more powerful than all the governments of the world how did it start where did it started here and it started here because okay now try here here gets a little bit mindboggling again on the one hand we've imported these thousands of Nazis and we're engaging ing them in, let's just say, highly ethically dubious projects, which requires what? It requires a massive state security and classification apparatus to be put in place, right? Which is unconstitutional according to our constitution. Government of the people, by the people, for the people. There was that thing, the Bill of Rights, right? So on the one hand, we're bringing all this technical expertise and the projects they're working on were things they were doing in concentration camps. So we need classification for that. On the other hand, this saucer crashes and it looks weird. We don't know what it is. Maybe it's alien. We don't know what. But it's definitely a threat to national security. And moreover, the thing crashed next to our own only nuclear base at the time. And it's got maybe some deformed children in it. and it's got all this super advanced technology but still stuff we can understand that we were already working on. Mhm. So you also need security classification for that. So here we have the National Security Act of 1947 which effectively creates the deep state. Right. Mhm. And but let me Okay. So, all right. I'll I'll finish this point and then I'll go back to talking about the saucer as a as an as an engineering design and where it came from. This deep state was already so autonomous from the civilian government of the United States, including our defense department, that when von Braun's team was working on the early rockets, the the adaptation of the V2 into a ballistic missile in the 1950s in Texas, the Pentagon officials found out that the Germans were taking classified information to the border and meeting with Nazi officials coming from Argentina and Chile and Paraguay, meeting them in border towns in Mexico, right on the Texas border, and giving them classified information from inside of our programs. So, they confronted the German scientists about this, right? They were going to like chastise them, whatever. I don't know. What could they do? What? Revoke their clearances? Well, who's going to build this [ __ ] right? But, you know, they get on their case about it. Guess what the next thing that happens is? Oops. The Germans misdirected their missiles and they landed in Mexico. They shot some ballistic missiles into Mexico as a way to say to the Pentagon, don't [ __ ] with us. You [ __ ] with us again, we'll start a war with Mexico. So, already by the 1950s, they had their hands on the balls of the US government to that extent. This is why you have Eisenhower coming out and making that statement as he leaves office, warning about the military-industrial complex that's gotten out of hand and they're a threat to our democratic society, etc. Because he knew this stuff. And I'm convinced the main reason now Kennedy made a lot of enemies for a lot of reasons. The Kennedy brothers did cuz they were, you know, engaged in prosecuting the mafia and, you know, there was the whole Cuban angle with a Bay of Pigs fiasco. Yeah. But I'm convinced that the main reason the JFK was killed is that Eisenhower handed this information off to him, the UFO stuff, the whole deep state problem. Yeah. And said to him, "Listen, man. You have to get this under control because these people pose an existential risk to our constitution and our way of life." And Kennedy was going to shut them down. And even after he was executed, his brother would have pursued the same policy. So they were both taken out. And I've heard RFK on record in interviews say that he believes that his father was killed by a locked contractor, specifically a locked contractor. Now, why would a locked contractor assassinate Robert Kennedy? There's only one explanation you can come up with for that. Whoa. Now, this is the place to go back to the saucers. Okay. All right. Okay. Uh, Loheed Martin used to be called Martin Aircraft. Yeah. In the 19 in 1953. Mhm. There were all these stories that came out in mainstream news publications about how these aerospace they weren't called. They were called aircraft companies in those days. These aircraft companies have developed the G engine and they're about to roll off the assembly line. craft that can defy gravity and get you like from New York to Australia in an hour. There were all these stories about this stuff and they quoted the chairman of Martin Aircraft, Lear, Convair, bunch of companies, handful of companies and the only one of those that's still active in the the defense industrial scene is Martin Aircraft which became Lockheed. Okay. Okay. And then in 19 by 1955 or so the story disappears. The story disappears. And it's at the same time between 53 and 55 where these chairman of these aeronautical engineering companies are making these statements that you have physicists holding conferences about cracking gravity. Right. Okay. Yeah. So the United States cracked gravity circa 1955. Right. Townson Brown was also developing, you know, this this um polarization effect. Bryce Dwit, Lewis Whitten. Yes. Whitten. The other company that has some of this tech is Northrup, which designed the B2 bomber, which some people say the B2 is a reference to uh the Brown Bfield effect, right? That can uh basically augment the propulsion of an aircraft by lowering the the you know effect of gravity on the aircraft. Yeah. ion wind. Yeah. Yeah. And uh so by 1955 they figured this [ __ ] out. Then went black. Now let me ask you something. If we're looking at Kevlar, Velcro, night vision, lasers, transistors, and we see that in all these areas, Nazi Germany was about a decade ahead of us. And we cracked electrogravitics in 1955. When did they crack it? There are reports that Okay, so there was a think tank in Prague under the direction of General Hans Comler. It was a Nazi scientific working group and I think it was based in Prague because they were collaborating with the Italians on this. The Italians were junior partner and they wanted a country that was sort of nominally not Germany, right? Basically under Nazi control. And there are people who who u claim that Otto Scorzani remember Otto Scorzani he came to the facility in Prague in 1944 toward the war's end and he saw that the scientists working under General Comler had developed a circular a discshaped airframe that was tremendously aerodynamic in its performance and And it had a number of interesting features to it. One is it had these vents that suction the boundary layer. It's called suctioning the boundary layer where you know air resistance develops around the edges of any airframe like an airplane or anything that has sharp edges to it. And so first of all by making a saucer shaped craft you're already reducing air resistance. Then they had suction vents that would suck in the boundary layer and redirect it redirect that air flow into the propulsion system. They also developed a kind of metal that was perforated. Um they called it luft schwam uh fly flying foam and it was a special kind of metal that had lots of tiny holes in it that would also allow air to pass through. Was a very light metal which further reduced air resistance. The same think tank, the camel stab camel staff in Prague was working on this 9 to 12 foot tall acorn-shaped or bell-shaped Oh, yes. reactor. It was a It was a Nazi bell. Yes. It was a mercury thorium reactor whose purpose was to generate more energy than is put into it. It was constantly powered by AC energy with big big cables and intermittently shocked with direct current and it would rotate counterrotate drums filled with mercury and thorium isotope inside of the shell of this device. And what they realized in the comler stop was we could take this thing and put it inside the saucer. Originally, the saucers were powered by rotating jets. And so, we could take this magnificently aerodynamic airframe and take this reactor and put it inside it as a power source. And there's your electrogravidic saucer invented in Nazi Germany 1944. We cracked the same engineering problems and propulsion issues in 1955. So, what does that tell you about all the rest of the stuff that was discovered in Roswell? It fits the pattern of the Nazis cracking this a decade earlier than we were there scientifically and technologically. And by the time we were there in 55, this deep state run by Nazis already had its hand around the balls of the civilian government of the United States and had already set up the national security state to sequester this information. And this is kind of similar to the idea of that Spectre organization in the Bond. Yeah. I mean, Ian Fleming was an intelligence operative at a very high level. Yeah. He was involved in um surveilling Martin Borman. Martin he I think Ian Fleming was involved in the operation of tracking and surveilling Martin Borman who was Hitler's chief financeier. He was the money man of the Reich. And Borman died three times. There's three different accounts of this guy's death. Faking his death. Yeah. I mean, twice wasn't enough. There's three different accounts of this guy's death, right? We have to be convinced he's dead. Except that from his from from, you know, beyond the grave, he writes a check in his own name through Chase Manhattan Bank in Argentina in 1975. So Martin Borman is still alive in 1975 writing checks for huge amounts through Chase, by the way, a bank. Yeah. Whose logo is a swastika? Pull it up. Take a good look at the Chase logo. Put Chase logo swastika. Take a look at that. And who founded uh who founded Chase? JP Morgan, right? JP Morgan was business partners with the Dulles brothers. Holy [ __ ] It is a freaking swastika. Yes. Uh, keep going down. There's better depictions compared. Was there like an older version of it that was more even more similar? Because I mean that's pretty close. Yeah, it's a good question. Um, the Ford uh motor company also had a swastika in its logo before it became politically incorrect. Ford was a big supporter of the Nazis. Ford loved the Nazis. Ford Ford was building [ __ ] for them even after the war, right? Yes. that we were he was building tanks that we were blowing up on the battlefield for the Nazis. Ford was a virolent anti-semite. He put copies of the protocols of the elders of Zion in the early Ford cars that were manufactured. You could like find it in the glove compartment. Type in Ford logo swastika. Let's see what that comes up with. So anyway, uh the early earliest Ford logo swastika. Look at there. Can you punch in? Yeah. Ford Motor Company. No, that's not it. No, that's it. No, that is a Ford Motor Company. Ford Motor Company. That was their logo? Yes, that's their logo. What? I'm telling you the guy. Listen, find some more of it. Ford. I found better ones of it before. I've I've put them in other interviews I've done. Uh, if you can find the drawing, that's that's that's Coke. No, that that's not it, dude. Anyway, look, uh, yeah, he was such a rabbid anti-semite. You know what the protocols of the elders of Zion is? It was a document about how Jews have a conspiracy to control the whole world. Right. Right. Right. He took copies of that, mass printed them, and would put them in the glove compartments of the cars that he sold to people just so he could make sure everybody could read it. Big supporter of Hitler. So, okay, but this is putting our finger on something important about this, which I was trying to get out with Chase, right? JP Morgan based in New York. Mhm. was business partners Morgan Jr. JP Morgan Jr. Yeah. was business partners with the Dulles brothers. Alan Dulles becomes the head of the CIA and Rockefeller. And these three together, Morgan, the Dulles brothers and Rockefeller funded the rise of Nazi Germany from America. Right. Okay. And they funded Mousolini too. So point being, there was already an American power base for the Nazis before the war. You see, so they had the connections already to fall back on, including people at the level of Rockefeller and Morgan to help them move money. Why is Chase clearing a check written by Martin Borman, who died three times? Why in 1975 are they still clearing checks written by this guy? Yeah. From Argentina. H. And who was the guy? Rudolph Hess. So in 19 38 Mhm. the I think it was 38, 37, 38, something like that, the Germans engaged in this massive expedition to Antarctica. It's been debated why did they go down there? What were they really, you know, going down there for? I mean the simplest explanation is they had a world-class navy and they wanted to build a naval base in uh Antarctica and uh but they brought a bunch of scientists with them and did excavations. Actually, one of the craziest things that they did is they flew over the ice sheet going up the you know trans Antarctic mountains are huge. They're like the Himalayas. They flew along the side of these mountains and they dropped swastika flags from out of airplanes to claim the territory. So today in Antarctica, if you go to trans Antarctic mountains, there are frozen swastika flags all along the mountain side claiming the territory for Nazi Germany. Anyway, Rudolph Hess was sent down there. Um Antarctic uh Deutsch Antarctic expedition, right? And he was doing what? What was what was his title? Good question. I mean, he was a military man. Okay. High level military man. But good question. What was he doing? Because here's what happens. Comes back from Antarctica. This Hess right takes an unauthorized flight from Germany into Britain while the British were at war with the Germans already. So they're already like I don't know if the Blitz had started yet, the bombing of London, the beach, but they were already at war with the British, right? So Hess gets in a plane, flies by himself to Britain, lands in a field, and he's arrested, and he says, "Take me to Winston Churchill. Take me to Winston Churchill." The two years earlier he was in Antarctica. Churchill refuses to see Hess and then they come back to say Churchill won't see you. He's like, "Well, I'm here to engage with like 30 members of your parliament who are interested in resolving our differences." Now, what historians won't tell you is that, you know, Hitler made like three or four peace offerings to the British before he declared war on them. Mhm. Not just peace offerings, he made offers to collaborate with the British Royal Navy and like become basically military allies. They turned down all these offers. So Hess says, "I'm here to make another offer to your, you know, people in the House of Lords." So he had the numbers already, right? There was a list of British politicians who this guy knew would be sympathetic. So when Churchill turns him down, so what do the British do? Churchill doesn't let him talk to these parliamentarians. They throw Hess in prison and he stays there for decades and decades and then after the Berlin wall comes down you know once Germany becomes democratic what reunification of Germany. Yeah. He was transplanted to a German prison. Hes and no one was allowed to talk to him ever again for the rest of his life until he died. Why did he go to Britain two years after being in Antarctica? What was he going to tell the British about Antarctica? What might have been found there? You know what do you think? And why did why wasn't he allowed to talk to anybody for the rest of his life? Right. So, it's interesting what what's your theory? Well, uh, if you if you believe the empirical case that's been made for Atlantis in Antarctica, which Graham Hancock made in in Fingerprints of the Gods, his first book, um, working off of the research of um, Charles Hapgood and Rand Flemth and Colin Wilson also at one point found this theory compelling when he wrote one of his books on Atlantis that the only land mass that fits Plato's description is Antarctica. Plato describes a an island the size of Libya and Asia combined of Asia and Libya combined. In the Greek world in that time, in Plato's time, that was a description for a territory roughly the size of the first Persian Empire. The first Persian Empire is about the size of the continental United States, a little larger than that. Well, that's the size of Antarctica. Moreover, Plato said that an Atlantis was in the world ocean. Well, what does that mean, the world ocean? He said it was outside the pillars of Hercules, which means the straight of Jibralar, but he didn't say it was in what's now the Atlantic. You know, people get this asked backwards. The Atlantic is named after um Atlantis. It's named after Atlas, not the other way around. It's not like Atlantis had to be in the Atlantic because it's the Atlantic. So people named in other words the Atlantic the Atlantic because they imagined Atlantis had been there. Okay. Okay. Named after the Titan Atlas, right? So but all what Plato says is is outside the pillars of Hercules, outside the straight of Gibralar in the world ocean. Well, what's the world ocean? There is one. There's a world ocean. It's where the Atlantic, the Pacific, and the Indian Ocean all meet in a single body of water in the shoreline of Antarctica. How would they get into a war with Athens all the way down there? They had conquered and were controlling the entire planet. So the Greeks think they're all so important. Like Atlantis came here and [ __ ] with us. Atlantis [ __ ] with everybody. Okay? It was a global civilization. It's a civilization that used those 1,300 ton stones at Balbeck. A global technical civilization. So first of all, the only land mass that fits the size is Antarctica. Second, it's in the right place. It's in the world ocean. Third, Plato said that when you go to Atlantis, you can come from one side of the world like South Africa and cross over Atlantis and you're on the other side of the world. Where else fits that bill than Antarctica where you go across Antarctica and you can go from from uh South Africa to South America. Yeah. Okay. Moreover, if you look at the research of Charles Hapgood, who was a uh actually he was a historian, but he started to develop interesting geoysical theories and he worked on contract for the CIA for a while. He was a history professor, but he had classified clearances and he worked with the CIA. And he developed this theory of earth crustal slippage that when you look at the flash frozen mammoths in Siberia who are frozen with the food undigested in their stomachs. Yes. And certain other things you it it looks like the crust of the earth slipped by several thousand miles suddenly. And this is why we have stories from various tribes who say that the stars fell like a this the idea of this is called what is it? It's called like a geomagnetic pole flip or something like that. Earth custal slippage is the technical term for this particular theory. Earth custal slippage. Charles Hapkood. And if that theory is correct and that's how the mammoths were flash frozen in Siberia and the food that we found undigested frozen in their stomachs is fruit of food of a temperate climate. M okay so it means that Siberia used to have a temperate climate it was suddenly pulled toward the polar region the north polear region where the earth's outer shell can move as a hole over the mantle like a skin of an orange it happens because the the it happens because during ice ages the earth gets topheavy from all the ice that's weighing down the crust so it causes it slip at a certain And the fact that the food in the mammoth stomachs is uh food from a temporal climate means that Siberia was suddenly pulled into the northern polar region. If you look at Hold on. If you look at Antarctica, right? Yeah. And you look at how Siberia slipped, it means as Siberia slipped suddenly into the northern polar region, Antarctica slipped suddenly by several thousand miles into the southern polar region. So about twothirds of Antarctica would have been where Argentina is today, right? Argentina is a great place, right? Great agriculture, great wine, great livestock, right? Atlantis would have been very habitable if Atlantis were Antarctica before the crustal slippage. So hes also to stay to to to linger on Atlantis for a minute. According to this long chain in transmission with Solon and all this stuff, Atlantis would have been how long ago again? Um, okay. I mean, play Plato's dates line up with a lot of other evidence that points to about 10,500 BC or 12,000 years ago. 12,000 years ago. And this is also when people hypothesized the younger dus cosmic impact theory would have happened too, which a lot of people think that the mammoth being frozen was from a cosmic impact that basically blacked out the sky. That's an alternative hypothesis. In any case, in any case, Antarctica fits Plato's description of Atlantis best. And so, if you were to ask me what it has on the Nazis in general, find in Antarctica, they found Atlantis. And they were obsessed with Atlantis. The entire Nazi elite, which came from out of the Occult Vill society and the Sula Gazelle shaft. The thu thula is a German equivalent of Atlantis. Ultima thula. It's a land mass at the north of the world. A vast land mass of the north of the world. Now we don't have any land mass of the north of the world. But what is the north of the world? The magnetic poles shift like every I forget what is 23,000 years or something like that. No, it's it's slipping like literally. What what is it? We talked about it on that Jimmy Corsetti podcast. It's migrating right now. It's migrating like miles per year, which means a reversal is about to happen again. Okay. So, when the Germanic people preserved this ancient myth that there was this ultimatula, a huge continent at the north of the world, it's probably dating from a time when the poles were reversed. Antarctica was the northern polar, you know, region and vice versa. magnetically. magnetically. So the Nazis were obsessed with finding Thula or Atlantis. Yeah. And they may have hit jackpot. Circa 1938. But then wouldn't there be some sort of evidence of it if the Nazis were there back then? Like wouldn't some of the stuff like would they find pyramids? What what did they find there? Well, there's evidence the Nazis were there. I mean, look up Operation High Jump, right? 1946. Admiral Bird went down there with a whole fleet and they were ba they were supposed to be on an expedition that lasted months and they ran into something that devastated the fleet and they retreated very quickly. And on his way back to um you know United States, they stopped at some port in Chile I think and Bird made this bizarre statement about how we have to prepare in the next world war to encounter aircraft that can cross from pole to pole with amazing speed. And so it looks like they went down there maybe to because they knew the Nazis were down there, tried to clear them out or something and they had the ship beaten out of them. 46. What do you make of the argument that Plato was full of [ __ ] and he wasn't a historian? He was just making up hypothetical allegorories like the allegory of the cave like like was Atlantis just another philosophical allegory like the cave. Okay, let me answer in two ways. Okay, my first answer is that we could it could be that Plato never existed. We can completely disregard Plato. The evidence for Atlantis is overwhelming. Don't call it Atlantis. By the way, I'm pretty sure the Atlantanss didn't call it Atlantis. They probably had some other name for it, right? So, other than Plato, what is the most compelling evidence? There's so much compelling evidence. I mean, first of all, the megalithic structures that have inexplicable engineering skill behind them in Egypt, on every continent, every it's everywhere. Look at um Tiwanaku in Bolivia. The Tiwanaku, the Kalisasia at Tiwanaku in Bolivia. The um some of the older sites in Mexico in the Yucatan. All of these sites exhibit the same enigmatic. Sakai Waman is another one. Oolatambbo. walls at Sakai Wan and Oleant Tambbo are made of insanely gigantic megalithic blocks which intersect with the blocks next to them sometimes at 12 different points of intersection. Yeah. Which means that either they had a way to liquefy stone and mold it as they were putting stones together or something even more mind-boggling, the stones were all pre-cut like jigsaw puzzle pieces and then put in exactly the right place. Well, either of those are insane from an engineering perspective. I mean, even we won't do that. We won't. Maybe we can just barely now, but no one in our world would ever think to try to do something like that. Mhm. It's And by the way, that type of building, it turns out it's extremely earthquake resistant. Yes, it is. Cuz it wobbles and then locks back into place. Yeah. Also, the land, the ground that it was built on, some something about it, the way they built the foundations of it, the the stone is like super flexible and malleable. Yeah. And some of these blocks, like the ones at Balbeck, 1,200 ton stones. 19 cranes can't lift those things. 19 industrial. Who did that? Yeah. All right. So, look, I mean, it's an it's written in stone. Whether you want to call it Atlantis, like I agree. I agree that's evidence of a super advanced civilization that was here before we have any kind of explanation for it. By the way, other cultures have other names for it. Not all cultures call it Atlantis. You find this in almost every civilization in the world that there's a myth about a super civilization that existed in antiquity and that the people who who lived there were demigods. That they were god-like people. Yeah. Who then disseminated knowledge to other primitive cultures in the world. You find it this basic myth in the Mayans. You find it in the Egyptians. You find it in the Middle East. In Iranian civilization, which is something I'm very familiar with. I wrote a whole tome on the history of Iran. Yeah. In ancient Iranian culture, they called this place Aranam, which means the seed cradle of the Aryans, meaning where the Aryan race came from. That's what they say. And they say it was a place. This is a very interesting detail. So you have all these flood myths around the world, right? And the flood myths are connected to the myth of the destruction of the super civilization in all these cultures including Mayan culture, Egyptian culture. The one exception is Iran where the Iran Iran we talked about this first time first interview. Iran the name means Aryan. It's a middle Persian form of the ancient Persian Aryan or Ariana. The Iranian ancient mythology is the only one that says the super civilization wasn't destroyed by a flood. It says our homeland froze. Our homeland was an island at the center of the world. It was the central continent of the world. Mhm. Which is what Antarctica looks like. If you you make a during the ice age, it would have been massive. Yeah. Make a globe. Yeah. Centered on Antarctica. You take a globe and you flip it. So you're looking right at Antarctica. It looks like the continent at the center of the world. If you live there and you're, you know, mapping the world from your perspective. So they say it's it was a continent at the center of the world and all of a sudden it froze over. See if you can find a a a graphic depiction of what Antarctica would have looked like during the ice age. The last ice age. You're talking about the subglacial topography of Antarctica. Yes, that would be the technical way of putting it. Yeah. So, no, that's what you want to look up. Look up subglacial topography Antarctica. They have found maps like the Orontius Phineas map and the period map which show Antarctica underneath the ice. No one in recorded history ought to have been able to map that land mass subglacially. Look how big that [ __ ] is. Yeah. Well, it's larger than the continental United States. That's insane. Antarctica. And that on the left that that connects down to South America. The amount. Yes. The amount of that the closest point to any land is in Argentina. You think that's a coincidence? Do you think it's a coincidence when when the Nazis went to Argentina that where they went was San Carlos to Baroce? That's Patagonia. It's the southernmost po point of Argentina that's close to Antarctica. Very convenient. How long do you think Hitler lived after the war? The war? He lived into the 1960s and he died of Parkinson's related. You know, people in Argentina describe having seen him with very bad Parkinson's. Mhm. He had lost the mustache, right? And uh he lived, I think, a very miserable life because and this is an important little anecdote because it says a lot about Spectre. Yeah. or as they called it themselves Dishba their name for it was the spider disha the spider the post-war Nazi international largely based in the United States and Argentina so an anecdote about the so Hitler thing is when you look at Martin Borman and his financial machinations in Latin America in the 19 from the 50s to the 70s and you look at autoscorzanei and how he was operating at an international level in that same time period. Yeah, it seems that if you know Hitler survived decades past the end of the war, which there's evidence he did, right? He wasn't doing anything important, right? I think the guy was put out to pasture. I think basically they said to him, you know, thank you very much, her Hitler, but please paint your sunsets. You know, go back. You wanted to be a painter, right? Enjoy painting your sunsets. We've got everything under control, sir. Yes, we've got everything under control. And eventually Eva Braun even left him, you know. And so I think the guy lived a pretty desperate and miserable life having been given the cold shoulder by the people who were actually in charge of what they were conceiving of as a coming forth. People like Borman, Scorzani, younger, more shrewd, competent people and people with a more dynamic vision, right? Give give you an example which really is a mind [ __ ] There's a lot of evidence that Scorzani played a huge role after the end of the war in tactical operations for these people. Remember Scorzani was the guy who thought of using saucers in the 50s as a part of a scop against America, right? Same Otto Scorzani, fencing scar guy, died 1975. Shortly before he died in the early 70s, he worked with Mossad. It's been proven he had a very good relationship with the state of Israel, Otto Scorzani. So, how is it that Israel is sending Mossad and and military intelligence operatives to retrieve Adolf Aishman from South America to then stand trial in Jerusalem, right? But they're working with Scorzani in the early 70s. What did Ikeman do to get on the [ __ ] list? [Laughter] Yeah, it's it's a it is such a mind [ __ ] the history of this stuff and how useful certain people were like Scorzanany to other Yeah. I think I think Iman was prosecuted because he ceased to be useful, right? They probably pissed off the wrong guy. Yeah. Yeah. And they said, "Okay, give them to the Israelis." And what do you make of this recent stuff that like Greer is talking about with this psychic psionic Stranger Things type stuff where they're kidnapping people that are like left-handed um young from other countries, bringing them here to and giving them drugs, he said. Yeah. Dopamineergic drugs to summon these things and crash them. So they're trying to hide. So first of all, why if these things are so advanced, how the [ __ ] are they crashing them with psychic abilities? And second of all, who are these people doing conducting these operations in your mind? Okay, that's a mo that's a complex question, right? And multi-part question. First of all, how are they crashing these things with psychic abilities? Well, consider this. If the pilot is part of the guidance system of a UFO and the pilot is integrated into the airframe psychoinetically, if you [ __ ] with the pilot's mind, you're going to crash the airframe. Right. Okay. Okay. Yeah. So, you had a powerful enough psychic get into the head of a UFO pilot, right? You can bring a saucer down. And who is the pilot in your mind? One of these Nordics, you know, in some cases with a bunch of these gray robots on board who handle the abductees. The Nordics don't like to handle the abductees because you see this in the Travis Walton case. Travis Walton case. They sent the robots to deal with him, right? Then he he beat up the robots. Big strapping guy that he was beat up the robots, right? And he went out into the hallway. And then the Nordics were like, "Man, we got to deal with this guy. We got to deal really seriously we have to deal with this guy now. So it's like they use the phrase and then Whitley Streber. So Whitley Streber look he's very clear that the people the people who put the implant in were people European looking people. Guy and a a guy two two guys and a woman who came into his house. One stayed outside or something. Two of them came in and they did this thing put the implant in his ear. people. Yeah, they're the Nordics. They use the grays to handle terrified abductees because who wants to do that job? What is the connection between and you you're the one who told me about this by the way uh before I conducted that Whitly Streeper podcast, you gave me a whole history of Whitley Streberer over like two hours on the phone, which was fascinating. And um I don't know anybody who has been gone so deep on the history of Whitley. I read his work like 20 years ago or something like that. It's been a very long but I you know when I read it I really read it like I read most things. And when I brought up you you mentioned to me told me to bring up with Whitley about his history in Mexico what he was what was going on with him in Mexico. And when I asked him that on the podcast he said he like straightened up and he's like I don't want to talk about that. Well yeah because I mean it was horrific child abuse managed by Nazis in Mexico. They had a huge presence in Mexico. Remember what I was saying earlier? Yeah. Is that the um paperclip rocket scientists would come to the border towns between Texas and Mexico and do data drops handing classified information to their N to their fellow Nazis. Yep. Who operated more freely in Mexico and throughout Latin America. So this was some sort of program to induce trauma in kids. PremK Ultra. Pre MK Ultra. So M MK Ultra was like the light the Bud Light version. They had [ __ ] before MK Ultra that was even worse. Bluebird and other things before that that are basically extensions of the experiments on children that were done in concentration camps. That's what it is. And how did that what what did that psychological traumatic experience that he went through in Mexico what what was it specifically? What were they doing to him? Okay. Now, I heard this very clearly. He, you know, he has this Dreamland radio program that's been going on for, I don't know, 25 years or something like that. I heard him describe this in detail. So, I don't know whether he wants to now not talk about it or say something. You know, it was another way, but I remember very clearly what he described. And he he did this in more than one conversation. once might have been a monologue and once was in an interview with somebody. And he basically said they were taken to a mansion in Mexico that was run by the same people as this Nazi doctor in Texas associated with Randolph Air Force Base, right? And he said they were put in these children were put in situations where they were shown mutilated bodies and horrific sounds were played to them in the dark and they were made to believe that they had killed these people. Okay. put in cages, shown mutilated body parts, exposed to chainsaws, made to hold chain, like just horrific [ __ ] right? That's basically meant to produce extreme dissociation and a fragmentation of the psyche. Okay. And how did this how does this connect to all his experiences with like having sex with aliens? Dissociation combined with um absorption. Okay, these these are two somewhat counterintuitively connected psychological processes. One, dissociation because you don't want to deal with a traumatic situation. And second, absorption, extreme attention. And you would think like these are opposite things, but there's a way to induce dissociation more or less simultaneously with absorption. And the state of mind that that produces is extremely scondive. Wow. So you you might perceive things that other people don't perceive, right? And you might be able to unconsciously exercise abilities that other people that they're only latent in most people. Okay? So that's what it is. It's a it's a catalyzing of dissociation and absorption. So these beings these beings that he he was experiencing were real. Here's one of my problems with Whitney's account, okay? is that he says that while one of these grays was on top of him and I believe this was in his cabin, right? He says this grays on top of him, I won't get into the vib, you know, yeah, details, but he said he in the moments where he could even focus on anything but her, he sees that there's all these people standing around in the cabin room and one of them is a CIA officer, right, who he knew and recognized, right? Okay. I mean, does that mean that there's some agreement between some of the grays and the CIA? Maybe. Or does it mean that he was given drugs and there was some elaborately staged scenario, right, where he was made to believe that, right? It was a an encounter. Yeah. I don't know. Take your pick. In any case, it it doesn't look good. Doesn't look good. No, it does not look good. Crazy [ __ ] Jason Georgiani, thanks again for coming, man. That was a uh wild followup to our first podcast. I didn't think it get any crazier. It was indeed, Danny. It was um tell people about your new book, where they can find it, where they can get in touch with you, all that good stuff. Good. So, the cover of my new book is still up there. Well, at least part of the cover. Uh it's called Metapoleos. Um Metapolamos, you could it's uber comp in German. Sort of super war. And um it refers to a metaphysical uh onlogical idea destructive departure and worldview warfare which is kind of my reverse engineering of the basic concept behind the breakaway civilization. Uh my reverse engineering the concept that motivates their activities and uh that's a huge breakthrough in understanding the nature of psychological warfare. So, but it's it's basically as I said at the outset. There it is. No, no, no. That's philosophy. Philosophy of the future. And the reason that there's a similarity in cover is that I intend medical Satan. No, no, no. Satan is my last book. Oh, which one is this? I write at a rather rapid pace. So, Satan came out in November. Okay. We're recording now in February. February. Yep. End of February. End of February. Uh so my latest book, the one that you have the cover up there on, uh part of the cover, is going to be out within let's say 2 3 weeks. Okay. And the reason that the Yeah, if you can put the whole cover up there, it' be good. I I emailed it to you, Steve. Anyway, the reason the cover has a similarity to the graphics for Philosophy of the Future is that it's meant to be a kind of companion volume to this. In philosophy of the future, I present an overview of my entire philosophical project in terms of my original concepts and in metapmos I give an executive summary of my whole project but in terms of the different domains of philosophy. So my thoughts yeah there it is my thoughts in the domain of ontology, my epistemology, my view on ethics, aesthetics and political philosophy. So it's divided up into those domains and gives you either an introductory overview or a kind of executive summary of my philosophical project. The last thing I want to say about this book is that I've included in this book which is now uh I think my 14th book journals which I wrote 20 years ago. So back when I was, you know, breeding Whitley Streberer 25 years ago, whatever. 20 years. Hanging out with Jack Sarfat. I saw the photo. He sent me a photo of you guys when you were That was when I Exactly. That's when I met Jackie. Yeah, that's right. Uh so back in those days for about three years, I kept a journal. It was a black notebook. And it's really the matrix of my philosophical thought. M it's the it's the you know the substrate from out of which my ideas emerge the genesis of my uh career as a philosopher is in those notebooks and I've included a pretty large selection of the entries from in there which is a very dangerous and revealing thing to do um and it'll give people a lot of insight into what motivated my philosophical project. Gorgeous. Um what's up with Saturn on top of the devil horns? That's a UFO. But it's interesting. Oh, it's a UFO. But it's interesting that it read as Saturn. Looks more like Saturn to me. Well, that's interesting because Saturn is Kronos and the Nazis called the Bell Project Project Kronos or Project Time. Wow. The Saturn project. We got to go do another podcast at dinner. I got a lot of more qu I got way more questions, but uh let's do it. You got to get going. All right. Thanks again, man. I'll link everything below. Thank you, Danny. It's been a pleasure again. All right. Good night,