So I noticed when you showed up, even on the road for weeks, you had no secret service with you, which is a little weird given your father was murdered while running for president as you now are. Why wouldn't you have secret service protection? Well, you know, I did do a tweet on that that God, 30 million views when we got rejected. We applied in May for a secret service protection. Actually, secret service protection was only allocated to the nominees and the parties. Prior to 1968, when my father was killed, they changed the law immediately and all of the people who were running against them, including George Wallace immediately got Secret Service Protection. So the law says that you're entitled to Secret Service Protection automatically on days out. But the president also has this creation to give secret service protection to any candidate for any reason. And there are criteria, which is that you have to have 15% of polling results for a limited period of time. But he even can overall that, for example, President Obama was given Secret Service Protection, 441 days out, or 551 days out, even though he had only, I think, 5% is supportive at the time. My uncle Teddy was given Secret Service Protection 450 days out, even though he had not even declared for his presidency. Now Carter, he and Carter hated each other. Carter was president Carter was the president of his own party and Teddy had been enormously critical of him. And personally, they had a very personal antipathy for one another and Teddy ended up running against them. When he was moving into that decision to run Carter in a very classy move, gave him Secret Service Protection. We applied for it. I get a lot of threads, a lot of death threads. And I get a lot of people who are, for example, about two weeks ago, mentally all person made it to the second story of my house. And that is very, very common. Are you inside your house? Yeah, inside my house. Or somebody who is working there stopped them and then called the police. We gave the Secret Service a 67-fat Gavin DeBacker who you've had on this show. There's the premier runs, the premier security service in the world. Put together a 67-page report, which included 28 pages of all the threads of typical threads against me and other indicia that I should have Secret Service Protection. And I assume the president would give it to me because it just seems like bad judgment not to give it to me. If you go even on my Twitter feed, probably one out of, I don't know, every 30 or 40 comments says, oh, you're going to get killed or something like that. It takes notice of the peculiar threats to my family, a family member's who are in this business. But something that, you know, the average American is aware of. Your name is Robert F. Kennedy. And so it was odd decision. I got a letter, Gavin actually got the letter because he had been doing it. And by the way, I want to say that as the Secret Service themselves were wonderful. They were very, very encouraging and they were very helpful at every step along the way. And I believe, and I can't speak for them, but I believe that their assumption was that they were going to get a Secret Service Protection. In fact, they told Gavin, we're going to send somebody out there within 10 days to interview Cheryl and Bobby and to tell them what it's going to look like. Because there's a lot of questions about, you know, do I go to the gym? Do I have them, you know, all of these questions that I don't know the answers to. And they come and they have a standard process for me. But then they went to Arc. And they said a decision is made very quickly within 14 days is what they told us. And they said we have eight details standing by ready to go. So we can do this very quickly. And then they went to Arc and for 88 days, we didn't hear from them. And then I got the letter from New Arca's, I'll admit, New Arca's who's the director of DHS saying that we've determined that you don't need a Secret Service Protection. It's very obvious and you've confirmed that there are threats against your life, against your family. That's known. And so if they deny you protection and they know that, what message are they sending? I don't really know what they're doing. And by the way, you know, we've walked in, there's a guy called Jeremy Hammond who's done a really good article, a really thorough article about the past. And he was not able and we were not able to find a single presidential candidate. It requested protection from the president and was not given protection. You know, I heard him in Kane, got it, I think 500 days out. Jesse Jackson, Shirley Chisholm, George Bush and Ronald Reagan got it, something five or 600 days out when they first ran. So it's just standard operating procedure. And particularly people who are polling around the fell, anywhere over 15%, which I have been for four or five months now, are regarded as good. It's been treated as proforma. And I am the single outliner that we could find that was denied Secret Service. Why do you think that is? I think the DNC is playing a hardball. And let's see this. I think the least malevolent interpretation that you can put on it is that they know that I'm going to have to have some kind of security service. And that typically would cost me to do real security service between $100,000 a month. Because you have to pay the protectors, you have to pay for their transportation. Of course you have to pay for the food. The cars and the hotels, the foods and all of this. And it's very expensive because I'm traveling every day. So I think they probably feel like they can bleed me white by making sure that I'm not spending that money on advertising or organization. But that I have to raise a lot of money on protection. But I don't know. I'm just speculating about that. Does it strike you that the Biden administration pays for personal security for Zelensky? But not for you? No, listen, John Bolton is still going to have to take service detail. Still? Yeah, still. He hasn't been in government in years. He didn't do a good job. You know, all of the President's family have Secret Service details. You know, Hunter has a Secret Service detail when he goes to court every day. He has four or five cars that are coming with him in a very, very big detail. Oh, and you know, many government officials who are ex-government officially with the Secret Service have all lost in what you can go to. Look at Jerry Hammond's Jeremy Hammond's report, which you can find on, I think he just go on the internet, put Jeremy Hammond and, you know, RFK Secret Service. He, you know, he shows that that literally nobody knows presidential candidate. Many, many other people are receiving it. And I'm really, I can outfire.