Is that it? Yeah, did you start? Did you launch? Yeah, I was in the mail. Guess what? No sponsors. Just fucking cue the music. Can I give you a dollar at least? Yes. Can we vote? All right, cool. Hit it. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Yeah, we have music, good boys. It's ridiculous, but it makes me feel like something's actually happening. Uh-huh. Sam Harris, ladies and gentlemen, thanks for joining me man. This is really cool. It's an excellent opportunity. The internet's are a buzz. I've gotten more response for this as far as like questions for you than I think any, any guests we've ever had. Great. Well, I'm very happy to be here. I'm happy to be here too, man. I've watched a lot of your videos online. I've enjoyed every one of them and I like in some of those debates that you get into with those old Gracian action videos. Uh-huh. Have you ever seen those old Gracian action videos? I'm not entirely sure. I know the ones you're talking about. I've seen a lot of Gracie material. Yeah. Well, the Gracian action videos are really the first videos that Horrien Gracie. Horrien Gracie, uh, who's a hitlios son, you know, hoices. Brother's a brilliant businessman and he realized that all he needed to do was put together a series of real life encounters between a trained Jiu Jitsu practitioner and some guy who thinks he knows how to fight. He's sure he knows how to fight. Right. And then he just gets mangled every time. Every single fight. This wasn't the Gracie challenge at all. Well, they've got a bunch of them. There's Gracie's and Gracian action one and two. There's essentially, it's just, it's, basically just compilations of home videos that they have. Right. Oh, really? For martial artists, really brilliant stuff to watch. Cause, you know, until the Gracies came along, nobody really knew that there was one guy out there that could just sort of manhandle people like that and just strangle them and choke them. That there was one martial art that was so superior when it came to grappling situation that you would watch those and you'd almost feel bad for the guy getting strangled, but not really. That's how I feel when I watch a lot of your debates. That's very high praise. I can tell you it's not as satisfying in the debate format as it is on the mat. Oh, sure. Cause it's because no one ever taps. It's like you're, it's like you're fighting, you know, an army of zombies that they've lost, but they, they can't be forced to admit that they've lost. So it's, it must be a very bizarre thing for you because as far as like people who have spent like hours and hours debating publicly debating the merits or the idea of religion, you might be like, you know, like top 10 on YouTube of all the, the different information that's available. Have you ever seen anybody in all these different debates you've been where you, you knock something into their head and you see like a light go off like holy shit? What if you're right? Do you ever get that? Well, it's hard to see in real time, people are pretty good about not having epiphanies in real time in front of you. You know, so, so you can see people get uncomfortable and you can see them want to make a lateral move to a new subject. Because there's a lot of, one of the great strategies or one of the, the less noble but effective strategies of debate is to, if you've lost a point, you just don't, you don't concede it. You just kind of move on to something else and hope no one notices. And if, and in, in a formal debate format, there's often no mechanism by which for your opponent to score that as, as conquered ground because you like you can't address each other in real time. So, so, so at least like I talked about 10 minutes, someone else talks for 10 minutes, the moderator doesn't necessarily interrupt us and we, the, the two discussants can't actually address one another. So a formal debates are actually ironically the kind of the worst format to actually prove, prove who's right because it's like fighting someone, you know, you're separated. But it's like, it's like boxing. You know, it's like the clean, you get a, you get a clinch on the ref separates you. And so you can't really test every tool in that context. And so, you can just kind of talk past each other and not address the thing that was brought up 10 minutes ago and it never really gets scored. So it's, it's, it's, it's amazingly unsatisfying even when you feel like you have said exactly what you should have said and you because they just won't buy it. It's just like just like fighting with fog, you know, it's like no one never, no one ever falls down. And, and it's occasionally you score, you score it below that you know, the audience has noticed. But even then, the audience is partitioned into, you know, the, the, your side and the other side and it's amazing how invulnerable people's prejudices and biases are to, to argument. So it also becomes a team, you know, becomes something that defines you. You know, a lot of people are defined by their ideas, especially when it comes to their religion or their politics. You know, they're defined by them to the point where they like act within certain parameters because they think that's what you're supposed to do if you're on this team. People like that for some, I mean, it's a weird, creepy desire that we have to become part of a, of a team and defend that team. And I think that happens when it, when it gets into the religious arguments, it's like you're, you're not just attacking an idea that someone planted in their head and you're, you're, you're attacking how they define themselves. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it is. It's, it's, it's people's extended identity. Yeah. My window is user. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, I'm a Christian, I'm a Catholic and it becomes, you know, it really becomes a big part of how they view. And if you want to take that away from them, it's like, you know, yeah. So you can see that when you're having the discussion, it's especially obvious in a debate format because basically nobody has any hope that that either side is going to change their mind and the context of the debate. I mean, they've come there to represent their views and they've got so much invested in doing that as well as they can. They're even if their mind was changed, they're not going to admit it. So it's not really an honest discussion. But when you are having an honest discussion, let's say we know one on one with somebody of deep conviction about faith, you can see the kind of the emotional hijacking of the conversation on their side very quickly. It's like it's basically like debating whether they're, their wife is attractive or something. I mean, it's just like it goes to something at the core and it's no longer about the ideas or evidence or and so that is it's one skill which admittedly I don't have such a firm grasp on, but one skill to acquire just as a person is to figure out how to have these conversations where you're, where you're being as rational and intellectually honest as possible, but you're actually kind of making the right Jiu-Jitsu moves around people's emotional response because it's just you do with comedy. Well yeah, that's what's brilliant about comedy. Yeah, you do it with comedy. Well, I've seen you do it in, you know, you were, you compared Elvis being alive, you know, and knowing that Elvis alive, feeling that he's alive, which was really very funny how you did it. It was the perfect way to do it because you did it very politely. You know, there's no name calling. You didn't get all shouty. Yeah, yeah, but that that is what is brilliant about pure comedy because if you if you make someone laugh at themselves or at the idea that they would otherwise defend, you know, that that actually is a visible sign that you have you have made contact, you know, because it's yeah, and you don't get you don't get that when you when you're playing it totally straight and so the comedy is very powerful. Yeah, and also obviously you're restricted in the language that you can use in these things. It's it is a fascinating sort of an in exchange. It's it's fascinating to watch the psychological wheel spin, you know, when when people really get behind an idea, whether it's religion or whatever the fuck it is when when they really get behind it to the point where, you know, they're not budging at all. They're not thinking at all. They're attached and married to it. Yeah, it's very dangerous, right? I mean, isn't it? Oh, well, yeah, insofar as someone really believes something and the beliefs have any point of contact with behavior and the rest of physical reality. I think it's it's the most consequential thing. I think what people believe is that is the the lever that moves most things in our world. You know, it's politics. It's public policy. It's the laws we write and the laws we choose to truly defend and and it's they're all just ideas that are that have a certain number of subscribers. Is it possible that religion in its form is useful for some people because they're just what whether it's psychologically they need they need some scaffolding whether it's, you know, to use it as a tool not to use it to control anyone but to use it as like a personal growth tool. Do you ever look at it like that? Well, insofar as it can be taken out of the belief space. So there's the doctrinal belief based part of religion which is where people are making claims about reality on bad evidence and that I that's just a problem. I mean, so far as you're pretending to be certain about something you shouldn't be certain about and then teaching your kids to do that. That's of just a problem for our for our conversation with one another as human beings. There's all this other stuff that people are attached to that isn't inherently problematic. So they like the music, they like the buildings, they like the style, you know, they like the artwork, they like the they like to think about certain historic figures who they have this sort of emotional bonding with or geez, they love the stories about Jesus and the New Testament and all of that is some of that could be intrinsically good. I mean, if you get the right beautiful buildings and beautiful music and a reason to come together and holidays and I think we actually want something very much like that in secular culture and we I think are suffering from the fact that we don't have an obvious alternative to that that we can just point religious people to and say, you know, how come you're not doing that? You know, this has everything you want without the bullshit. That's very important and you know, if someone tried to form some sort of a secular group like that would quickly devolve being a cult. Most likely. Yeah, depending on who would become someone trying to fuck everybody's wife. Well, if we had someone that comes when someone's at the top who has the eternal wisdom and is imparting into you and part of that process of dispensation is to fuck your wife. There's actually a story I think I had told in and note the end of faith and he's some guys who brought out a guru from India who they just thought was just the quite literally the Messiah who's a sort of naked yogi. I mean, Yogi, he just wore this little, you know, little almost a chai strep. Like a speedo. Yeah, like a and long jetta, you know, long dreadlocks and he's so kind of this kind of gorgeous 25 year old Indian Sadeu who was silent. So he wouldn't you never speak. So the only wisdom is very kind of low bandwidth teaching. The only wisdom you're going to get from him is what he could write out on an eight by ten chalkboard. So he'd write these you know, just gnomic little sentences in response to your questions. And he was a really good drummer. So he would lead these kirtons. He's these devotional chanting sessions where he would drum and people would get quite out of their minds and happy. And so they were just worshipping this guy. They brought him out. And at a certain point, he, I don't know how he must communicate with this on his chalkboard. He said he needed to start sleeping with the various, you know, as luck would have it the most beautiful wives of his devotees. And so he was doing that. But the breaking point came when the one guy who was his host, who's wife was sleeping with him, gave him Hagen to the, the, the, the, the, the, the Sadeu wanted to eat Hagen does vanilla ice cream with cashews for breakfast. So that was like he, someone gave him Hagen does and it blew his mind. And so he needed this for breakfast. So, so he was what this guy was walking through the, you know, like the Ralph's freezer aisle at, at in the morning getting a resupply of vanilla ice cream. And that was the moment. That was the, that was the final straw where he realized, okay, this guy is, is just just, we're just, we're just, we're just, we're just, guys, tool and they just sent him back to India. You know, he's like, you put the ice cream back on the shelf. That's hilarious. Hack your bags. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It wasn't everybody's wife. It wasn't the wife. It was the, it was the Hagen does. That's ridiculous. So what did the Hagen does just represent something so silly that it couldn't be. It was just, it was just too obviously carnal, you know, like there's no tantra. You might be doing tantra with my wife, but you're not doing tantra with the Hagen does. For breakfast. Obviously carnal ice cream being carnal. That's very funny. Yeah. I mean, I think it's just a, the primate instinct when any man is in any position where he's got ultimate power over a group of people. That's a terrible idea. Yeah. That's why everybody's afraid of what's going on right now was in terms of, you know, government and new laws are being passed every day. It's, it gets kind of spooky. It's like how much control do you really need over people? Is this, is, I understand that, you know, we're in trouble sometimes. I understand that we're at war, but do you really, how much, how much control does the government really deserve over people? Do we, do we really need to be in the situation we're in right now? Well, I, I'm, for the most part, I'm kind of libertarian on this subject. I mean, I'm not, I get a lot of flack from libertarians based on the, you know, the 5% where I depart from, you know, classic libertarianism. But like a national defense authorization, you know, well, I just think the principle is that peaceful honest people have the right to be left alone. You know, if some, if you're not harming other people and you're not stealing from them, and you're, you're honoring your contracts, you know, we can define what all that means. But if you are not in, in fringing on other people's happiness, then you have, you should have the right to be left alone. And what that means is we as a society shouldn't want the police to kick in the door of a peaceful honest person to stop him from doing, from whatever it is he's doing, smoking pot or whatever, victimless crime is currently illegal. And if you draw the line there, I think you get a very sane response or a very sane idea of the limits of state power. And, and it's, yeah, it's all about mitigating harm and keeping people safe. Now, obviously we can only, there's a trade off between freedom and, and risk. So, you know, the, the, the attention between, let's say, the right to privacy and finding actual terrorists. You know, so it's like if we, if we, if we wanted to maximize, we're going to find everyone who's a terrorist, well, then we would just, there'd be no such thing as privacy and we would, every, the government could read all our email and look in our windows, etc. So there's, there's a tension there and we, and we have to keep finding the, the, the sweet spot, but it's, it's, it's, it's attention that everyone should recognize. So do you think that these new laws are being passed like the NDAA? Do you think that that's in the, the idea is that as the population increases is, is crime going to keep up or, or pick up to a point where they're going to need something like this? I mean, when, when you think of someone being able to detain people without warrants and not even have to inform their family and that, that could be an American citizen. I mean, at what point in time would that be effective? You know? Yeah, I, I don't see, and again, this is not really my area to have a very strong opinion. So, you know, I would be opened any counter-argument on this, but I've never seen the, the, the wisdom or necessity of infringing on our existing laws to, to fight the war on terror. So the idea that, you know, the people at Guantanamo, I'm I understand that there are different things apply on a battlefield and, and, you know, in a crime fighting scenario and, in, you know, in the States. But, I mean, why, why people don't have the right to counsel or the right to see the evidence against them? I just, it seems like crazy. If they're guilty, you know, let, let the truth shine on the, on the data. Well, what always hurt is that we were always, you know, growing up, there was always a problem with Russia and there was always this idea that we could go to war with Russia. But there was like a really strong belief amongst people that we were the good guys. That we did all good guys stuff only. You know, that America was making sure the rest of the world didn't start speaking German or Japanese or any reason. Right. But it doesn't feel like that anymore. You know, now it's, it seems like as the age of of information has gotten us to this 2012 date, like we're at right now. It's so easy to get information that people are just so much more cynical about their intentions. So if you see laws like this, like what's the motivation to crack down more on civil liberties? Is it just to make it easier for them? What, I mean, is it to create bigger government? What, I mean, what is the motivation for that? Well, it's, it is fear and some perception of the necessity of, of taking the friction out of the system, the system that would keep us safe or respond to an attack or detect an attack. And it's understandable. I mean, when you think about what the President's daily briefing must look like, you know, it's like it's got to be absolutely terrifying. And, and the, the reality of the prospect of nuclear terrorism is it, like once you actually just put those goggles on and say, yes, the nuclear nonproliferation is more or less a lost cause. I mean, the technology spreading, the material is spreading. You got a 30,000 out of work scientist in the former Soviet Union who, who have ever, who are not taken care of, you know, who have every economic incentive to, to not be entirely ethical. So if you feel as many people do this, just a matter of time that a new, a new can some form gets into the hands of terrorists. And we have a, a massively porous border, you know, the joke is if you want to get nukes into the, the US, you just hide it, hide it in a bale of marijuana. I mean, it's like we can't, we can't fight the war on drugs. So the idea that we can keep everything out is, is pretty much a pipe dream. So, so when you start thinking about the idea of a nuke going off in a major American city and forget about the loss of life, just what would that do to the world economy? It's, it's easy to see how the paranoia ramps up. So I, you know, I don't, it's a hard, these are obviously hard calls to make for, for anyone. And you're going to look, just imagine the day after an act of terrorism orders of magnitude bigger than September 11th, what is it to have to talk about the reasons why we didn't do all these things that we could have done to keep, to keep us safe. So I'm very, I mean, I, I, I share your concerns about infringing on, on civil liberties, but it's just the way you look at it. It's scarier on the other side. It's scared that the threat is scarier. I think the threat of, of nuclear terrorism is quite real. And, and, and anyone who thinks that it's not or that's just fear mongering. I just think it's not, it's not reading reading the, the, the books or papers of, of experts who, who, whose job it is to actually worry about this. It's just, it's just not a, it's a real, it's a real problem. So the question is in the face of that, what do you do? And, you know, I, I'm as annoyed as the thing you don't do is force everyone to take their shoes off in airports until the end of time. I mean, it's like we're, we're so inefficient in how we felt, we filter and, and so yeah, I mean, it's a, it's, it's a big problem. It's a problem. I actually, I don't know that much about. I mean, my file on what we should do is, it's pretty thin, but it's, it's, it's pretty clear that, you know, every time I'm in an airport and I see some old Norwegian lady who obviously is not a terrorist, submitting to the same search as somebody who looks like Osama bin Laden, it seems like a misallocation of attentional resources. So, yeah, it seems ridiculous. Yeah, it's just the idea behind it. So, and you know what all it's freaks man is all the fucking radiation. How much radiation of those big body scanners? Is that, so I don't know. I don't know. I, I, I, but I, I would be concerned that the manufacturers are not entirely candid about, or even cognizant of, of the health effects of them. So I, I don't know. I, I haven't seen the data on them, but yeah, you want to minimize the amount of X-rays you get. And, but every time you want to play and you get, you're, you're getting toast. So it's, it's not, I don't know how it compares to the actual plain flight. How much time of your day do you think about nuclear terrorism? Because if I was in a, I was convinced as you are. You know, it's not, I mean, it's not even every day. It's, I put it out of my mind like, like anyone else. Yeah. Well, no, it's just, it's, it's, um, the truth is I, I, I believe you asked me rationally how, how big a risk do I think it is? I think it's, it's a, it's a big risk. It's not a one in a hundred risk. I think, I think it's 50, 50. Well, that's what, you know, experts like Graham Allison think in any, in this next decade that he wrote his book about five years ago, but he thought it's like next 10 or 20 year period, the chance of a, a nuke going off in a major American city was like 50, 50, not, not one in a hundred. And, and so, and, and no one really criticized him for that. I mean, it's the people kind of, that, that, that, that, that, that panel of experts, I think came up with 30%, right? So it's, but again, you're not, you're not hearing the people say, no, it's a one in a thousand. Um, 30% terrifying. I'm terrifying. And, and yet I don't feel that I have, I don't really live with that piece of software, humming on the hard drive very much. I mean, I haven't integrated that into my sense of, of daily risk. Uh, so it's, it's not entirely, I haven't responded entirely rationally to that information. But with all the different books that you've written about religion and all the different debates you've gotten into with people about it, I mean, you can't have a rosy view of how this is going to turn out. Do you think it's possible to, that the human race can pull out of this? Yeah, more in right now to move to the next level. Yeah. Yeah. For sure. Well, I just don't, the truth is I actually don't think in terms of optimism and pessimism very much. I think I'm, by default, I, I'm slightly pessimistic. But, um, you've got to live life and you want, you, we all are just sort of trying to find our way toward the high points of, of well-being and, and, um, I think, uh, I think culture can change quickly. That's, that's, it's, it's easy to, it's easy to, to deny how risky our situation is. And I think that we shouldn't do that. But it's also easy to overlook how quickly we can get our act together. And so when you look at just how, I mean, the example for me is, is the change in, in, in views of race in the United States. And when you roll back the clock, even 70 years, there was just the level of racism in this country was just, it was just unrecognizable. It's not that racism isn't still a problem. But people were being lynched, you know, and, and there would, you know, senators would come out and get their photo taken in front of the dangling body. I mean, it was just insanity. Um, it's amazing when you think of how little time has passed. Yeah, that is a very good point. Yeah. Racism probably is the one thing that we've made the biggest amount of progress. Yeah. Yeah. As far as culturally. Yeah. And it's, it's undeniable progress. It's, and it's progress of a sort that it's very hard to, to picture what would cause us to, sort of roll that back. I mean, it feels like those are gains kind of just, just gains in terms of understanding. Yeah. That we, we can't, can't lose. I don't think we've fully felt the impact of the internet on culture either because the first couple generations who grew up exclusive with the full access to information like that, they haven't really reached adulthood yet. Yeah. And once, you know, once these kids that grew up with the internet, their entire life, and constantly having access to new ideas that aren't, you know, not regional people that they have to talk to, people in their neighborhood, people in their state, but instead being able to talk to people all over the world and get watch a lot of your shit online, watch, you know, watch a lot of different lectures online. I mean, that kind of, there was nothing like that when we were kids. The impact of that generation, I think that's going to be pretty substantial. When the kids now, I think that's going to be the next big leap of cultural evolution, the internet kids, when they become adults and start running shit. I think, I think it's just the attitude online, it does not mirror the attitude that that's expressed in, in, in laws and the ideas that people have about, about, about our society. Yeah. Yeah. I, I, I'm a little worried. I think it, it goes in go either way there. I think the internet enables to very different and antagonistic processes. On the one hand, it, it, it, it allows you to cancel bad ideas very quickly. It's like, it's hard to learn to lie about yourself or about anything given access information. So that's, that's very good. And it connects people and then people can see how other people live. And so all of that's, it could breaks down barriers between people. But it also, it also amplifies certain voices in a way that never would have happened before. And these are, they're just terrible voices. So for instance, global jihad, the phenomenon of exporting alcada style is long to the rest of the world more or less without friction is entirely an internet phenomenon. It's very hard to see that happening the way it has in the last 10 years without the internet. And just, just, you know, you have these any crazy person with his crazy idea can create a little subculture on the internet and you have this walled garden where people can just talk endlessly in a, a very self-converment way. Whether it's, whether it's certain conspiracy theories or, or just, you know, racist, racist subgroups, whatever. And that you just, you just get in there and you never get out. And, and you find enough people who are echoing back your bad ideas that you, and you never, the other problems you never meet these people. Yeah. And then, and then also the, the, the, the role of anonymity online I think is, is pretty destructive. I mean, if you have ever read a YouTube comment thread, which I'm sure you have, it's just the most poisonous. It's amazing. Yeah, it's amazing. It's, if you ran into people like that in real life, you'd want to have a sword. Yeah. You'd want to just be hacking through them everywhere you went. Yeah. I don't know. I, I, I, I see your point. It makes, it makes a big, the anonymity makes a big difference. And, you know, the, why, you're having a lack of any, any sort of repercussions for shitty behavior. Yeah. That's not natural for humans. It's not natural for humans to be able to affect each other with ideas without social cues, without, you know, feeling the emotions of someone who's feelings you're hurting or, you know, to be able to do it like this is just so, so crunchy is what it is. And even, it's not even just internet, internet, comment threads or even an image. I find it with email. It's like everyone's, this is, this is now a trivial to point out, but everyone has sent the email that they shouldn't have sent and watch this even a very good relationship on Ravel based on the fact that there's, you're not being modulated by facial cues when you're, when you're saying, when you're dropping these bombs on your friend or your brother or whatever. And it just, it's just, you know, it escalates. On the other hand, it's a good way to tell someone their fucker. Yes. Well, it happened actually to get all the information in one place. Yeah. Be in a room with them and, you know, have them argue with you about it. You know, in that sense, right? Yeah. So when, when you look at the possibility of nuclear terrorism and, you know, you're, you're a fairly young guy, you know, and you look at all this, this insanity and chaos in the world. What way do you think is going to be the way out of this? Is it a technological solution? I mean, what's, what's going to elevate people or make people's ideas evolve to the point where they realize that, you know, this idea is a completely ridiculous nuclear wars, absolutely. It can't even be on the table, can't be an option for anyone in the world. What, what's going to get us to that? Well, it's a, it's a big question. I think one, uh, one piece of it is so it actually is. to get us to that. Well, it's a big question. I think one piece of it is, so actually it connects back with something you said, this idea that we are the good guys and that our enemies aren't. There's not actually moral parity between the two sides and these conflicts. I think that's still true. Guantanamo Bay can make it as bad as you want it. It's still true that we're the good guys in this particular conflict. Now, I wish we were better than we are and there's obviously some bad guys on our side in any given moment. But I think the one thing we have to get past is this, the kind of moral relativism that you tend to hear from the left. And I'm very much on the left in almost every respect. But this disempowering idea that we, so for instance, to talk about nuclear bombs, we should, what gives us the right to have nuclear bombs if we are going to have them Iran should have them. We have no argument to keep Iran nuclear free if we keep bombs ourselves. Well, we're very different from Iran at this moment. We're not, our president doesn't get in front of the microphone and say that he's going to wipe out and turn a country into a lake of fire and he's not waiting for the messiah to come back and wrapish everybody. Now, if we had a sufficiently crazy president, well then all of a sudden, we would have a similar liability, but we're not using, we're not prone to use nuclear bombs in a a flagrantly crazy apocalyptic way. And we don't, from everything Iran says, they certainly seem capable of being just as crazy as we could fear. And so that's a difference that we have to just acknowledge. And so it matters who gets the bombs. And if people who are quite zealous to die, who, you know, people who are literally happy to set off the bomb in their laps just for the pleasure of setting it off, that's a very different kind of mind to be engaged with. And it raises the stakes. It's not a rat. These people are not rational. I'm not saying the entire Muslim world fits the subscription, but there are people who are not rational actors based on their ideology. I mean, they want to get to paradise. They think you win if you blow the place up at the right moment. And the moment you take on board that certain people actually believe that, then you have to play a different game with respect to the risk of a pose. So what we should do, I think we need to one acknowledge that there are very different moments of tension in this world, those where we're dealing with rational actors. And those what we're dealing with with either completely irrational actors or actors, where they have an ideology that's motivating them to do things that should be unthinkable. Well, I completely agree with you that we have to be aware of religious zealots and we have to be aware of crazy people willing to blow themselves up. But you got to wonder why they're mad at us in the first place. And I agree that for the most part, I mean, I think our idea still sort of holds that we're the good guy in comparison to the rest of the world. Does that mean you have to be a certain amount of evil just to keep up? Just to compete? I mean, is that what's fucked up with our foreign policy? Is that why we go into places like Iraq with false information about weapons and mass destruction, where there's a clear motivation to get in there? I think I'm not going to defend Iraq. That I think was a stupid war to fight. But going into Afghanistan. That's just ended. But look at Afghanistan's the clearer case because we really, I think, had to go in after September 11th. And so do you think we had to go in to control al Qaeda? Well, it was rational to go in and try to kill Osama bin Laden and the rest of the people who brought us September 11th. And we September 11th to some degree was a price paid for never having dealt with these people in the first place. And when you listen to the chatter on their side about how we were a paper tiger, they could blow up the coal, they could blow up embassies in Kenya. We got bombed in Lebanon and we just left. So we were scared of conflict after Vietnam. And that was noticeable to everyone on their side. So to some degree, this problem was just getting bigger and bigger and bigger. And when you asked it's possible, September 11th happened because we didn't invade Iraq earlier because we didn't go in Afghanistan earlier. Well, no, we didn't deal with the threat of jihad terrorism earlier. We're not being upset in the first place because we have troops on their land. Well, it got to be precise about exactly why that's offensive. It was when you look at why Osama bin Laden and the rest of Al Qaeda were upset. It was because it was not a nationalistic concern of we're proud Saudis and our holy land. This was a theological grievance. I mean, Osama bin Laden was already out of sorts with the Saudi government at that point. And he's Osama and anyone else enamored of this whole notion of global jihad want to take a global caliphate. I mean, this is an idea that we're living in a perverse time where Islam has been has been derigated and subjugated and has not yet triumphed. And it has a mandate to triumph in this world. And so if you really believe that, if you have to believe that you have to fight to spread the true faith for the glory of God in this life and win the game, you know, Ganga's Khan style or more relevantly Muhammad style in this life, that is that dictates a certain kind of grandiosity and arrogance and expansionism. And people like Osama bin Laden really believe that. And I mean, he was free to live a very different life than he lived. So he didn't have to spend his time in caves scheming to defeat the Great Satan. He could have just been chilling in Paris. I mean, he had a lot of money and a lot of opportunity. Do you buy the official story? How do they kill them in the through many ocean? I haven't thought about what might not be true in it. But it seems basically I buy the official story that we went in and killed him and what happened to his body. Or why? I'm not sure. I think we didn't. I think it would be amazing if he was dead a long time ago and they just concocted a crazy hero rescue story, Jessica Lynch. No, I think that would be. I think the, no, I mean, because it would have been so many other. If you were going to fake something like that, first of all, it's just so hard to fake anything. We couldn't fake Jessica Lynch. You know, it's like it's like it's, you get people's, this is what's wrong with most fake it with helicopters, right? Yeah. And it's, it's, it's just two, these things, operations like that go wrong spectacularly and everyone knows about it and they go right sometimes and it's very difficult to fake. The Pakistanis aren't acting like we faked it. You know, they're just pissed that we actually successfully got in there, seal team six style and, and got out. So, but the problem with it with any conspiracy of that sort and especially a bigger one, like a 9-11 truth style conspiracy is that it's just takes it so much perfect collaboration to bring it off and we know that people are so bad at that. We know that interests don't align so perfectly. We know that there's always somebody who just wants to sell their story to a tabloid or feels guilty about their, the part they played or. You know, they're getting divorced and they just can't stop talking and they built Clinton couldn't keep a seam and stain dress off of the news. You know, it's like, it's like, it's like, that's the simplest thing. He's just like the president of the United States with a terrified intern and this is going to wreck his presidency and he still couldn't keep the dress. See, I see, well he couldn't keep that dress but how many freaks he think he'd bang my eyes. Well, that kind of was just whipping out his dick left and right and we're in the way with thousands. That's probably why you talk about it. Once you're a freak, you're a freak and when you're a freak of the highest order where you want to be the king of the world and you know, you're whipping your dick out and meetings, like he would meet with women and just whip his dick out and run out of the room screaming. Yeah. That guy did that shit a lot. Yeah. But again, we haven't know about that. We know about one. No, we know that. He did September 11th every other month. Yeah, but you read, well, you know, he did. Got a few girls. He got mad at him. Hitched wrote a great book. No one left a lie to the triangulations of William Jefferson Clinton. Really? He just took him down hard. He hit Christopher Hitched. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. For about short books, like 150 pages, really. Brutal. And I don't, you know, I just, it's, you'll never quite think about Clinton the same way. I mean, it just, it just puts a fine point on everything you just said and it's, yeah, it's pretty brutal. He has a tinge of ego that when he talks, it always makes me wonder what he's really like. You know, when they'll say thing, you know, they have these big political speeches. They didn't do this. We did this. And the Democrat, we did this. We did that. And, you know, sort of bragging about stuff. It's like, it's very unleatered like at this stage of the game. Right. When you go when looking to his past dealings, like I read the strange death of Vince Foster, that's a creepy goddamn book. I'd like to go back and reread that. He's a guy who was somehow involved in that crazy real estate that they were with and they found him. He shot himself, but there was no blood of the scene. So it was clear that his body had been moved. Yeah. See, that, I mean, that's the kind of, again, I'm not saying no one has ever murdered or no one ever conspires, but it's just so easy to manufacture details like that that are then impossible to debunk. Like, so how do we know there was no blood of the scene? How do we know that some 18 year old didn't just say that on his website and now that's the meme that gets spread. And now you have it in your head that there was no blood of the scene. Right. But so much so many conspiracies seem to be engineered by that kind of chatter. Right. And then I wanted to say, okay, we're going to devote the next month of our lives to just knocking down each one of those points. How would we do it? Let me see what you're going to have to travel to find out whether there was blood of the scene and talk to people in the world. Even then you would know. It's just endless sinkhole of energy and yet it just takes a second to set that fire. And that's what actually happens in debate too. There's certain people who you debate on in the subject of religion who know that they can start many small fires in, you know, they're giving, you know, they're eight minutes for their side and they can, they can set 30 small fires, you know, half truths, untruths, stuff that you know, you really should respond to because it's just, it's just false. But it takes you so long to put the fires out that you just, you can basically put half of them out and then you haven't said any of what you came to say and then they just come back and say, well, he didn't put out fires, three, four, eight, nine. And so he's clearly conceited my point. And it's just a, it's a debating game. Right. Dinesh D'Souza is an egregious example of that technique. It's just, if you ever see, he did a debate with Daniel Dennett, which was, you know, really didn't serve Dan very well because it was just, it was a technique that was quite effective. He just, it's a fast-talker and he can just make a mess and it would take you an hour and half to clean it up. But I'm, I'm absolutely agree with you on everything you said. But do you think that there are real conspiracies? Do you think that every one of these things is bullshit? I mean, people clearly do conspire, right? And Ron was clearly a conspiracy. It might have been a conspiracy that we entered into the Iraq war under false pretenses. I mean, it might have been a conspiracy that Gulf of talking incident and Vietnam. That might have been a big conspiracy. Yeah. There's no question that, that from time to time. People, right? Powerful people get into some star chamber and twirl their mustaches and conspire. I think that probably happens. But it's just hard, it's hard to bring it off and you should never assume that's the case. And, and this is, there's an adage on this, on this subject that you never ascribe to conspiracy what can be explained by incompetence or something like that. And it's just so obvious, the incompetence factor in many of these situations is so high and so obvious. And as it is almost everywhere. Yeah. And especially in government. And with, with September 11th, it's just, I mean, it's just a, it's just the crushing variable. It's just, you know, we were just not, we're not prepared to deal with that kind of problem. And, you know, anyone who thinks this was a, a conspiracy thinks that at least hundreds, it's probably thousands of people woke up one day. It's probably normal people, people, the FAA, people in the military, people in government woke up. Perfect psychopaths, willing, without, with a clear conscience to murder 3,000 of their innocent neighbors. And not just, you know, not, this wasn't Tuskegee, this wasn't the poor and disenfranchised race that you're not fond of. This is, you know, these are some of those powerful people in our society just, just blown up one day. And all of this was perfectly tuned to leave the person at the top of the conspiracy, presumably George Bush sitting reading my pet goat when the whole thing kicked off. I mean, it's just, it's ridiculous. It's like, and then as a pretext to go into Iraq, if, first of all, it would have been so much easier to think of a pretext to go into Iraq. But why, why make it look like that we got bombed or attacked by Saudis and Yemenis and Egyptians, which in fact, is, oh, let's see, you're saying as a motivation to do that. Yeah. I mean, the general, we did it on purpose so that we could go to war with Iraq. Yeah. If you're, if you're thinking about the sort of the false flag operation thesis that we wanted to go to Iraq and steal their oil. Then we, and we're perfectly evil and perfectly Machiavellian and could bring this whole thing off without any leaks to this day. You know, 10 years hence no one has come forward and said, this is the part I played in and I feel terrible about it. And yet we botched it in these, in these huge ways where we had to go to Afghanistan before Iraq and we really didn't want to go to Afghanistan. No one suggests we actually wanted to be running around to our Bora fighting the Taliban. We go to Iraq. That worked out well. I mean, the idea that that was the easiest way to get their oil is crazy. It would have been far cheaper to buy it. But it's just, it makes us the argument over the event. We wanted to control Iraq. I mean, that we wanted to take over and control their oil, which we kind of do now, right? But we wanted it. So if we just wanted to go into Iraq to create a let's buy the idea that people conspire and that actually certain people in our government are willing to run a false flag operation so that we can go into Iraq. What would you have done? You would have shot down one of our planes over Iraq and which I mean, we didn't even have needed that because Saddam was shooting in our planes. We had a no fly zone in force for 10 years and Saddam was, the war wasn't over as far as he was concerned. He just kept shooting at planes. He didn't hit any, but let's, so let him hit one. And then we would, then we would go in, but it just, that right, killing 3,000 people in downtown Manhattan, people who are well connected, who, who, and sending the global economy into a tailspin, it just doesn't have the right shape of it. I completely agree with you that it would take way too many people to plan it out most likely. And what I look at it, I just see, this is, someone's going to tell, there's just too many things that have to be coordinated. Too many people are going to start talking. It's just, I agree with you that it's much more likely in competence. There was definitely a motivation to go into Iraq. They wanted to go into Iraq already. That's something they had been planning on even before September 11, like looking for motivation. So it's possible right that this incompetent government allowed us to take place and then they capitalized on it. But why was, what was their motivation to go to Iraq in the first place? If they weren't going over there to try to control the oil, then why were they so desperate to go to Iraq because it was pretty clear that they wanted to? Well, I think, and again, some of the way I'm talking out of my depth here because I'm not, you know, I'm not really like a policy guy. But the argument which was made publicly at the time by many so-called neo-cons is that Iraq, because it was the perfect test case for to create a vibrant democracy in the heart of the Arab world. I mean, this is basically educated population that we completely underestimated the level of sectarianism there. But again, that's, it's easily ascribed to incompetence. I mean, we were sending in 23-year-old friends of Bush with no expertise at all just because they were the nephew of somebody who had donated to the campaign and all of a sudden these people are in charge of some major piece of the machine of how to create a democracy in Iraq. The level of, to read any of those books about what we did in Iraq is to just, above everything else, just to come face to face with a shocking degree of incompetence. So where are the good guys were just incompetent? Well, I mean, look who had in the Oval Office at that moment. There's a lot of words come to mind when you think about Bush and competence is not, you know, Bush is a strange case. I mean, obviously it's not the smartest guy in the world. But when you look at like the policies that he put in a place, it's really similar to what Obama's doing. It's not much different at all. Right. But that, I mean, I think their crucial difference is, but one, two important things. One is that Obama has inherited the world that Bush helped make. So Obama's got the hardest job on planet Earth at the moment. You blame Bush for the whole Iraq mess. Do you blame, or his administration at least? Yeah. We didn't have to go into Iraq. And it was, we could have, arguably we had to go into Afghanistan. I mean, I think, I think our approach to fighting the war on terror is fundamentally ill-conceived. I don't see why we need to be fighting wars and taking credit for fighting wars. This should, from my point of view, be all covert, all JVCs and stuff. Yeah. I mean, insofar as all the, I mean, it's assassination. There may be situations where that's not possible. But I don't see why we need to be, we should fight the war on terror as a, as a, as an international crime problem. And that has occasional military solutions. From my point of view, people, you know, jihadis in al-Qaeda should just have been disappearing and no one takes credit for it. I mean, why should we ever say we did it? We, you know, yes, we did it. Right. And now there's a possible blowback to that. And I mean, the reality is, you know, whenever you put Navy SEALs on the ground and let them shoot, they, or drop bombs from, you know, predator drones, you're going to be killing some number of innocent people. And that's terrible. And the terrible truth is there's no alternative to that. I mean, unless you're going to be a pacifist, that you're going to run the risk of killing innocent people when you have to fight certain conflicts. And so that's, I just don't see any. It's, do you ever look at it from their point of view? Do you ever look at it from the al-Qaeda's point of view of someone who is watching his giant military machine coming in and raping their country's national resources? Well, no, but that's, that's stealing minerals. Okay, but what's going on in Afghanistan? Think about Afghanistan for a moment. What is the point, what's the point of view of a woman in a burqa in Afghanistan? Now, from my point of view, it's very likely whether she knows it or not, there is a much better life she could be living. You know, the average life expectancy in Afghanistan for women is 44 years. It's got the highest, almost the highest maternal mortality and infant mortality in the world. It's, it's, you know, the most women are illiterate. It's just, it's a terrible life for women. So one of the real, really, when we think of having to leave Afghanistan, one of the real ethical problems from my point of view is we're just abandoning them to the Taliban. We're abandoning the women to the, to the Taliban. And, and if we, if there was a way to actually help them, we would have a moral obligation to do it. It's so costly to do. It's so intrusive to do. And so many people shoot at you or blow themselves up while you do it that there's, it's it's completely impractical to do. So I think, I think we have a real problem, ethically, to just abandon women to getting their noses cut off because they decided not to marry the, the octogenarian that their father sold them to. Well, you know, obviously I don't agree with any of that stuff for any of those social restrictions they put on. But do you really think that we should have troops overseas to try to reinforce our moral standards on this, this country that's a mess? I mean, should we really do that? I think we, that is that what we're doing though? No, but I think we need, well, we are attempting to do that, but it's just, it's just not doable. I think we really think that's our motivation though. Just disagree. But what about the amount of money that they're pulling out of there? What about the amount of money that they're making and just in minerals? Well, let me, let me sidestep that for a second and just just talk about what I think in the end game is. The end game is to have a global civilization that actually works. And what would that look like? It would, it would look like more or less what it looks like in any country. And I know whether you have a world government that achieves this or some, some federation that, that, of states that works better than, than, than, than the UN. You need to have, you know, if, if, if girls were getting their, their noses cut off and being forced to live in burkas in Florida, it would be a crime problem. And we would send, we would send in police to, to force people to treat their daughters better or treat their wives better. And, and that's, that's necessary and appropriate. It's just, there's no mechanism that allows us to do that as a matter of international law. And, and so we clearly have to get to a time where when you have a hostage crisis where an entire country is held hostage by some lunatic or a group of lunatics in the government, it's the matter of national sovereignty is not an, I mean, who cares about the national sovereignty of North Korea? That's, that's a, that's a hostage situation. Well, that's a really interesting point because we negotiate with North Korea and we give the money and we're not even thinking about going over there. We give the money out of compassion to, to, to leave it. It's our relationship. It's our relationship. It's our relationship. It's our relationship. We have so much artillery pointed at South Korea and the distance is so small that from nukes aside, it would just be, it would be a disaster. But, but again, that's just, that's an argument for not letting these, these failed states and deranged states get too strong. I mean, that's, so, I mean, we, we need a way to, to, we need a way to convince the entire civilised world of, of, of, of functional democracies to apply quasi global pressure to any one of these regions demanding that they get their act together and Afghanistan is definitely, definitely a place that, that, where it would be compassion. If we could come in, you know, if we could give, if, if every, if, if Russia and, and China and everyone else could get on the same page with us and we could all agree, all right, the women of Afghanistan, we actually need to help you. So how, how are we going to do this? We're going to, the first pass we're going to, we're, you know, any guy who's throwing a battery acid in the face of little girls because they, they want to go to school. Okay. That we're going to deal with that guy as the sociopath that he is. And if it just so happens that there's a culture of those guys and they call themselves the Taliban, we're going to deal with the Taliban as, as a, you know, a gang of, of sociopaths. But again, it's just, it's so, we tried it on our own more or less on our own. And the, the results have been terrible. And, and the results have been terrible because of the largely because of the role that religious thinking plays there. I mean, we, you know, you, you burn a, a Quran by accident and basically the war is almost over and well lost because everyone takes to the streets and begins killing people. You know, there's nothing more inflammatory than, than trespassing on their religious sensitivities. And, you know, if you accidentally bomb a wedding and kill 50 children, you don't get the response we recently got with, you know, this Quran incident. And so it's, it's just, it's not, we're not dealing with a, a culture that can have a, a sane discussion about the, the proper goals of human life and how to, you know, how to safeguard human happiness and, and, so in your mind, we need to be the police of the world. We're the only ones who know what's right. We're the only ones who are going to enforce it. We're the good guys. And so we need to go over there. America, I guess, military industrial complex or runs America. And what is it? No. We, we is, well just, just look at, again, take, take one piece that you, you agreed on our, our, the gains we've made socially and culturally and morally around racism. So we have, we're at least seen the daylight on the subject of race in this country. Now, so then we have the benefit of a kind of a running start ahead of South Africa. We see they've got their apartheid thing going on. And we begin, it takes us a while, but we begin to apply pressure to them, you know, boycott in trade with South Africa or, or, or blocking trade. And that has an effect. Now that's, if you could get the entire world on the same page on each of these questions, I mean, it's a, the treatment of women is even a bigger variable than, than notions of, of race. Because here, you're talking about fully half of the human population. So wherever they're treating women terribly, that's a, and systematically, not just, not by accident, but because there's some ideology that women can be treated terribly, that's a, that's a human rights problem that, that every, every society that has a robust conception of human rights can figure out how to apply pressure to. Now, you know, to stop in trade may not be enough. And, and then you, you have all of these other secondary effects of when you apply sanctions to a country, then women and everyone in kids and everyone else suffer. And so it's, it's, it's such a blunt instrument. We don't have, we don't have good tools to deal with these problems. I could see it as a justification, one of many as to why a part of the world was run by bad people with bad ideas. But I don't think that's the motivation to go there. I don't think there's the main motivation to go there. I, I just, I don't believe that the, the army would act that way, that they would spend so much money to go somewhere to save some women. I don't buy it. Well, I'm not saying it's the only motivation, but it's, but it's one that you think is being a primary one. Well, it's, well, again, I, I just would have to focus on any specific conflict we're talking about. But when you, when you ask yourself why there, there, there, there are soldiers who've done multiple tours of duty in, in Afghanistan and feel committed to the, the project and feel reasonably good about what they've done. Why do they feel that way? Why are they, why don't, why don't they get up every morning feeling like they're completely wasting their life and taking massive risks for no reason at all? You know, I don't have the interview each individual one to find out what the motivation wants, but I look at Afghanistan. And taking massive risks for no reason at all. Well, you know, I don't have the interview. Each individual won to find out what the motivation was. But I look at Afghanistan as a giant money making effort. I look at how much money they're making in minerals. And I don't think they send tanks and it's for safe women. I don't believe it. It's not a money. It's the most caught. These two, Afghanistan and Iraq have been the most costly things. Sure. We've formed under one day. We've made it for the American people. But aren't huge military companies like Hal Burton and people that rebuild these places and people that contractors, there's a lot of money being spent. Well, yeah. There are companies make money in times of war. Yeah. And so the people do make bullets, make money when they get to sell bullets. But in terms of the cost to our economy in general and the cost in the lives of the men and women are military serving over there. So everyone who, none of the soldiers are extracting wealth from the ground in Afghanistan or of course, extracting oil. And yet when you hear them talk about their experience, what you don't hear is a litany of we never should have done that. That was a complete waste of time. I can't believe that our government is not true at all. I hear a lot of people online that are sold to former soldiers that have a lot of those stories. No, there's some of that. I mean, you can't say you never hear. No, I'm not. No, I'm not saying, but it's not all of what you hear. You also hear is an experience of really trying to build in schools or build the infrastructure and really trying to help a democracy grow in these places. Now it is such a thankless job. And again, I don't mistake me for being optimistic or at all saying about what's happened in Iraq and Afghanistan. I think it's been a disaster. And but you think ultimately it's a good idea. No, Iraq, no. Afghanistan, I think it was absolutely essential that we do something. Now we clearly we did it badly from day one, committing far too few troops and letting our proxies do it for us and do it badly and Osama bin Laden got away. But you see it as a war of culture. You see I get bad people out of control of a country that they could potentially be dangerous to us. It was worth the preemptive strike. Well, again, let's just sort of talk about the big picture. If you're if you're a pacifist, you think we should never do anything like this. And as you never pull out of gun and start shooting or threaten to shoot because nothing is worth killing for, now I'm not a pacifist. I think if we all took a Gandhi in response to these problems and just got on our Facebook page and made a lot of noise that there are certain enemies we could have and do have who will just inherit the earth. I mean, so the thugs will win in that case. Gandhi's non-violence worked against the British because the British were the British and they had enough of a conscience not to just kill everybody. It wouldn't have worked against Hitler. And Gandhi actually knew that. So, the if you're not going to be a pacifist, then the question is just when do you pull out the guns? And we can then have an intelligent discussion about whether it made any sense to pull out the guns vis a v. Iraq or Afghanistan and then it's just a pragmatic question of when you do it and how it's best to do it. So I can agree with that. I'm going to agree that we need guns because they're bad people in the world. We need an army. We need a military because they're bad people in the world. But then when you look about our actions that define what our purpose is with this army, look at our two main campaigns. Iraq and Afghanistan even made it both complete fuckups and disaster. So if that's the case, how do you think the rest of the world will look at us? Why wouldn't they be upset with us? It seems to me that these campaigns have done far more to hurt the way the rest of the world wants to treat us than anything else we could have ever done. Gone to these places and blowing up buildings and killing. How many hundreds of thousands of innocent people died in Iraq and how many people are dying every day in Afghanistan? Do you think about the numbers that have been piled up? Just the actual raw statistics as motivation for these people. Well, I think it's had paradoxically it's had both effects. Because if we didn't go into certain situations, when Libya was kicking off, the resistance was desperate for us to come in. And we looked at the kind of the mealy mouth approach we took just sort of letting our allies to take the lead. That looked a little bit like cowardice and we got a lot of grief for not actually being active enough to help prop up the Libyan... Right. That's a pretty extreme case. You've got a guy who's been a dictator forever and the people literally are saying... But I'm the same with the same case. But the people were not riding in the streets because he was a better dictator. I mean, it's like it was worse, arguably worse in Iraq. There were more reasons to go in. The people were... There was every expectation that the people... Enough of the people were ready to be rid of Saddam that we could have been greeted as friends. And yeah, it was a disaster. Because mainly because we underestimated the level of sectarian violence that was going to begin the moment we took the lid off. And again, that's just incompetence. But it's not... So when you have Sunni Muslims who are going to blow up a Shia mosque, people didn't even know about that before they went into the... Well, a lot of people didn't know... But we didn't even know the difference between Sunni and Shia. Yeah. I mean, you had bloopers of our White House press conferences where they're getting people's affiliation wrong and not even thinking they're interchangeable. Do you think that these debates that you've had with all these fiercely religious people? Have they given you more of a pessimistic thought or idea on how we need to handle people in other parts of the world where their entire cultures are run by religion? I mean, does it... Do you like lose a bit of hope for rational conversations to the point where you're like, you know what? You have to engage militarily. There's no other options. You're never going to get by with debate. You're never going to get by with rational thought. You're never going to get by with reason. You're talking about cultures that want to murder you for burning some pages accidentally. You're talking about culture that wants to murder you for drawing their guy. Right. Yeah. Well, I think it's not... It's not partitioned so easily by state. But I think... I view it as kind of concentric circle. So again, we're talking about Islam here for the moment. You have this sort of center of the bullseye of doctrinal, crazy, global jihadist Islam where, yeah, I think, you know, al-Qaeda and al-Qaeda-like thinking that's just a deal breaker. I mean, so where at war would that subset of the Muslim world and there... I mean, it's not our idea that we're at war with them. They're at war with us. And so we're talking about it. For innocent, we've got nothing. We've done... We have done... They are running a very different game in their heads. It's not about land. It's not about the Palestinian. It's not about... They're living... They've got these seven century or 14 century goggles that they're looking at the world through. And, you know, if we pipe Baywatch over on the satellite dish, that's an offense that they're willing to die for. I mean, it's a very different game they're playing there. You've got to imagine what it's like to really believe in paradise. You know, I mean, to really want to get there, to know that if you blow yourself up killing infidels, you're going to get there and you're going to get everyone you love there. I mean, there's just this velvet rope in front of paradise and you're going to walk right past because the angel's going to lift it up for you and the way to get there is to be a jihadi. You know, it's like the ultimate right, it's like being James Bond who's going to get 72 virgins in paradise. And you have got no other problems in life. You need to worry about it. You don't have to worry about getting an education or getting a job or making it work in this world or building a civil society. You just have to play your side of the game right and die in the right circumstances. But how many of those are there? How many people are there enough to talk about? I think there are tens of thousands of people who went to training camps in Afghanistan. So again, so concentric circles. So the center of the bulls, let's say that's just, let's say that's half of a percent of the Muslim world. Which is a time. So whenever you, half a percent is a, you know, 1% of humanity is schizophrenic. I mean, so half a percent is a tiny segment of any population. There's, there's, there's no idea so crazy that only half a percent of Americans believe in it. You know, if you ask people, yeah, yeah, so you're going to get more than half a percent. It's just, so, but even half a percent, what is that? It's like, you know, it's millions of people who are just the die hard of the die hard. Now, it's 1.4 billion Muslims. So do you think it's possible that half a percent of them? Oh, no, I think it's worse. Because so let's say there's potentially, let's say there's potentially a million jihadis, right? I think it's probably worse than that. But let's say... Yeah, but let's just say, let's say it's you, but when you say just define it, you mean guys who are willing to become suicide bonds. Yes. More than a million. Well, I think that wouldn't be a crazy guess. I mean, I have no way of knowing apart from the fact that there's like, in every Muslim country, it's 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, depending on the country up to, you know, 70 percent who thinks suicide bombing is a good thing. Wow. Right? So it's not... When you run the poll, which has been done by Pew and other organizations, and you start asking people, do you think suicide bombing in defense of Islam is ever justifiable? And then as you know, yes, sometimes rarely and never are the possible responses. The number of yes's and sometimes gives you a... If not a majority, a significant minority of every Muslim country. I mean, even in the UK, you would get something like, you know, 20, 25 percent of young Muslims thinking that it's justifiable. And you'd get that immediately after the suicide bombings in London. These polls have been run. Do you want to live under Sharia law? You get like 30 percent in the UK among Muslims, 18 to 24. Now, so one question is, do people actually believe what they say they believe when you are taking a poll? And what does it actually mean to say yes to that? How does that inform your life? So let's just dial it all the way down to half a percent. Okay. Everyone else is just bluffing. Half a percent is still with the spread of weapons of high yield, you know, whether it's nuclear weapons or biological weapons. Half a percent of any population, any significant population, it can do a lot of damage. And so we just, it's something that we have to win a war of ideas ultimately. And we have to, we have to discredit these ideas so that the next generation doesn't find it so easy to believe these things. But, but how did they accept us? How do they accept anything, any real solution coming from us when they know what we did in Iraq, when they know we did in Afghanistan, when they know what a fuckery we've made out of the whole thing, when they know how much rampant corruption there is, when they know how much missing money there is. How do they ever look at this as anything other than a money grab? How do they ever look at it as like, oh, these are the Americans are going to teach us how to live. How could anybody accept that? Well, it's not, but when you look at, again, it's just necessary. It doesn't matter how they accept it. We just have to do it anyway. When you're talking about the center of the bulls, these people are truly unperswatable. It says, there was nothing we were going to do that was going to get Osama bin Laden to say, you know, I had you guys all wrong. This is where friends now. I think a certain percentage of people are unperswatable. The force or the threat of force is the only game to play. Then what we have to do is win a war of ideas around that first circle where they become marginalized, sufficiently marginalized, and not supported within their society. That arguably that has happened to some degree even with how chaotic Afghanistan and Iraq look. Well, there's certainly been more penetration than there was like 50 or 60 years ago, but the majority of the population has still really deep into their culture. They have a weird setup. They only have one city. Cobbles are the only real city, right? And Afghanistan is just filled with tribes, essentially. Yeah. I haven't been there. So I'm against being the third hand, but a bunch of heard McCain talk about it, where he, I think, I believe one of his quotes was that it's run the same way as it was when Alexander the Great was around. And some of that tribalism isn't strictly a religious problem. I mean, the tribalism is a problem and religious tribalism is a problem. These are any ideology that fundamentally divides one group from another and prevents them from recognizing their common humanity as a problem. And so not all of that's religious. Some of its racist, some of its tribal. But the role that religion plays in confounding are best intentions. So even if we only had our best intentions and they were not mingled with our worst intentions, even if it was not about, even if we would just go into Rwanda to help people, even though they don't have oil and we got no national security interest, but they take out the macheteas and start killing their neighbors. And we're just, we're going to put our lives on the line to just stop the violence. It's the problem is it's just there's no elegant way to do it. You wind up killing innocent people. You wind up, you can't, you can't commit enough resources to build a civil society. You can't, it takes too long to teach people what they should want. You know, it's just, it's some. So you sort of reconcile our problem. You sort of reconcile our military actions. You reconcile the corruption, all the fuck up, you say all the fuck ups that they are what they are. And there's nothing we can do about them now. But what's important is we keep these crazy people from developing nuclear bombs and from attacking us because the very real possibility of nuclear terrorism to you is far more important than whatever mistakes or corruption has been, you know, has, that we've put out as a country that have gotten, gotten these people to have this sort of a perception of us. I think, well, we can't sign on to all of that because I think our scrups have been huge and, and I think we, we have a huge moral debt to all the people we have accidentally blown up. Obviously, collateral damage is a huge problem. And I think we are, and it's been a problem in every war we've ever fought. We're one of the things we've now, which is an advantage on the one hand, but also a disadvantage is that there's so much more transparency. We know so much more about the bad stuff we do, whether inadvertent or not, that we didn't know this in World War II. A more bombing Dresden and incinerating hundreds of thousands of people, the innocent bystanders for, for, for the most part, and not, you know, non-military targets. And we could now, arguably, we should never have done that, but we've arguably couldn't do that now, given how much, given, given what the images would do to us on the nightly news. And so, and I think that's all to the good. I think we should, I think we should understand the cost of war more than we do, and we should understand how horrible collateral damage is more than we do. How do you feel about WikiLeaks? Well, I think, I think Assange is just, he's a cult impersonal. He's a pre-pabaster. So it's hard to, I mean, I, I like transparency. I think, I think the, the journalistic aspect of it, to some degree, was legitimate. But I think it's also, if you're going to release certain secrets shouldn't be released, certain secrets are there because they're keeping people safe. And to release those secrets, irresponsibly is to put people in harm's way. And so it's a, it's a very mixed thing. How did you feel about the initial video that he released? Collateral murder, the one that showed the guys and helicopters shooting the people on the ground. Yeah. And a powerful children and them saying, well, shouldn't have brought their kids. Right. The thing that's horrible about that is the, the horrible, but, but may be inevitable is that we're just not wired to kind of understand the consequences of our actions once we can fight war remotely. You know, it's, I mean, the, have, if we were just fighting, if it was all just, you know, bayonets, there's a, there's the kind of the inescapability of the horror of war. But the moment you can fly something you're sitting in your, in your office park and outside of Las Vegas and you're flying a predator drone or 13,000 miles away, it's, I'm, I'm not suggesting those guys don't have a hard time sleeping at night, some of them, but it's a very different kind of violence. And, and one of the, the scariest things about technology is that it uncouples us from our, emotions from the reality of the consequences of our actions so that the most harmful things aren't actually the most disturbing things. You know, so, so, so if you, this is an example actually I used in, I think the end of faith. You know, if you hear that your grandfather fought in World War II and he dropped bombs, he was a, he was a bomber pilot, he dropped bombs over Dresden, that's one kind of level of abstraction of his actions that, it doesn't really disturb you about him. And it needed to have disturbed him and he strays that 30,000 feet dropping bombs not really getting what he's doing. But if you hear Granddad killed a woman and her kids with a shovel, all of a sudden he's the scariest guy you've ever heard of and probably he couldn't sleep for the rest of his life either because he, it takes a very different kind of person to do that. The guy dropping bombs killed far many more women and children than the guy with a shovel. And so that, that's fascinating isn't it? And then now we're moving into drones. Yeah, and so it was even more. So we need, the burden is to figure out how to have an appropriate emotional response response to reality and to be guided by, it's not to say that our emotions are always the perfect guide. I mean, there may be ways in which we are wired to have a strong response to something that we should just get over and we're not wired to have an appropriately emotional response to something that really is a massive danger. And so our perception of risk and our perception of harm is not what it needs to be for us to make intelligent decisions and compassionate decisions in these kinds of conflicts. Did you agree with the video being released? Did you think it was a bad idea? From morale for all of us? It's hard to separate that from everything else that has happened. But as far as WikiLeaks, you mean? Yeah. Yeah. So I think WikiLeaks, truth is I don't even know the ultimate consequences of WikiLeaks. It would just matter what the consequences of it are. But is it transparency good? Yeah, but up to a certain point. But do I think Obama should be forced at his next press conference to just share his White House briefing with the world? No. And I think he, there are certain things that I understand that he and people like him need to know that I don't need to know. And if I knew and blogged about it, I would be harming our national security. So yeah, no, I'm not for the just unlimited distribution of secrets. So you allowed them to have certain secrets just for national security. Well, it's just clearly we need that. Absolutely need that. We would be terrible. I agree with that. I agree with that. Absolutely. If there's bad guys, but to what level? Like at what point? How do you make the distinction? How do you decide that they shouldn't be able to have certain secrets that may in fact be damaging to Americans, civilians or maybe we might disagree with it or might change the way we feel about a president or our policy? It's probably not that complicated. I don't think so. No, it's probably pretty basic. It's probably like, all right, we should definitely not tell them about our where nuclear warheads throughout the United States are located everywhere. Yeah, you would think so. Well, I think there's a lot more complicated than that. Yeah. Well, again, there are trade-offs between some of these things where it's just, it's hard to really be satisfied that you've hit the right answer because it's the sole for instance, going through security in the airport. There's this issue of fairness. And there's this issue of intelligent use of attentional resources. So the fairness would say, yes, Frisk, Frisk, the 75-year-old woman who looks like she just got out of her evangelical church just as much as you Frisk, the guy who just prayed on his knees to Mecca before passing through security. It's only fair to be blind to those otherwise salient differences between them. But it's stupid too when you know that the person who's going to blow himself up on the plane is a jihadi and not an ordinary looking old woman. So again, you see, what are the consequences of being starkly unfair? Where you just profile nakedly and say, yes, without apology, we profile. If your Muslim, we are going to subject you to a heroin surge at the airport because we're worried about your brothers. We have to find a balance. We're struggling to find a balance between those two things. And I think we're in the current environment. I think we're wise to air on the side of being fair. And I think you would want us to air in that direction, to be fair and to be transparent and to be. But that's what's so scary about something like nuclear terrorism. One thing has to happen. And all of a sudden, we'll all be desperate for a level of security that will radically transform our lives. And it'll be again, it could be completely out of scale with the actual damage. So if a new quinoff in Los Angeles and killed 100,000 people, right? So a small nuke, killed 100,000 people and rendered some area uninhabitable for a while, that would be such a rattling event that we would all be demanding huge changes and we would be forfeiting our civil liberties happily with both hands. As was clearly after 9, 11, after 9, 11. Right. But this would be orders of magnitude worse. And yet it would be rational to say, well listen, 400,000 people died of heart disease last year. No one is forfeiting their civil liberties or going nuts over that figure. We're talking about 100,000 people who, what is the real risk we're talking about? Well, there's a sudden death over the long-sloaf. And there's no way self-administered death. Even if that would be, even if we, I'm not saying that's the right way to look at it, but even if you could show a commensurate body count from some other source, actually Bill Moore once made this point where he was talking about Hurricane Katrina. He said, well, look at what happened with Hurricane Katrina and billions of dollars in cost and a thousand lives lost. If a terrorist had done this, we would completely freak out as a nation because it's the weather. We basically can't get our act together and don't really worry about it. That difference in response is something we have to be cognizant of. So one reason, one rational reason to want to protect against certain, especially salient events like nuclear terrorism is because we are guaranteed to overreact in such a way that the consequences will be horrendous. I mean, just economically consequences. That's a very good point. So your point is cut back on civil liberties so that we don't have to cut back on them in the future when the shit hits the face. Well, to some degree, that's an argument. Yeah, but it's not too bad to do it. Yeah. Yeah. No, but cut back on them. And again, I wouldn't phrase it in terms of cutting back on civil liberties. But it comes back to moments like airport security for me. It's like how much security do I want when I get on an airplane? I want intelligence security. Now, I also want fairness, and I'm willing to put up with a certain level of inconvenience to know that basically this is being done insanely. Now, do I want huge inconvenience? Do I want to be bombarded with X-rays? Do I want to take my clothes off every time I get on a plane? No, but it's just, as a society, there's something very corrosive about the signs that these efforts are ineffectual and not being done intelligently. If we could all just see an airport security protocol that just looked right, you know, where it's just, you know, then I think everyone would understand why we had to do it. But it looks so wrong and it feels so wrong. And it doesn't feel like it's proving. It's just, you know, like they're figuring out the system better and this is an easier way to do it, less intrusive. There's no easier way to do it. And I'm not even putting myself. It's like I'm not, you know, fine. You know, I don't actually look, I don't think I look like I'm al-Qaeda. But I don't look, I'm not as benign. I mean, I want to saw a little girl when this, when we first got the shoe bomber effect and we were all having to take off our shoes. I saw, you know, I saw a three year old girl in her, you know, whatever those, what those black and white shoes that little girl saw where her called. She always bugs. I don't know if this, there's some older school name. Anyway, she was like holding up a line. She was being forced to take her shoes off. She was terrified, like her first flight, you know, and like the parents were being traumatized and it was just the most insane misapplication of human resources. And meanwhile, that was a flight where I had accidentally taken a bag that I used to keep a gun in and I went through security with a double handful of bullets just inadvertently, right? So I'm getting through with bullets and they're looking at the swirls like she's, you know, the, she's al-Qaeda. So how gorg up frisked? Do you remember that? No. Al gorg made a big deal out of it because he was full. He's, you know, the, uh, she's outta out. Oh, Corg, I'll gorg up for it. Do you remember that? No, but yeah, I'll gorg. I mean, you made a big deal out of it because he was flying commercial. Right. One of these flights and he got, he got frisked. And he's like, what? That's a talk, man. How ridiculous. That's a symbolic demonstration of parents. Yeah. Yeah, it is. Like, yes, at a certain point in time that you go, come on, you think the ex president, the ex vice president is going to become a suicide bomber? Is there really anything that we were looking at here? Yeah. Yeah. So that, it's that kind of thing that I think is, is corrosive. And, and the, the, the missteps and failures we've had at the level of foreign policy and in fighting wars have been corrosive for the same reasons. It's just the ineptitude and the, and the, the un-acknowledged and unanticipated costs. And it's all just, um, yeah, it's very hard to be idealistic or feel like anything is being done right. But again, think of just what Obama's got a deal with when he drinks his first cup of coffee in the morning. He's got, he, he, they're getting information from a world of intelligence, which is, is, is struggling to quantify certain risks. And there is no question that there are people who are desperate to blow up whole cities in this country, because not because they have said they have a long list of rational grievances against our foreign policy, but because they're fighting a, a cosmic war. And that's just, that's just something we have to absorb as, as bizarre effect as it is. So you think for most people, it's almost impossible to sort of understand their mindset, to really put yourself into their shoes. It's virtually impossible to really have that kind of a crazed. I don't, I don't find it. I do. I feel like I can put myself in their shoes. You know, I, you know, I read the Quran and I read the Hadith and I read what, what people like Osama bin Laden say about their intentions and why they're doing what they're doing. You watch enough, you watch a few suicide videos, you know, last testament videos of suicide bombers. You just have to imagine what it would be like if you really believed that this was the structure of the universe, where this human life that we, that people like us really value is just this irredeemable fallen, really revolting circumstance of, of separation from God. And it's just this anti-room to the better place that, that you get into if you live this way and die in the right way at the right time and eternity awaits, eternity where all the good people get get to be happy forever awaits. Now, why would you want to stick around here? I have to talk about this more, but I also have to pee. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to put my headphones down and I'm going to ask you a question when we get back though. How the fuck does anything get fixed? How do we fix this? If you were the, the grand social engineer of the universe, think about that. I will follow you. So now, but now what do we do while you pee? Okay. Hey, how's it going? Sorry, I'm just readjusting everything. So is this something that you fell into? Like, did you, like think like this growing up or did you have somebody that inspired your, your beliefs in the way that you, that you think and like your, your, I guess your stance on everything, you know, or did you, have you always been interested in it? Or? Well, I've always been, I've been interested in, um, religious experience. Right. Why, just what it means for people personally and just what the possibilities are as a teenager, I just, you know, I was, as interested in just what is, you know, what are the limits of reality as anyone else? And so to some degree, my research there has been scientific and now increasingly scientific, but early on, I just, I was interested in religion as a possible account of what's true. And, um, I was also interested in the kinds of experiences that the founders of, of the world's religions have had or seem to have had. So I'm interested in the kind of experience that would get Jesus talking like Jesus or Buddha talking like Buddha. And, and I've, I've sought those experiences with drugs and meditation and, and, um, it's very, it's absolutely clear to me that there is a range of experience there that is hugely motivating and real and accessible and has been traditionally described only in religious language and seems to cash out the crazy claims of, of the various religions. So like, so if you're, if you're a devout Muslim and you start having the kinds of experiences that we've had on asset or that, that, that people have had in intensive meditation retreats, they get framed in very much in doctrinal ways. So it seems to justify your infatuation with this one revelation, a revelation which is intrinsically divisive, which argues that you should hate everyone who's not in the fold. So clearly we need a way of talking about these kinds of experiences and valuing them that is, which is, which is just as generalizable and scalable as the larger conversation of reason and science based thinking about the nature of reality and is not in principle, and therefore it's not in principle divisive. One of the things that McKenna always said in describing the difference between religion and psychedelic experiences that in psychedelic experience, you don't have to believe anything. Just go on in and you'll, you're going to experience it whether you like it or not. You're going to get hit by it, how you interpret it and how you disseminate it inside your own head is one thing, but it's not like a religious experience in that you don't have to believe. Yeah. Oh yeah. Which is probably the beauty of it because, you know, the ego wants you to hold back to all and can retain all control of your, your faculties at any given time. You know, you don't want to relinquish control to some sort of foreign substance and some sort of a drug, some sort of a thing that, you know, you're going to give up your whole body and your mind for three hours, fuck that. That's too long. That freaks people out. Yeah. But some of it freaks me, you know, it freaks people out with good reason because there is, there is a chaos factor to psychedelics, which you don't get doing yoga. Now, I mean, that's, that's their power and their, their peril because the, I mean, the other thing that McKenna said, which is obviously quite true, which is that if you teach someone to meditate, you teach them to do yoga, you teach them to, you tell them to do whatever spiritual discipline you think is so potent based on their talents or based on their happenstance or, or nothing might happen. I mean, they just, they just might get bored. It doesn't matter if they do it for an hour or a week. It's not necessarily going to move them. But if you give them 100 micrograms of LSD or, or a sufficient dose of anything in that family, um, there is just no questions on things going to happen. Now it could be very pleasant. It could be very unpleasant. It could be mixed. But there is, there is going to be a break with their ordinary consensus trance of egoity and, um, that's a short huge. So it's a huge shortcut. But it's the problem is it does just sort of just puts you in a slingshot and you're not quite sure where it's pointed. And then you're, it's, you're going there. So it's a method, but you think that meditation is probably uniquely effective method if you, if you really follow it through. I mean, I think, I think of meditation the same way I think of martial arts. You know, I could, I could teach you a spinning wheel kick. I could show you it. Right. And you might not ever be able to do it right. You, you might not have the flexibility, the coordination, whether it's a mental flexibility, you might be, not be able to focus on it enough or be intense enough or spend it, you'd be disciplined enough to stretch yourself enough to pull something off. But you can't say that another person can't pull it off. It is possible to pull it off. It's possible to be an expert at it. But out of all the people that you teach this, you know, like Kundalini or some intense form of meditation where you achieve altered states of consciousness, how many people are going to have the focus, the drive, the discipline, how many people are going to put in the time and the numbers to actually pull off and alternate state? I have never done it. Well, I completely agree with that except there's one caveat, which is, I think that the center of the bullseye of altered states of meditation is not so altered. It's not, it's actually the, the thing that you want to realize from a, from a contemptible point of view is not actually the same as the full kaleidoscope of effects you get from psychedelics. It's not just, and this is a distinction I made, I think again in the end of faith between the content of consciousness and realizing a specific property of the nature of consciousness. And there's no question that, that in our, because ordinary waking consciousness, the content, the spectrum of content is trimmed down. I mean, we have, you know, there's just a kind of a feeling of it's because it's all solid and it's just me here in my body. I'm kind of locked in my head and it's you over there. And there's no, the, the, the energy of the situation is, is, is quite limited. Yeah. And, and there are not too many surprises from we, we have all kind of been taught neurologically to just perceive our, ourselves in the world. You give someone LSD or psilocybin or mescaline and that begins to change radically and it changes for everyone and it can be terrifying. It can be incredibly blissful. And, but what happens is people are flooded with new content and new feelings of meaning and new, and, and, and new, just the energetics change. So, well, you tell you, put your hand on a tree and you feel like the, the, the buzz of kind of living contact with a tree in which you have never felt in your life. All of that kind of the more aspect that you get with psychedelics isn't really what isn't the point of meditation. And it comes with meditation. So if you go on, you know, a three month retreat where you're just meditating 18 hours a day and every time your mind gets lost and thought you come back to the practice, whether it's, you know, mindfulness, you're like the pasta in the meditation or whatever it is, it could be yoga. That, you know, being in a pressure cooker of intensive retreat can give you that some experience of more. I've never quite had it like what you get in a psychedelics experience. How close have you come? Well, it's not, it's not the, you can certainly get what you get with MDMA. I mean, the full blown empathic, unconditional love. Real thing happened. Yeah. You've had that? Oh, yeah. Yeah. You can. Wow. And they're actually practically within Buddhism, there are practices that are just tuned to that. So the practice of loving kindness called meta in, in poly. It's just, you're just, you're just trying to stoke that emotion. And you're just, you're just thinking it's a, it's a very simple practice. You, you bring to mind people you love, you're not, not romantic love, but people who you just, you know, your best friend, say, and you just meditate on that person and you just think, you know, thoughts of well-wishing for them. Just so you, you may be happy, may you be free from suffering and just, and just connect with your wish for that person's happiness. And you just train that up. The crucial piece is once you get concentrated, once your mind is no longer wandering into the, into the, into the chatter of just distraction. And you can actually focus. You get the feeling going and you can focus on the, the actual practice. Then you can do it. Then it, or just, it gets kindled. And then you're, you're feeling very much what you feel, on ecstasy, where that's just this. So it becomes, it becomes like like ecstasy, the moment you move it off, because it's, you start with someone who's very easy to love, like your best friend. And then, then the practice evolves and then you move it to a neutral person. And then you even move it to an enemy. And so, and then so then you get it. It's then it's just broad spectrum, you know, 360. I love, I wish everyone happiness. That's the goal of the practice. And, and, but, but wishing with a totally focused mind that is not lost and thought. It is, I mean, the truth is just having a concentrated mind that's not getting lost and thought is just intrinsically pleasurable. It's intrinsically blissful. It's, it's sort of, it's like the, the emotional base note of all the good drug experiences. It's, it's like the, it's sort of kind of the, the opiate, you know, happy feeling comes just with concentration. It doesn't even matter what you're concentrated on. If you're just concentrated on a, maybe Buddhist do practices where they'll just focus on a colored disc. And they, they reach levels of concentration. And so you're just focusing on a piece of swatch of red and your, your, your, your, your reaching states of consciousness that are just extraordinarily blissful. And, but again, that's not, that's not the ultimate, it's not the ultimate point of meditation and constant concentration is just a tool to use to actually glimpse something about the nature of consciousness. And so that this comes back to what I was saying before that the, that the actual goal, and this is, this is a difference between just getting more content and, and getting the kind of the wisdom that comes with, with recognizing something about consciousness. The goal is to recognize that ordinary consciousness without anything getting psychedelic is a circumstance of, of genuine freedom. That the, that the sense of being a neurotic self locked in the head, worried about what other people are thinking that can be cut through fully. So that it's, it's just gone. I mean, so that you can recognize the intrinsic selflessness of consciousness. And that can happen without any of the pyrotechnics. It can happen without the, the rush of energy in the body. It can happen without the colors changing. It can happen without any luminosity of any kind. And it says, like you don't feel like you've taken a drug. You're, you're, you're, you're awareness is crystal clear. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's compatible with ordinary behavior. You can drive a car. You can, if someone says, can you pass the salt? You don't, you're not this dazzled, stoned person who can't find the salt. You, you're, you're fully here and integrated. and yet the center has dropped out of experience. And you can just, only the world remains in some sense. And you're no longer on the, this side of it, looking at it. It's asking personally. Or even just, even the sense of subject object perception, and even just it's like there's, there's a way of looking at you take any object. And there's a way of looking at it as an object where I feel like I'm over here looking at it. And then there's also a way of still seeing it, but seeing it so clearly that you're no longer, you're no longer the, the sear, you're no longer the, on the outside or on the inside looking out, there's just seen. There's just a totality of this is some karate kid type shit. You're like become the cap. It's not, nobody's not becoming the cap. It's just become the world become the world. Yeah. You become whatever you focus on. Yeah. It becomes, become the, become, most of us feel like we are having an experience. Like there's, there's our experience. There's the world of our experience. And then there's us over here having the experience. You know, like we're on the outside looking in or we're looking over our own shoulder. There's a distance. There's a subject. And then there's all the objects. And it's possible to collapse that distance in a way that is doesn't require any psychedelic explosion. And that is the, from a meditation point of view, that, that is, that's the, the center of the bullseye that you want to, you want to find that intrinsic property of consciousness. And then you meditate on that. I mean, then you just, you drop your distraction and you fall, you fall back into that space of just being open and aware. And then it doesn't matter what happens. Then it doesn't matter whether you feel bliss or you don't, you're not waiting for the meditation to get good. You're not trying to have an experience that you had yesterday that, you know, that you lost and you're trying to get back to it. I mean, that's also all of the seeking that tends to come in people's spiritual lives where they're just trying to get some place. That's the irony is, you know, the, the seeking is your problem. You know, seek a trying to become happy, trying to, the, positing a goal and then seeking it from a, from a contemplative point of view is the trap that you want to avoid. You mean as far as like behavior is concerned. I mean, as far as, I mean, you don't mean that as far as like goal setting in life. No. No. I mean, there's, there's certainly a place where goals setting and how do you have the attitude and still write your books? No, no. I mean, it was impossible. Yeah. No, no, no, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not nullifying all purpose based behavior, obviously. But, but, but from a contemplative point of view, like so the question is, what is available to realize now in the present moment that is liberating? So like what? So it's just, just me, neurotic me unhappy me, me who's disappointed with yesterday. What can I do right now to be free? Is that even possible? Does that, does that question even make any sense? Now some people would say, well, that doesn't make any sense. You know, there's no, there is, you are just a monkey or you're just an ape with various needs and desires and, and you can be as happy as you can be. But there's just, there's nothing really profound to be realized about the nature of consciousness in the present. There's just you think believing in certain things, wanting certain things, etc. And that's just not true. Now it's completely rational that many people think it's true because they haven't had certain kinds of experiences. But, but the truth is that, and this is the truth that, that, inconveniently for our sake is only really ever acknowledged in the context of religion. The truth is there actually is something more profound to realize about the present moment. And you get one look at that truth through the psychedelic experience because it's just you being neurotic and someone had hands you a tab of acid and all of a sudden, you are a wash in an ocean of new content that is, is completely profound. And, and I mean, you've had no idea life could be so rich. Rich now, if you have a bad experience, you have a bad experience and that's, that's something else. But if you have a good psychedelic experience where you feel like Jesus, that proves to you that is possible to be much, much deeper and happier and fulfilled than you, than you realized. I read that you had a very similar experience to me when you, the first time you did MDMA. And that was a real behavior changing experience for me. And I remember that when I did it, I really couldn't, couldn't stop thinking after, it was over like, why can't people be like that all the time? What an incredible world it would be if people thought like that all the time. It would anything ever get done. I don't know. But, you know, boy, human interaction would be blissful all the time. Yeah, no, I mean, and again, I keep feeling just a civic responsibility to bracket all of my enthusiasm for psychedelics with the warning that I think there, some of them are more just biochemically more risky or riskier than others in some or just psychologically risky. And it's possible to have a bad experience and to really regret taking things from it. Absolutely. So, well, if you have a hard time with reality, I say, stay the fuck away from psychedelics. But even if you've had nothing but good experiences, you can suddenly start having bad experiences. I mean, that was my course. I took MDMA a few times, I took psilocybin a few times, I took acid, you know, a dozen times or so. And I had, for the most part, just, especially with LSD, I had 10 perfect experiences where, afterwards, it was just, it was unthinkable to me that anyone ever had a bad trip. I didn't even know what that, I couldn't even see the direction you would head to have a bad trip. Did anything change in your life before you had the bad trip? I don't know. I don't know what the shock is. It's insecure. No, I mean, but then, I think this is, I don't know, I don't have any science to go on here, but anecdotally, I think this is a reasonably common experience where, once you've had a bad trip, then the door is slightly a jar there and you can, you can find your way there in a way, kind of reliably. So I approach psychedelics with more caution now, and it's been years since I've done anything, but it's not that I wouldn't do it again. I probably would, but I would just, I would take my moment wisely because, you know, as good as the good trips were, the bad trips were just as bad. And it's, so. Well, the legal situation is very unfortunate because if it was legal, then we can have people that were experts on it that were professionals and they could distribute it and they could do it properly into the right environment and we'd have, you know, protocol and the correct things to do if someone is having a bad trip and they're in the safety and comfort of professionals and people that can write them know that everything's going to be fine, sort of steer it in one way or another. You know, that's all something, the potential growth experiences where we're all missing out on those, because of the illegality of it. But I agree with you that you should be really careful about anything you do, especially, I know people that they just, you know, they get on Xanax and they lose their mind. You know, I know people that just, things that seem to be mild and acceptable. I know people can't drink. You know, every everyone's mind is very different biochemically the way it reacts to to different substances. You know, some people can't, I know people that have given them pot and they swear there's something in it. They swear this is not pot. This is, you're drugging me and it's, no, it's just pot, man. It's just, you're set up different. There's a certain amount of immunity that I've developed that you don't have. You know, tolerance rather. I think it's really unfortunate though that we can't experiment with these things. They aren't like, you know, at a university level, but this isn't like normal. People are quietly doing research on basically everything now. I think I don't know if there's anything that you can't do research with at the moment, but it all is pretty quiet, but they're doing MDMA research and actually the, I had three times I was at TED and someone who's somewhat close to this research told me that the, they've been having such success with two sessions of MDMA therapy for PTSD that the military is now looking at using MDMA for MDMA for, yeah, I'd heard about that. Two or three session protocol, which sort of, I think that the jury's still out on the neurotoxicity of MDMA. I think it's, I mean, there's been studies on both sides, but if it's just two sessions and you get some huge response rate for PTSD, that sort of gets around the neurotoxicity question because it's not, it's not so toxic that you can't do it a few times or even a few more times than that. Yeah, so anyway, I'm not a psychedelics or truly indispensable for me at a certain time in my life in terms of just, I was so, I was a hard enough case and skeptical enough that there was anything worth realizing through introspection that it took just getting, you know, hurled over the wall for me to realize that there was any more to the world. And so, and then that gave me a basis from which to practice meditation and kind of look into these things. What do you think is happening in the psychedelic experience? I've heard the broad spectrum of, you know, you're just changing the brain chemistry you're adding in a different element. It creates hallucinations and because those hallucinations, you know, you get these profound feelings and you can learn growth from those feelings. It's a radio and you're tuning into another life form that only communicates with you through eating it. It's from another planet and that's why there's a logos. That's why when you take especially high doses of mushrooms, there you have people, you have a language whether it's internal or not, you don't really know. I mean, you could all be, you know, how much of, if you can see any of that stuff, I mean, how much of that is just firing against the different parts of your brain that causes visions. I mean, what do you think is happening in a psychedelic experience? Well, this, so I blogged about this. I wrote an article, I wrote a drug in the meaning of life. And so I, in a footnote, I differentiated those two kinds of psychedelic experience because there is this, there is the one experience which is, again, personal, even if it's trans personal, it doesn't put you in dialogue with anything else or it doesn't seem to put you in dialogue with anything else. And that's the only kind I've ever had. I've never had the experience where your, the Terrence McKenna style, I'm now in the presence of the other talking and receiving information that I couldn't have had any other way or I couldn't think I could have had any other way. So for people who have had that experience, it seems rational to say that it's putting you in touch with an other in some sense. It's not just, it's not just an expanded you or just the universe without you, without your ego involved. It's actually putting somebody else's attention on you and now you're in dialogue. Now that's, that's an experience I haven't had. And so I can't really, but the thing is that, the test of the validity of that experience is pretty straightforward. I mean, if you're getting information that you couldn't have any other way, that should be provable. And one of the, one of the, the, the fishy things about Terrence's account of these states is that, had many moments he claimed to be getting, he really did claim to have a compelling experience of being in dialogue with kind of omniscient other. I don't know if you read his book, True Holus Nation. Sure. He's in the Amazon, he's walking around and he's had more mushrooms than any person in human history. And he is in dialogue with, it's a very, it's a very readable book, very fun read, some very out there ideas in there. And so it's, I'm going to, I'm going to falsify by summarizing what he was claiming to be in dialogue with, but his in dialogue with some omniscient other. And it's just, so he's pointing to a species of plant that he doesn't know the name of. His, he, Terrence was very, had a lot of botanical knowledge, but he, his point, he's pointed to plants that he doesn't know the name of. And he claimed he's just getting the Latin name in his head, beamed to him by the other. Right now, that would be, he, he, he, he, it's been a little while so I looked at the book, but, if you're in a scientific frame of mind, you actually want to establish whether this is more than just your experience, that's the kind of thing that is very testable. I mean, you could say, listen, I had, you know, I didn't know. The scientific frame of mind, you actually want to establish whether this is more than just your experience. That's the kind of thing that is very testable. I mean, you could say, listen, I had, you know, I didn't know any of these plants, and I've never taken a course in botany, or I'm going to give the same dose to someone who really doesn't know a damn thing about botany. And we're going to see how many of these species of plants he can name. And that's just, I mean, that would be, it's as easy as testing psychic phenomenon in an ordinary sense. Sure. If you could attach it scientifically. If you could just get information one unique experience, though. But, but it's just a member, any of those names? Well, yeah, he didn't. So, so Tera, I mean, Tera's was so smart, but he, you know, he was not the most rigorous, at the margins of his rap on what was real. You know, he was, he was more poet than scientist when he would, when he would get to some of these crucial moments. And so, yeah, I haven't seen in his work any effort to be really rigorous and say, okay, I had this experience where I was getting information that I know was not my own content. It was not based on prior learning and it was not just merely imagined. It was real information. And here is how I went about trying to authenticate that it was real information. Because he talks about just being able to close his eyes and see not, you know, alien civilizations, obviously that's hard to authenticate, but, you know, see historical periods and see, um, he said that? Yeah, no, yeah. So he was, he would, you know, look, what was that? It wasn't some of his, some of his talks. He was probably highest fuck. Yeah, so obviously it's possible to be completely stone and have these wild experiences that are basically just dreams, you know, or hypnagogic images. And, um, unless you can bring back those Latin names. Yeah, if you can't, if you can't bring back something that's clearly information, then my feeling is there's no reason to claim that it is. You can claim that this is the one thing that what's indisputable is that people can have a range of experience that is incredibly beautiful and life-changing. And then a certain percentage of people feel the need to tell a metaphysical story about the significance of those experiences. And religion is in the business of enshrining specific metaphysical stories as the ultimate truth. We know they can't all be true because they're all mutually canceling, which is to say Christianity is true, Islam is false and vice versa. But the psychedelic experience falls into the same, under the same rubric. I mean, you can have all of these experiences and not know what they mean and be very humble about what they, you know, what you don't know and still value the experiences. Or you can say, oh no, I'm in contact with the Pleiadians and they live in a star system and they're sending messages blah, blah, blah. And then you're just part of the cacophony of new age claims that are- That are- That are- That are- That are unsubstantiated. So I didn't know that he had claimed that. That's really pretty funny. But one of the things that he did claim was that he was high on mushrooms and they were communicating with him, telling him to create a map of time out of the E-ching. That's something worth dollars. Yeah. That was the whole time wave. Yeah. But I have another thing that just, you know, he played some mathematical game with the end date, right? The king-win sequence in the E-ching. And I don't think he did it. I don't think he was alone for this. I think he found some mathematically talented or crazy grad student to help him with this game. But he got some pattern of knowledge. Yeah. But again, how you define novelty is so sketchy. And yeah, I never wanted to go down that particular rabbit hole with him. But yeah, if the world ends in eight months or whatever it is, as he predicted, or the singularity happened, or something huge that- Yeah. What he predicted is the- The- The asymptotic achievement of novelty on December 21st, 2012. Whatever that means, it's going to be the most novel day in the history of the universe, and nothing, nothing will be the same. So if December 22nd dawns, and basically we've just had another news cycle, and it's just Fox News versus CNN, we'll know that that novelty theory was wrong. And then there'll be the percentage of devotees who just think it's kind of time shifted. Well, he's fun to follow, because he was such an entertaining speaker. And I think that was a problem. The problem was that he was so entertaining and engaging that he sort of was a prisoner to his gift. And his gift was to tell his compelling stories. And the story wasn't so compelling. Well, yeah, move things around and make it compelling. Yeah. And then, unfortunately, I really found out recently because of people in my message board kind of illuminated this to me. He changed the end date. The December 21st, 2012 end date that they always said was that he magically arrived at with his mathematical program, which was to the day, the same end date of the long count of the mine count. Right. He- Brian, you had to throw that fucking stupid clock away, man. That shit's annoying. Ridiculous, meow, clock. You're a grown man. But apparently it was really in November. It wasn't his original calculations were in November. And then when he found out about the end date of the mine calendar, then he just shifted it a month. No. Which is so convenient. But it's ridiculous because he used to say to the day. So he was a great speaker. It was really cool ideas, a lot of fun to follow. But when you do that much, much, Holmes, you know, reality must become like a slippery fish in your hand, you know, really, really difficult to constantly have control of. Yeah. Yeah. No. I mean, it is a bit of a liability. When you say it so well, you can get carried away with just the experience of saying it that well. And it- So something really is true with writing. I mean, you can have an, like, I think Freud's influence is outside influence. Which is kind of inexplicable given how crazy some of his ideas were. Is born of just the quality of his writing. And Freud was a great writer. And it's just, I mean, the whole mythology he created for what's going on in our head. Fascinating. Fascinating. Fascinating. But it's like, you know, it's so much of it is- Cocaine would you say it should have been obviously bogus. But he was a damn good writer. Yeah. Well, to this day people, you know, talk about Freudian slips. You know, it's somehow this dick going on in the back of your mind all day. Well, something isn't a big bother. I mean, there are- There's a lot of unconscious processing going on. And I mean, this is actually the subject of my current book, very short book on free will, is speaks to that. That it's just the sense that we have of being the kind of conscious authors of our thoughts and actions. We know as false. Now, it's not false in the Freudian sense that we've got the id and the super ego and the ego at war. And it's all being driven from behind by a kind of intelligence that's consciously editing what we can consciously know. But there's just that there's a- Most of our- what's going on in the brain is unconscious. And most of us not even potentially conscious. And that actually explains a lot of the change you get with psychedelics because what- You change the biochemistry enough. You're playing with the margin of what's conscious and what's potentially conscious. And we are potentially conscious of a lot of things we don't tend to be conscious of. And that it completely transforms our experience. But there's a lot that we're not just potentially conscious of, that the brain is doing. And it is- it is everything we are conscious of is dependent upon all of that work. So for instance, the fact that you are hearing my words as words right now because you speak English. And I'm speaking in English and you're parsing the- so I'm making sounds. And you're just- you're not making any special effort to hear words. You're just hearing words. In fact, you couldn't not hear words if you tried. And the words are coming and you're understanding them. And I'm going to get to the end of the sentence sometime. And we'll both recognize that it was more or less grammatically correct. All of that is happening unconsciously. And you're not- and you're just conscious of understanding what I'm saying or not based on whether I'm following the rules of English grammar or not. But I'm not aware of what's allowing me to follow the rules. You're not aware of what's allowing you to detect my errors. And the truth is, from a conscious perspective, I don't know how I get to the end of the sentence. And this is really like all of this- this experience of talking is writing a top of machinery that I can't inspect. And when it fails, it's a surprise and I don't know why it failed. And so that's just talking about, you know, parsing speech. But all of our- all of our thinking and behaving and wanting and doing all of our inner life is made of- of unconscious processing of that sort. And so their experiments where you can show that people- when you think you have consciously decided to do something, your brain is actually committed to doing it- half a second or some seconds before you- before you- why you still think you're making up your mind. So this really nullifies a conventional notion of free will because you're- you know, if you say, you give me two buttons to push and I can push either one I want and I can push them one I want. And you just tell me to make up my mind. And I go back and forth and back and forth and say, I'm going to push the left one. Completely free choice. I did it. No one forced me to do it. The truth is if you were recording from my scalp or the E.G. or looking with FMRI at- at brain function, you could detect that before I thought I was committed. Because in these experiments subjects watch a clock and they- so I'm like watching the hands of a clock or watching random numbers appear on a screen. And I looked and I- my only goal is to just look at when I've decided, when I'm committed, I go back and forth between left and right, left and right. And then I say, okay, that's the hands of the six, I'm going to go left. All the experiments show that- that for some decisions several seconds before we could tell from the brain, what- whether the subject was going to go left or right. So your subjective sense of being truly upstream of your decision making process is- is a false one. The only problem I have with that is twofold. One is that if you're going to study something like that and you- you know, you- you make a clear study where you're- there's a red and a green and you have to make a choice as to which one. And you monitor the subject's brain. Is that real? Is that real life? I mean, it's a fucking test. You know, I mean, how do we know what's going on in a real life scenario? How do we know that there's not a lot of overthinking going on? How we know that's not a lot of shit going on behind the scenes. Like in this sort of a situation because you're setting up this test. Right. You can- can- could psychedelics change free will. If a psychedelic experience changes your whole tune, could it- could it literally change what- what decisions you would automatically make? I mean, if there is no free will, a free will is just your mind for whatever reason goes left or right based on morals or ethics or what feels right or what feels wrong. In that sense, wouldn't psychedelics be able to change free will? Well, I think free will is a truly incoherent- right. It's crazy work. It just doesn't make a placeholder. We have- we have causality and no one has ever described away in which mental or physical events can arise that make sense of this idea of free will or- of being the true locus of the causes of your thought and actions. And this is- most people think that we have this- that there's a mystery here that we have this subjective experience of free will, but we can't map it on to a notion of physical cause and effect. But I think if you look closely, you realize you don't even have this objective experience of free will. So if I ask you, you know, think of a- a- an MMA fighter. Okay. Okay. So did you- did you get one? Yes. Okay. Who'd you think of? Sure. So I think of George St. Pierre. Okay. So now why didn't you think of Matt Hughes? Okay. Now, but so whatever story you're going to tell it is meaningless. Right. Right. So like the truth is you're not in a position to know why you thought of George St. Pierre. Right. And so so okay. There are all these MMA fighters whose names you know and you know them as well as you know George St. Pierre's name. You could have thought of over-ream or I mean, the hundreds you could have thought of, right. And let's say you thought of a few and then you settled on one to tell for the purposes of telling me. Right. So you thought of, so you got Hughes and you got over-ream, you got St. Pierre and then I said, well who was it and you say, well St. Pierre. Right. You can't explain why you fixate it on him as opposed to Hughes or whoever the other candidates were in your mind. All of that's being driven from behind unconsciously and there's no way to ever even- even if it wasn't- even if there was no time lag. Even if we knew that the neurophysiology and the conscious thought were truly simultaneous. So there was no part of your brain that was going George St. Pierre before you were aware of it. Right. It's still a mystery as to why it is what it is. Right. But that's sort of an answer to a question with no consequence. When it comes to something with consequences and they're free will then. When someone contemplates the you know the results of their actions and I mean isn't that what we really truly consider to be free will. As you look at something and you so should I hit this old lady with my car? No I should not because I have free will. I mean even if there's you know some sort of a decision that had you know green lit in your brain you know seconds earlier than that no we're not going to run over this old lady. Sort of that's free will. Right. I mean what what leads someone to murder someone is every murderer innocent because they don't have free will. Are they a accumulation of their past histories and their emotional responses to very astinulized good or bad in their environment that's led them down this road and here they are in this moment in time in this physical altercation and they murder somebody. Do they not have free will? Right. Yeah so all good concerns. Clearly there's a difference between voluntary and involuntary action and so we can talk about that difference without ever invoking free will. So there are the things I choose to do and I'm reaching for the water because I want to pick it up and that's different from me accidentally knocking it over or so so and those differences matter so if you intentionally shot me that's one thing you're a murder or an attempted murder. If you're if you accidentally shot me because you were cleaning your gun there was no intent and that says a lot of you're a very different person in the world you're not the person who intentionally shot me. So we don't have to worry about you in the same way. So for the purposes of our legal system the difference between intent and and lack of intent is huge but it's huge because it says a lot about what someone's likely to do in the future. The payoff is that there are one I think understanding that the incoherence of free will does subtly change your morality and would change our legal system in small but crucial ways because changes your morality because you have to acknowledge that there's a huge role for luck in this world that is morally relevant that we don't acknowledge. So you are not responsible for the fact that you have your genes that you were born to this this society that you've had your life experience that your brain you didn't make your brain. Your brain is exactly the state it's in based on no it's not an accomplishment of yours right you and and you can't take credit for the fact that you're not a psychopath. You are lucky that you're not a psychopath on some basic level you would be unlucky to have the genes and the life experience that would make you want to get up tomorrow morning and kill kids. Do you think that psychome that that sort of a pathology is inherently genetic do you think that's environmental weather is a combination of so it's a combination it's significantly genetic but so the combination of environment but you didn't pick your environment I right but it's not something that someone can avoid based on a bunch of different sort of right. Yeah so so I'm not negating the role of human effort and human intention and we can change ourselves we can we can get in shape we can learn new skills we can we can improve relationships there's everything about what people want to want to do with their lives can be conserved but the truth is some people are much luckier than others. I mean it's like and and and but and no one can take credit for the fact that they're intelligent that they're good looking that they're I mean it's like so you say this but what about the secret right yes that talk about dangerous nonsense did that drive you crazy when that was coming out that was. I was the most irresponsible thing in the world from Oprah's I mean Oprah's boosting of that book was was a journalistic layer responsible in a way that that few things do some anything watching people run with it though people that were convinced that all of a sudden they were going to create their life with their imagination. What sort of there is some sort of an impact that your thoughts in mind have on the real world. Oh no it's positive energy psychic energy there's something there yeah if you're a nice person and you're thinking nice thoughts about people they're going to notice that and like you and that's that becomes a self fulfilling loop. I mean you are like if you if you are an angry person who's always noticing what's wrong with the people around you that that's that's very hard to keep to yourself. And people begin to treat you a certain way and it becomes self soothing as entirely social. No there's a thought. Well there's not I wouldn't attribute any spooky level to it. It's all understandable. You've ever seen like mass prayers where they work on a certain you know thing and you know everybody together try to pool up their energy. Well that's never would be so it would be so easy to demonstrate. Yeah. And and there's been so much prayer that I mean it's just it's just I mean this is what the great the website what why does God hate amputees. Because so so you have all these people who believe they've been healed through intercessory prayer of their cancer and all these other diseases that are self limiting. You never hear somebody here somebody who's prayed to grow back in arm and said look you know I here's a picture of me without an arm and now they're both back on the unlike the human salamander. If prayer worked you'd be able to pray for long storms. Well that you say that but what a prayer only works a really tiny bit and you got a lot of people involved. So it's like is there a boost your immune system. Oh no. It's just not it's not perfect. It's not magic. Is there is there power in thought but it is build as magic. Yes it is build as magic but I can do every once. Okay God if we're talking about God I'm talking about groups people praying for things. I'm talking about using their energy of their thoughts. I'm not really talking about invoking a higher power. I'm just hoping that but they think they are that's it. So I mean about sometimes making that a with art bell. You remember that show our Bell coast coast where wolves the three o'clock in the morning we were driving on AM radio. Right. I believe he did some sort of a test where he tried to they tried to influence something whether it's weather or something with a you know a gigantic a gigantic mine meldo but it wasn't it wasn't a religious thing. I think the idea was it can you get a bunch of people to concentrate on something and do we have like the most minute ability to influence things and together we could do something measurable but I don't know if anybody ever do anything. Well there are a lot of people who have done research of that kind and what they claim is just that these these micro departures these micro effects that when you aggregate them over many many trials represent huge statistical departures from chance and most people in the skeptic community find that completely unperspaced because you looked into it all like one number generator. Yeah. So I've just I haven't apart from just reading a couple of books like Dean Raiden's book on the conscious universe. It's what you come down to there are just meta analyses of someone statistics and the the concern on the part of skeptics that you know their frauds involved or there's just a file drawer effect where people are not reporting their failures and they are reporting the positive results. And so there's just what you want what you should be able to find is if these are if these are if these are real abilities that that really matter in terms of you know tangible. You should find someone who can come into the lab and demonstrate telepathy or clairvoyance or whatever the thing is you're interested in it so so that it's really it should survive the presence of a skeptic like James Randy who's a professional magician knows how to fake these mentalist games. You should be able to to test it in so actually I spoke to Rupert Sheldrake about this once because you know sure. It's a he's a big advocate of the scientific testing of these phenomenon but he's very he's a believer. he's a real believer and he's he's published essays or articles on you know pets that know when their their owners are going to come home and so he's got the camera on the dog and the owners head at home. He's got them times synced and showing the effect of the dog getting up to the right time and he's very into the idea of democratizing science where you can get thousands of people doing these tests on their own and and and showing some effect. But what he hasn't wanted to do is just actually submit to James Randy's challenge of showing up and doing an experiment that will survive the the scrutiny of professional magicians and I'll just allow this thing to be and and it's just you know people find James Randy's skepticism so unpleasant that they that they think that that would nullify the the experiment or somehow are they not going to submit that. But I mean James Randy has put up a million dollars to anyone who can show some positive result. Now I know doubt he's not the easiest guy to deal with if you actually you know if you are a they they committed to the reality of psychic phenomenon and you have to go in and meet with James Randy and and design and experiment. I'm sure he's going to he's he's going to make you jump through hoops that you feel like you don't have to jump through. But but you it would be trivially easy to design a valid experiment. They could demonstrate these these effects and so it's I'm open minded that that this stuff is possible but it's it's it's fishy that he hasn't it just had taken the time people should just come forward and and and demonstrate the effect. But what is Raubert's claims I mean is it is it you know that every single time Raubert's claim was that that he doesn't think science should be decided by contest essentially. It's like it's not that's not how you do science you don't do science to answer a million dollar challenge put up by a magician and that's a okay I understand this kind of the his static objection or his interpersonal objection to working with with a cranky person like Randy. But cranky not in the in the flaky sense but cranky just in the you know he's a he's a confrontation. Yeah he's confrontational. But given how the whole field of parapsycology and you know size studies is treated like intellectual pornography given how discredited it is in the in the view of mainstream science. If there's an effect there and you've got a protocol that has demonstrated it just come forward and do it do it in every context where you can shine light on it and and and just prove it. And children can never done this. Not will not anyone satisfaction that that that can move the conversation forward and he says you know all there's many people who say they've done it. But when you actually look at what they what hasn't happened is you haven't you haven't discovered people with with where there's a really strong effect where you get one person who's like I you know the tiger woods of of mind reading where you where they can actually show a departure from from chance that is huge. In a in their own trial what you get is if you get 6,000 people staring at a random number generator trying to make it to part you know to the high side as opposed to the low side. You get people saying that there was this tiny effect so it should have been 50 50 it was actually 51% over all those trials and that when you do the stats on it is you know you would expect a one in 10 billion due to chance. That's just that's subject to many kind of experimenter problems that that that people are right to worry about which is one you didn't. I mean people have been caught not reporting their failed experiments. I mean there's a kind of a true believer syndrome that happens even in certain wings. There's a phenomenon of scientific fraud across science which is a problem we guard against but it's also been true of. Of parapsychology as well. Do you think it's possible that people have these certain senses that have not evolved yet and that that's why like sometimes you know you know someone's going to call you and you pick up the phone and it's them. You know there's weird. Non duplicated a bull that's on a word you there's there's weird experiences that you can't duplicate you know there's there's. Random weird things that can't be controlled but sometimes the right frequency kicks in and you catch a radio station from San Diego. When you're in San Francisco and it doesn't make any sense and only lasts for a little while. Is it is it possible you do you believe like if you ever had personal experiences where you know you knew someone was staring at you and you looked and they were you knew the phone was going to ring and it did. Oh yeah. It's all bull. But well no it's not bull shit but a huge component and perhaps the component that explains all of those experiences is what's called sampling bias where you you notice all the hits and you don't notice that the non hits you don't notice all the time you pick up the phone and you had no idea who was calling you which is most of the time. Right. And this is before caller ID obviously caller ID has has has ruled out this thing in order to move it yeah it's like a phenomenon. But so we're not we're just we know we don't keep track we one the hits are salient to us and the failures aren't and so and religious people do this all the time God always gets credit for the good things he does. He doesn't get scored for all the the disasters he fails to prevent so you know a bus crashes and everyone's dead except one little girl and it's a miracle that you know she walked away but what about all the dead people. Right. And so the the non hits always outweigh the hits and if you actually do so the and the classic demonstration of this which is still shocking to people is the. It's called the the the hot hand fallacy in basketball the idea that people get on a shooting streak you know Michael Jordan he would shoot you know two outside jumpers and when he goes up for his third. There's the sense both in him and in the audience that he's actually more likely to make that third shot having made those. up that prior to because he's he's just on a roll so that whole feeling. And that he's actually more likely to make that third shot having made those prior to because he's just on a roll. So that whole feeling of being on a roll in basketball has been studied because what's amazing about professional sports, like basketball is the statistics are like every single game that has ever been played is completely broken down. I love we know every shot and every, you know, a basket and every rebound. And so statisticians could just sit down and analyze, is there such a thing as the hot hand? Is it actually true that if a guy has made three jumpers in a row, he's more likely to make the fourth or is the fourth truly independent of everything that's gone before? And they found that despite the personal experience of being on a roll and despite the fact that we feel like we've all seen someone on a roll, there's really no such thing as being on a roll in basketball. Now there may be other sports where it's different, but there's so much chaos and so much uncertainty in once that ball leaves your hand, it's a low percentage enough phenomenon that it is actually insensitive to how it's going now. No, it's insensitive to the fact that you feel great and everything's going well for you and you just sank two baskets and you go up to sink a third. That third is you're no more likely to sink that third than you were if it was your first one or you just failed to just miss two and then you go up to the third. So do you completely discount the players comfort like when they feel like during the zone that doesn't exist? I mean, what is the zone? I mean, it's no state of mind that created but they're having an experience. So what's amazing about this is this is so no one's ever more likely to make a basket. Is that what you say? Or another confident and they make the basket knowing that they're going to make the basket? Statistically you say that doesn't interact. There's no sign of, and this, again, this research is probably, it's probably 10 years old or so so maybe something's happened in the last decade. But you're not just fucked up. Yeah, right exactly. But my understanding is there is zero evidence of what's called the hot hand and basketball so that literally it is a subjective error that everyone feels powerfully. And so given that, so just map that on to all of our psychic, so-called psychic experiences where you feel like you knew someone who is going to call or we're just just luck. Yeah, it's just, there's going to be some, how do you know though? How do you know it's just luck? How do you know it's not either or? How do you know it's not? Well, because sometimes there's a brief, but it should be just. But you're just testing it. You're by placing an experiment on anything. Don't you automatically alter the results of it, especially when you're talking about something so ethereal that's an idea of a friend and then boom, there's an email in your box. You haven't talked to them in years. I'm just playing devil's advocate here because I don't believe in it. Listen, I've had it, but I don't believe in it either. So here's one weird experience like that that I've had, which I mean statistically, it seems completely beyond the pale, but it's again, there are going to be low probability events that happen every day. And so, you know, I know a guy who went, for instance, his college girlfriend went, broke up with him and went to Europe. And he was convinced the relationship wasn't over and he decided he was going to go to Europe to find her. So he was like, 18, right? It was not a crazy guy, just really romantic guy and it was not a scary breakup. So anyway, nice story, they got back together. But what happened is, so he's just only an 18-year-old could get it and do his head to do this. He gets on a plane and he doesn't even know which country she went to. So he just goes to Europe, right? He goes to Spain because he speaks Spanish. And he's like 10 days into his trip and so he's in Barcelona and some tourists hand him, other tourists hand him a camera and said, well, we take our picture and he picks up the camera and he's taking their picture and into frame walks his ex-girlfriend. So he's found it like within 10 days, he just found her in, so what are the chance of that happening? Well, pretty small. Pretty small, right? But that stuff happens to people. It would be a miracle if low probability events never happened. It's like it would be a miracle if no one in human history ever had a story like that to tell. Yes, right. So we're in a system where it's bound, there's bound to be very low probability events. Or it's just not fully evolved. And this kid went on his instincts and he tapped into the information in the universe and he knew instinctively where to go. And he met his sweetheart. But God damn Sandra Bullock movie. If it's an ability that anyone should care about, it should be testable. It should be strong enough that we can test it. But how can you test something when it's a unique event that very rarely takes place, completely uncontrollable and it's something that's just almost like a natural phenomenon that rarely occurs? I mean, how are you gonna put something in a testing environment, an environment of a laboratory and see if it really does make sense that you think about what's going on in the world? Might be Shell Drake was doing this. There's a test of the phone call phenomenon where you get, people can subscribe to get there. They get a call, they enlist like they're five closest people in their lives and to call them at random intervals. I guess they disable their call or idea or whatever. And you can just set this up so that you know, it's still not a true moment. Because they're acting on an experiment. But how do you know that someone calling you might not just be calling you because they tapped into this idea of loving you and this idea of missing you and that is the tune that breaks through all the way to you and causes you to look at your phone right when they tune in. That's not replicatable. Replicatable? That's not. Yeah. That's what it knows for replicable. It's replicable. It's not, I mean, you know what I'm saying? I mean, it's the idea of unique events isn't disproven by experimenting with it. Look, I don't know that it's true that sometimes you know when someone is calling me, but I've had the experience myself, but I haven't had it in years. It's been years and years since I knew who was going to call me and I looked at it. But I do remember it having it happen in my life several times. What if it's something that just, you know, when a fucking summer solstice, the planets are aligned, your own biology, you have a certain amount of water in your system and boom, the certain amount of love and the thought gets through. Is that possible? Well, sure it's possible, but the question is, even if it's true, given this description doesn't really seem to matter. Because then they're all, so it's because it's not fascinating. No, but it doesn't, it doesn't, it's not a matter of just, it's not a sign of how connected you are with the person because sometimes you know it's somebody you don't even like, right? It's not a measure of how crucial it is that they reach you at that moment. Because sometimes it's completely trivial. And then other times when someone really had to get a hold of you because your dad was sick, they couldn't find you. And you are just blissfully ignorant of the fact that the closest person in your life is having a medical emergency, right? Well, no one's saying that it works all the time. And that because it works on a blue moon that it can't, you know. But then that's not working. Well, it's not that it's not working. It just doesn't work all the time. It's a rare event. Is it possible that there are rare events like that? Or you can't just- Well, no, but they're much more likely scientifically to be. It's much more given this. Given what we're talking about now, this is all much more likely to be coincidence. I mean, it's just, it's just, it's, it's, you don't have that many people in your life you think about. You think about them. You don't have that many people in your life who call you. I mean, we just, we're actually run the numbers on this. The, the, one promise that we have very bad intuitions of probability. So have you heard of the birthday party problem? No. If I got a room, if you put you in a room of just random strangers. Right. How many would I have to have in the room for you to be confident that two people in the room had the same birthday? Jesus. So you'd be willing to bet us how bet you would have to be thousands from me. Okay. And that would just be guess. Okay. So that's, so that's basically everyone's guess. That it's just, there's 365 days in the year. We've got to get two people on the same day. That's going to be a lot of people. Right. The truth is, and this is just a fact that if you get 23 people in the room, you have crossed the 50% threshold so that it's more likely than not that two of them have the same birthday. That's amazing. 23 people. Now, the reason that what's crucial to understand is that it's, it's, it's, the crucial piece and this actually goes to this to flate so many conspiracy theories and other bad ideas is that it's absolutely crucial that we didn't specify which birthday. Right. So it's any to birthday. It's any single birthday. Any two people and any single birthday. 23. And that makes it, that makes it, that changes the game entirely. But if I said how many people do I need in a room to find one with my birthday, that changes it. Right. But any two people on any given birthday, it's, yeah, if you go with just your birthday, that's thousands. That would be thousands. I don't know what that would be. But anyway, that's, so anyway, our intuitions are bad about probability. And so, and so when you look at like 911 truth stuff, it's so much about finding these little anomalies that strike people as intuitively, highly unlikely and in desperate need of explanation, whereas you can always look at, any, anything you look at after the fact can be described as a miracle. So like I could say to you, what are the chances that all of the wires and objects on this desk would be exactly in this position on this, on a creationist argument for the evolution of the eyeball? Like how is it going? Yeah, well, but at least there's actually more to talk about there. I mean, you have to, it is kind of inscrutable how this, this stuff happens through genetic mutation and environmental pressure. But we can tell that story. But this is just post hoc after the fact I say, this is just inexplicable. The wires are tangled in exactly this way. If you were going to kind of randomly do this again, you'd never get them in this position. But of course, it's completely meaningless. There's not, the wires have to be some way. They just happen to be this way. And I'm putting a, a, a, a completely, completely gratuitous burden on you to explain the fact that they're just this way. Right. And so in any situations, certainly in any situation as complicated as September 11th, you're going to see all these anomalies. So you see, you know, the fact that how do you explain the fact that, you know, on that day, we, the Navy was running a fighter jet test and, and we had F-16s that were out over the ocean or whatever, whatever the thing is, you know, they only run that test, you know, two days a year and they were running it that day. Right. You could, if it wasn't that anomaly, you'd find some other anomaly. You could always, if, as long as you're picking after the fact, you can always find something weird that is in desperate need of explanation. Have there been statistical, have there been studies that have proven statistics on people knowing that people are watching them? I've heard there's been studies people say, if you had Rupert Sheldrake on here, he would say yes, but you would say no. I, I would, I'm not close enough to the research to have any sense. To some degree, you, you've got some substantial anything? Well, you just have to take people at their word. So I've talked to Rupert. I don't think Rupert is, I don't think he's a conscious fraud. I think he's a smart guy. He's a very earnest guy. Is he lying about what he thinks he knows or is he self-deceived or is he, has he been deceived by unscrupulous people or is there a nation bias? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So it's just the, the problem is that it's so fringe and so many people want to believe it's true that it's easy to worry that it hasn't really been fully, um, you know, the bushes haven't been beaten hard enough to find all the errors and the biases and the, and the frauds. But if there's a real phenomenon there, it should be testable and it shouldn't be vulnerable to the slightest quirk of, oh, that, that experiment or had a bad vibe or was too skeptical and therefore it killed the effect. It just, especially when you're talking about people who are not real. If, if, if, is it possible that someone could be the experiment or could have a bad vibe and be too skeptical and that is what they would have energy? You could, you could set up an experiment where, um, the experiment or was 5,000 miles away or had really good vibes. You could put the true believers in, you know, kind of the coach. You could put a completely friendly coach who was, you know, Sylvia Brown, you know, crazy fraudulent psychics, Sylvia Brown. She could be there working her magic, you know, and, and just helping every, you could, you could, you could surround them with only true believers and you wanted to. You could, you could design the experiment in such a way. Um, so you could make the vibes as nice as you want. It's just that, that's anyone who's, there's a, there's a fundamentally unscientific attitude you get from many, many people in this area of the human conversation, which is science is reductionistic. It's, it's, uh, hypercritical. It's life destroying. It's, there's this whole area of truth that science in principle can't touch. And that's just not true. It's like if it's a real phenomenon, science is the best way to touch it. There's certain things that it's hard to figure out how you would do the experiment. It's hard to figure out how to get it in the lab and how to get it to where the person who's doing the experiment is not being influenced by the fact you're, you're experimenting on them. Yes, exactly. So there's certain, so, you know, the, the scientific research I've done is with functional magnetic resonance imaging where you have to put people in an MRI scanner. And it's, it, it hugely limits what you can study because there's, the people, people can't move, you know, if you move, you, you destroy the image. So you've got to lie in a clattering machine, uh, motionless and do some cognitive task that you can do looking at computer goggles or, you know, looking at a mirror and across your feet out into the room. It limits, so, so, so, so a brain scanning experiment is usually limited. You can't put somebody on their bike and have them, you know, ride off into the distance while scanning their brain. But those, those things aside, you can, and here we're not talking about experiments with those kinds of limitations. So you can, if people have an ability to know who's calling on the phone, uh, if there's even one guy on planet Earth who knows who has this ability, it should be, we can easily design an experiment that would demonstrate that. And the people who claim, I mean, there are people who really claim these abilities, they, they claim it, uh, repeatable basis. Yeah, there, there, people who, well, they're, they're the sort of kind of shister, western new age psychics, um, who, uh, I'm not sure, but I, I, I imagine they just never submit to being tested, um, for obvious reasons. I mean, and then there, then there's the kind of Buddhist, Hindu, yogi, contemplative world where people imagine that great meditators have developed these abilities and even some of the meditators will, you know, wink, wink, it suggests that they probably have these abilities, but are just too humble to demonstrate them. But, and there's sort of a kind of religious taboo against demonstrating them or, or simply, or challenging them or, or submitting them to test. But in, in the, in the, in the contemplative world among Buddhists and, and, and Indian yogis, there's actually a straightforward path to developing these skills. I mean, that there's just a recipe. You could go into your, you know, you could go ask the Dalai Lama, how could I learn to read people's minds. He has an answer to that question. I mean, it's not like, well, it's, it's just a matter of whether you're gifted or not. No, there's actually, it's like you can get, you can basically get a PhD in reading people's minds in, in, among Buddhists and Hindus. So the people who've done that, why don't they get tested? It's not because, because what they're claiming is not an ability to make a random number, generator, jumps lightly. If they've got 5,000 people sitting next to them, also doing it, they, they, they claim just huge abilities are possible for meditators who've reached certain levels of concentration. I mean, there are people who, who, the stories are as crazy as anything you've heard. What about like remote viewing? That's the, yeah. It would be the crazy shit of all time, right? Is that everybody is believing? Is that everybody is believing? Is that everybody is believing? That's going to be the story. It's just vague enough. Well, first of all, there are, there are magicians like, um, that's the British magician, like Darren Brown. I got a P again. Yeah. So I forgot to mention this, I guess. I'm so, I'm so, I'm so not finding this for the thing. Well, it's, I'm so non psychic that I forgot I had to pee. That's how in touch I am with, with the, my physical reality. This has been a really fascinating conversation, man. We could go on for hours and hours. How long was that? Almost three hours. No, really? Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah. We're down five minutes away from three hours. Yeah. I hope we didn't kill our audience. No, you're kidding, man. People love this shit. Look, I think you're, you're, you're, you're, your devotion to the scientific method and exploring everything is very admirable. It's very interesting and unique and we've never had anybody on the show that breaks things down and that way before. It's really, really been really cool. Follow him on Twitter, Sam Harris org and check out all of his books from letter to a Christian nation was the first one that I ever read to, uh, End of Faith and what is the the, the most recent one, the moral landscape and free will is the most recent one. And free will is the PDF. It's a downloadable small. No, that's a line was a short essay that's a, yeah, a, a book on the ethics of line. Is it Sam Harris dot org? Is that the best I used to go to? Yeah. Yeah. Do, we got to do this again, man. We didn't even touch. We didn't talk about martial arts. We got all up in jihad and a little bit of drugs. It was great. Yeah. Awesome. Awesome. Like when we do this over and over again. So ladies and gentlemen, that's it. Harris is the fucking man and it shows over. Thanks everybody. See you soon. See this week we got a lot of people coming up. What the fuck do we got, Brian? Uh, at the ice house. Yeah, we got Joey Diaz to the podcast on Friday. Felicia Mason Silva's coming back on Tuesday. Um, Aubrey Marcus is coming back next week. Yeah. We got a lot of people too. We got a lot of people. All right. We love you, bitches. Thanks. Thanks for everything. Bye bye.