Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. Hey, did you see him, man? Nice to meet you. You team, man. Pleasure. I love your channel, man. It's really great. You're really doing some really interesting videos. When did you get started? Thanks. Well, I only started the YouTube less than a year ago. That's crazy. He's been a bit of a wild ride. I don't even know how I found it. It was like one of them YouTube recommends things. It just popped up. I don't remember which one it was. It was something on each in history. I was like, oh. Yeah. All right. Yeah, it was cool. I started just under a year ago, but no one started watching until March. And then I think you sort of seen me just after that point. And it's been a bit of a big journey since then. Upwards. But it's been very exciting and very happy to be here today. Very excited to be in Austin. And yeah, looking forward to talk about some ancient history. So did you start off on a traditional academic journey and then sort of get sidetracked into a YouTube career? Like, how did this work? Yeah, basically. So I studied ancient history at university for four years. And I've always been interested in history. I've done history all the way through. Like, I've fascinated by about history as a kid. And got to the stage of my life where it was, you know, thinking about going to university. So I thought, I'll do ancient history at university. And study there for four years. I graduated. All of that kind of stuff. But they came a point during my degree where I was kind of, you know, a little bit. I didn't quite agree with the kind of high level ideas regarding the timeline of history. And what we're talking about our ancient past. And it wasn't that I dispute anything that I'd been taught. And I have like great respect for the people that I met at university and my professors. And I don't dispute anything that we were taught actually on the course. But it was more the kind of high level macro perspective of history that I found myself having more and more questions about. And yeah. So what would bother you? Like, what were the questions? It was kind of the big questions regarding the origins of civilization and how deep civilization goes and how complex human behavior, you know, I thought went way back further into history than what we were being taught. I wasn't too, I just didn't buy this idea that nothing happened for like vast rest of time. Because it was during my course that they found the modern humans, they made this discovery in Morocco in 2017 or 2018, I think. And that was when I was at university. Was that done in the sovans? No, no, homo-sapeans. So I can't remember this. It's called like the Jeb Bell Elude site or something like that. But they were modern homo sapien remains. They thought they were in the under-thal initially because they were so old. How old were they? They're 315,000 years old. That's kind of like the estimate. It goes up to potentially 360,000 years old. So they're super old. And yeah, they thought they were in his own. And the under-thalks of this age, but then they discovered a few more and they were, they classified them as homo sapien. And when I saw that, I was like, how is this not kicking out more of a fuss? Because before them, the oldest homo sapien remains. We had were around 200,000 years old. And that had been the case for like a decade or something. And before that, it was like 100,000 years old. So this discovery pushed back the age of our species by another third, like 100,000 years. So I saw that and I was thinking like, how are we still basing our kind of idea of history around the fact that nothing happened for 310,000 years? And then everything happened in like the last 10,000 years. Since the Neolithic Revolution, I just thought that was odd because we've been in this anatomically modern form for so long. And yet we were being taught that nothing had happened until the last 10,000 years. And that didn't make sense to me. So that's kind of where I started thinking about it. And then we did this module at university. I remember called, it was called something like cataclysm or something. And it was all about how in recorded history, natural disaster had a big impact on human societies and stuff like that and how it's small, like tiny changes in climate could massively disrupt human civilization and bring them all crashing down. And the case study they used was something called the late Bronze Age collapse. Have you ever had the late Bronze Age? Yes. Yeah. It's when all these powerful influential civilizations at the peak of human progress around 1,000 BC, all simultaneously came crashing down. And no one was quite sure why it was. But the best theory we have is that it's like a kind of combination of climate factors, which led to trade disruption, which led to societal unrest. And then all these empires like the hit-eye empire, the Syrian empire, the palaces of my senior Greece, the Egyptian New Kingdom, all within a 20 to 30, 40 year period, all came crashing down the exact same time. And I remember being hooked by that. I was like, that's so crazy. Like we don't even know why this happened, but it was like a half degree change in climate. And so I remember starting to research how bad a climate had been during history and how bad it had been like these big climactic episodes have been during prehistory. And I started thinking like, wow, if that had caused all these civilizations to collapse, just like 20 half degree change in climate, which caused drought, which led to those civilizations collapsing, some of the stuff that had been happening during prehistory was so much worse than that. And that got me thinking like, how do we know that sophisticated human culture hadn't flourished, 10,000 years ago, 20,000 years ago, 100,000 years ago, 200,000 years ago, and collapsed due to climate change or natural disaster, volcanoes, comet impacts, anything like that. And that's kind of what set me on the journey, that along with the discovery of the remains and Morocco and that really got me thinking about the story we've told regarding our past and how I wasn't quite sure. And yeah, that's kind of what made me initially kind of break away from the traditional timeline that we were being taught. The term prehistory is weird, isn't it? Because it's like according to what we find, you know, I mean, how do we know what historical, if there was a great cataclysm, like if the younger dryest impact theory is correct, well, you know, how much history would be written down? What would be left? How would you find it? What would you know? Yeah. You know, we're, that's one of the things that disturbs being the most is the arrogance that some academics have to having a definitive understanding of the exact timeline of agriculture, civilization, and then modern humans. Yeah, annoys me. I feel like academics, as opposed to the alternative historians are kind of more saying, we don't know, but here's a potential hypothetical scenario that could be possible. Whereas I feel like more mainstream for one of a better word, I don't really like using that because I don't think there's such a thing as a mainstream. It's not like there's a group of people that all collectively decide. But some particularly vocal mainstream kind of historians and scientists seem to claim to know absolute truth about the past. And that's just stupid. Like how can anyone know about what happened 100,000 years ago or 200,000 years ago? And it kind of gets me a little bit rolled up. Because at the end of the day, none of us know what happened back then. So I think a lot more possibilities are possible than what many people appreciate. And did you ever see there was a video documentary back in the day, something about the mysteries of this finks? And there was this archeologist that was mocking Graham Hancock's ideas in Dr. Robert Shawx ideas about the timeline saying talking about things that existed pre 10,000 years. And he was saying, what evidence is there of any civilization from 10,000 years ago? This was literally, I think, around the same time that they discovered to go backly-tapping. Like that this guy was mocking it. I think slightly thereafter they discovered go backly-tapping, which threw everything into a tizzy. Because now you've got something that was absolutely covered, they believe intentionally somewhere in the neighborhood of 11,000 years ago. Yeah, I think go backly-tapping is the biggest kind of smoking gun. For at least for the idea that civilization is older and more complex than the traditional model suggests, because obviously, as you say, it's like 12,000 years old. And it's massive megalithic pillars. Like, I mean, you know about go backly-tapping, probably most people listening to this one about go backly-tapping. But it's such a clear sign that sophisticated human culture was present way earlier than the conventional timeline suggests. And I think that at least should throw among your engines to a lot of these people's ideas regarding human civilization and when it began. Because clearly, the toolkit for civilization existed 12,000 years ago. So how why couldn't it have existed a little bit earlier than that? And why, if it existed then, did it then take another 6,000 years for it to emerge in ancient sumo, which is the kind of traditional thought to be the earliest civilization? So go backly-tapping is fascinating. I love it. It's a really interesting site. I think it will one day be classed to civilization. I'm almost certain that when enough time passes, we'll kind of look at that. And because it's a whole culture, the whole touch to Peloculture, there's like 14 sites at least. And they all have this kind of megalithic architecture. They all have shared symbolism. They all are clearly connected. Like, it's crazy how it's not defined as anything other than hunter-gatherers. And even if you think that hunter-gatherers build geometrically tepe, then you need to massively update the definition of what a hunter-gatherer is. Because clearly they had surplus. They weren't just building these sites in their spare time. And yeah, it's a truly paradigm shifting site. But I mean, everyone knows about geometrically tepe now. But not everyone. But also as spectacular as what they've discovered so far is, they have only unearthed 5% of it, which is even more bizarre. Because you've got so much stuff that's underground. You have no idea what's on those pillars. There's speculation that one of the pillars from go back to Tepe that is unearthed is some sort of a calendar of events. And they believe that it depicts some sort of a disaster. Like that these whatever, how they're making these images to be associated with either an impact or something. But there's a timeline that's inscribed in these pillars. Yeah, there's like a study that was written or a paper that was written. And then they think it's the pillar 43, I think it is. It's kind of like a cosmic calendar. And it's like almost a prediction model of an impact that could happen already has happened. And it's like a warning for the future. That is still disputed. But there's been good research that's done into that that suggests that's what it is. And it's certainly a site that has cosmic alignments. And it has been built with the stars in mind, which is something that we can say about so many ancient sites around the world, which is another thing that isn't really considered by quote unquote, mainstream archaeology, perhaps as much as it should be. So yeah, it's a fascinating site. And I really think it displays a lot about how human ingenuity and civilization for, I mean, people get a bit stuck with the word civilization because we have this very narrow definition of what civilization is. And basically based on the old model of Mesopotamia, which is ancient sumon, because that was the earliest known civilization for so long. We kind of constructed this whole idea about what a civilization is purely based on Mesopotamia. But I don't see why that has to be what civilization is, because that was just one civilization. And just because that was the earliest one we'd found for a long time, and still is thought of as such. doesn't mean that that's the only way that humanity can flourish, because humans are so adaptable, we do so many different things, and we're clever in different ways, and we change to different environments. And I think that definition has really kept a lot of people boxed in when thinking about how sophisticated human culture could flourish in different places and different environments, and with different pressures. And I think that's forced people to not consider what other possibilities are out there. I think it's even more fascinating if you consider the fact that ancient sumon and that part of the world from about 6,000 years ago is where they're sort of hanging their hat, saying that this is the birthplace of civilization. But if you do have this evidence of Go-Bekli-Tape, and then we are talking about some sort of an ancient civilization that lived 12,000 years ago, like what happened? What happened? Like what was the gap between that? And then it took 6,000 years before they started civilization back up again, sort of a reimagining of civilization, which makes you really, at least makes me really consider the possibility of a cataclysm, because if the people that survived, whatever they would be, you know, I mean, they would probably be living off the land, they'd probably be barely getting by and barbaric for a long, long time. And if it really took 6,000 years to kind of like settle down again, that is fascinating to me. Yeah. And it all ties into this idea that we've had that agriculture leads to civilization, but there's that bizarre thing that agriculture appears in multiple different places that pretty much the exact same time all over the world. And that's never made sense to me, because if agriculture was such a kind of vital invention for civilization to flourish, then why did no one invent it for, you know, about 310,000 years? Right. And then in South America, in Mesopotamia, in ancient China, and you could argue there's other different places that say there's like South America and the central America, I mean, you could argue that's potentially connected, but a lot of people say it isn't. So how can agriculture, if it's such an incredible invention, be invented by multiple people at the same time, and then but no one else thought of it before. I mean, it doesn't make sense to me. It doesn't make any sense. It doesn't make any sense. that it wouldn't figure out seeds. Like how do you not know eventually that these seeds are dropping, and then the seedlings that are coming out of the ground? Just that seems pretty logical and easy connection. And then you'd say, oh, well, if we gather these seeds and go plant them over there, you know, maybe we can get some fruit trees over here. Yeah. Oh, look at that. It worked. Like that doesn't, that seems like you'd figure that out in one lifetime. I know. I think the idea is that I do always has been that it's because of the climate, right? And because of the Holocene, which is, which began around 12,000 years ago, as we came out of that and we had kind of stable climate conditions that we still live in today, that's what enabled the invention of agriculture. Right. But then the question I always ask is, what about all the other warm periods that have come in the past? If as the idea is that, you know, stable climate led to agriculture, then why couldn't such a thing have happened in the EMEA period 120,000 years ago? There's been four distinct warm periods that have lasted for like over 10,000 years while modern humans have been around, at least. And obviously these Morocco remains of Homo sapiens. It's unlikely that they're the earliest Homo sapiens that ever lived. They're just the earliest we've found. So we could be even older than that. So considering we've been through four distinct warm periods before the Holocene, and if the argument is that the Holocene was what led to the invention of agriculture due to the stable climate, then why couldn't it have happened in the earlier warm periods? That's a question I've always asked myself and been fascinated by. And the real problem is there would be very little evidence of any. Yeah. So this is the preservation problem. And this is something I talk about in my videos. So I kind of always ask the question, like, what if human culture had flourished in the EMEA in for example, which was from 130 to 115,000 years ago, what realistically would survive? Because it's such a vast, vast length of time that it's really unlikely, at least as far as I can tell. And obviously I'm not a scientist. I'm not like a, you know, a materialist. I'm not any kind of, I'm just a guy. I'm not even a historian technically. But as far as I can tell, it's extremely hard for these, for any materials, but even our modern materials in our huge civilization that, you know, eight billion people in industrial society sending rockets to space, you know, all the crazy stuff that we're doing. Even us, if we disappear tomorrow, I think it would be extremely unlikely that pretty much anything would survive when you get up to these huge timescales of like 100,000 years. So I've been doing quite a lot of, you know, research into this. And because I don't, I obviously don't want to, you know, get things wrong and put falsehoods out there and mislead people. I don't want to look like a dickhead in front of like, and find millions of people or whatever. So I've been trying to like, you know, debunk myself or play devil's advocate to myself on this point because, you know, that's the best way to make your argument airtight and no one's really out there debunking me. I don't know if that's because I'm right because like, no, and those me maybe that would change after a show like this, but I've been really looking into the kind of degradation of modern materials as much as I can and trying to work out how much would survive from a civilization like ours if we disappeared tomorrow in 100,000 years time. So if you like someplace like London or Manhattan, what would be left in 100,000 yeah, of like an actual modern city and the scary truth is it's almost nothing like they're really as far like in town and also some of the buildings they were just deteriorating, they would go like concrete would crack and you get, you know, two in there and freeze the weathering and over these huge timescales of like 5,000 years, 10,000 years, they would just crumble down into dust and be absolutely imperceptible. Just 10,000 years. I think so. Obviously these, I mean, I'm just doing this off the top of my head. I haven't got any notes in front of me or anything. As far as I could tell from my research, it's going to be a few like 10,000 years, 20,000 years, max. It's not going to get up to these timescales of 100,000 years. So if you do add in, if you think about what Manhattan would look like in 100,000 years, it's almost nothing. I would say it was nothing to be nothing and it would just get overrun by trees again. Yeah, because there's just, it's just such an incredible amount of time that all these materials that we build with are just going to corrode and they're going to, they're going to rust away. If they're metal, is they're going to oxidize? They're going to flake until they're just tiny little fragments that just disperse in the sedimentary record and they're just invisible to see and same with concrete, same with, even things like glass. I've heard a lot of people say that glass would potentially survive because glass is a, you know, it's a very durable material and glass would survive a long time, but glass in the form of a human made recognizable artifact isn't going to survive in that form. It's going to get crushed. It's going to break away into tiny little nano fragments into silica grains that are just invisible in the kind of archaeological record when you get up to these huge levels of time. And yeah, I mean, there's, I would say almost nothing would survive that long. And again, with the caveat that I'm just some random dude who investigated this on the internet and researched this myself, not a scientist. If anyone out there is a material scientist, I encourage them to reach out to me, but as far as I can tell, there are very few things that could possibly survive that long. I mean, we're pretty crazy fucking apes. Like we do crazy shit. So things like nuclear weapons, like we test nuclear weapons in the atmosphere. You could argue if we knew when to look and what to look for, we could see traces of plutonium in the atmosphere from our nuclear weapons testing or you could see on nuclear waste deposits, or things like carved stone. Because stone obviously survives a very long time. Human carved stone, you'd be able to find that. But we do find that. We find stone tools, but just because ancient humans use stone tools, doesn't mean they didn't use anything else. It's just stone is the most likely thing to survive. And the crazy thing is, like do you know how many sites we have, homo sapiens sites from more than 100,000 years ago? Oh man. Nine. We have nine sites, nine glimpses, nine snapshots into over 200,000 years of history, nine moments in time. And we use that to extrapolate out what every single human was doing for nine globally. Nine globally, yeah. This episode is brought to you by Woop. You probably heard me talk about Woop before, but if you hadn't, here is the rundown. With Woop, the goal isn't just to live longer. It's to live better. Well, Woop sent me their latest tracker, the Woop 5.0. And I love it. I love all the new features, especially the new battery. It lasts for over two weeks on a single charge. So you never miss a beat. But there's one new feature that's really, really exciting. Health span is a totally new feature on the Woop app that shows how fast your body is aging. And if you skew younger or older than your actual age, helping you slow your aging down, so you can keep doing what you love. It pulls from nine metrics back by science like sleep consistency, heart rate zones, and VO2 max to give you a personalized Woop age. Join Woop.com slash JRE and get a free trial. That's join.woop.com slash JRE for one month free of Woop. Check it out. And where are they mostly? Africa. And so what do they find? Like what is the evidence? It's usually capes and it's usually just, you know, remains of five hits and stone tools. And that's kind of it. And so we see that and we think, okay, they were just lifting caves and you stone tools. Right. But it's nine sites, nine moments in time for 200,000 years. Well, the problem is there's people that essentially live like that right now in some parts of the world, which is really weird, right? Because we always want to think about technology and advancement of civilization being sort of universal, but it's really not. You know, there's people that are living a subsistence lifestyle right now. There's people that are uncontacted right now. And the same time as Elon Musk sending us. Yes, rocket's the Mars and ship. Right. I mean, that that's the weirdest ones is when you see them get invaded in the Amazon. When you see them contact these people and they're pointing bows and arrows at helicopters. And, you know, they're naked. Yeah, exactly. When we're so adaptable humans could do so many different things. As you say, right now we're sending rockets to space and people are living in very traditional ways of life. And that just because we find traditional ways of life in a repeat, nine sites to cover 200,000 years, in my view, that's just what we can see. That's just the own that kind of points to my point of regarding what would possibly survive. Because if you think of all the human life stories, cultures that have potentially existed for our whole species of existence. If we only have nine little glimpses from, and to be fair, that nine is, you could say it's up to 15 because the some sites are debated. But either way, it's a tiny, tiny, tiny amount of human, you know, signs of human life. Just because in that fragment, in that snapshot, in that slither, all we see is some humans with stone tools in caves. Doesn't mean that nothing else was happening. Well, a good piece of evidence to that that would point in that direction is Egypt. Because Egypt, even if you accept the conventional timeline of Egypt, which is 2,500 BC for the Great Pyramid, the goal, look at the rest of the world at 2,500 BC. You don't see anything like that. Nothing even close. Yeah, they were clearly even if you kind of look at the conventional model of history, the ancient Egyptians were wildly ahead of everyone. Everyone is just so weird. It's so weird. And that's, that's if you, and the conventional model doesn't really give us any explanations of how they would do and what they would do. And they arrogantly dismiss any other explanations, which is really weird. When you're talking about these immense structures that are baffling, yeah, absolutely baffling to anybody who's being honest. Yeah. What is your take on these Italian researchers that are looking at the tomography and they're looking at these things that they believe are underneath the Great Pyramid and some other structures in Egypt? Yeah, the, what's it called? Like SARS-toppler. I mean, I don't know. I'm always a little bit suspicious when you make sensationalist claims with new technology. And that doesn't mean it's wrong. I just, that just goes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yes, because it's bonkers. He's what they're saying is two kilometers deep underneath the Great Pyramid. The structures and there's hundreds of meters of these pylons, these pillars that are in uniform positions with some sort of a coil wrapped under ram. Yeah. What is that? Is that real? And they, they reproduce it in multiple different scans. But I don't know what they're seeing. I don't understand the technology. Understand where the errors could be like what, what could possibly cause it to glitch like that. Yeah. I mean, I don't know. I would love it to be true obviously because you know, I would love it. I think you're not sure. That's the problem. The problem is the same problem that I have with UFOs and everything else. It's been true. 100%. So it really clouds my judgment. And then I have to get my analytical mind to say shut up. Yeah. Let's look at this, honestly. But I mean, I think, I mean, there's definitely something below the geese plateau. Like that's always been written about in ancient sources and these, these kind of scans and then people gonna, do you have stories of people going down into labyrinths that aren't accepted by Egyptology? And there's definitely massive mysteries surrounding geese are in the construction of the pyramids and what could potentially be below the pyramids and this kind of new pyramid scan project has the potential, I think, to make big progress in understanding what is below geese are. But I don't know. Until this better data out there, I'm not gonna, you know, jump to any conclusions and declare that this is like evidence of, you know, a lost advance technology civilization. No, you can't. But I am so excited about just the possibility that they're right because if they are right, that throw, that's the greatest monkey wrench into history that's ever existed because explain away that with ancient people with stone tools and or copper, or explain that away. They probably try me because it already doesn't make sense how their explanation for the construction of the pyramids being wooden slaggers and stone shizzles or whatever they say, it already doesn't make sense. It's already so ridiculous that I wouldn't even be surprised if they try to explain away these. Well, it'll discredit them because the problem is if it does indicate that the pyramid is something other than a tomb, you know, there's not, I don't even see any evidence that the great pyramid at geese, I mean, what's the evidence that that was a tomb? I mean, I don't think they've ever found a body in that. It's just a chamber which they've called the Kings Chamber. Right. I mean, I'm not an expert in ancient Egypt by any respect, but it's always baffled me that they're so determined that the pyramids are tombs just because some later pyramids have had, you know, mummies and pharaohs and sarcophagi found inside them, but that doesn't mean anything. And that doesn't mean that they built it. That also could mean that the pharaoh decided that it was his and wanted to be buried inside of it and it had existed for thousands of years before they ever even got there. And you can find bodies in like, you know, buildings today and that doesn't mean the purpose of that building was to be a tomb. Right. It's just very this or someone, yeah, as you say, weird assumption, it's a very weird assumption. And did you ever read any Christopher, Christopher Dunn, Christopher Dunn's work? I haven't read his book, I know a bit about it. It's interesting. I mean, he's like a serious guy, isn't he? He's like an engineer. Exactly. And he has quite serious theories that he thinks it's a power player. Yeah, which would be crazy. Especially if you add into that the Graham Hancock's ideas and some of these other people's ideas that perhaps some of these structures are far older. Well, that kind of Orion correlation and the Sphinx. Also the fact that the deeper you go into the sand, the more sophisticated the building techniques are. Yeah. That gets weird. Like larger stones. Like what happened? The whole of ancient Egypt and the Sahara desert in general just doesn't make sense to me because when you look at the Sahara desert and the fact that it was green for 9,000 years and then it stopped being green at precisely the time that we're told ancient Egypt emerged. That doesn't make sense. If that defies how civilization works, why would a civilization only emerge after the climate got worse? Right. That doesn't make sense at all. And so little research done and sub-Saharan Africa where they've actually gone into the ground and done like large scale research of these immense areas. Nothing. The Sahara desert is vast and obviously covered in sand and extremely hot, extremely difficult to survey politically unstable and there's basically been no archaeological work done across the whole. And Sahara desert is massive. It's like the whole of North Africa, right? Down to, right. I mean, it's massive. And you can fit the United States in that. If anything in there, like a whole, like, preceding civilization for 9,000 years leading up to ancient Egypt, like it's the perfect place. It's right by Mesopotamia. It's right by Egypt. And yet we have this blank spot for the 9,000 years before the development of civilization, which is kind of also the gap between, I mean, it's a little bit less than this, but the gap between Quebec, L'Tappé and the birth of civilization. We have this huge area which would have been perfect for civilization full of rivers, lakes, grasslands, perfect climate. And it's just missing. Also abundant resources where they could establish a stable civilization because they had so much food and they weren't being attacked so they could kind of... Also abundant resources where they could establish a stable civilization because they had so much food and and they weren't being attacked So they could kind of set up shop and figure some things out. Yeah over a long period of time Yeah, so my theory is that things were happening in the Sahara desert when it was green in the Greens Sahara for those nine thousand years And then because it was really quick That's what I don't think people realize is that when the Sahara desert turned from you know green lush paradise Whatever you want to call it to a desert it was like a few centuries. It's called rapid desertification and it It flipped or not overnight Obviously, but in a few centuries compared to nine thousand years is a rapid change and for any kind of culture that was living there You wouldn't have noticed it straight away, but in 50 years you'd be like fuck it's getting a bit hot Here, so I think maybe people migrated to the last stretch of green that was still available to them Which was the Nile River and then the kind of survivors or the migratory populations developed around the Nile River and using the kind of Experience and knowledge that they had from their lives and the kind of history of their cultures in the green Sahara period That is what led to ancient Egypt. I mean, that's just a well It's also just an assumption that ancient Egypt didn't exist alongside that in short or even previous to that Which is also possible Especially when you consider what Robert chalk thinks about the erosion the water erosion and the temple this finks Yeah, they kind of explanation a way of that also never made sense to me that is wind and sand because When you see pictures of the Sphinx even from when they kind of found it in the polyonic times is buried in sand Right, and there's records from the Egyptians themselves who You know took excavated effectively because it was covered in sand So if it quickly gets covered in sand How could it be eroded by wind and sand if it doesn't take very long for it to kind of get filled up with sand? Then how does wind and sand erosion even count? I've never seen anyone kind of explain that away Well though it's the walls that are the most fascinating to me because the deep fissures that clearly look like rainfall It looks like something that water does over thousands of years. Yeah, you know and when you those whales that were The whale the valley of the whales. Yeah, it's just about I don't know how many miles south But it's south of Cairo that's bonkers. Oh, that's crazy. They find your whales Hundreds of whales in the desert. That's so great. Look at that image. That's so nuts. That is so nuts. Some of them had teeth and toes So crazy So crazy and then it makes you wonder like how did those bones survive? Like why why are they there? Like how quickly did they die? How quickly did they get covered up by sediment that they could find them all these years later? Because that's the weird thing about fossils and bones in general is that most of them You're never going to find because they get eaten. They they deteriorate. They they're gone Like it's very difficult to make a fossil You know when you you think about our you know quote-unquote fossil record It's really weird because it's hard to make a fossil So we're dealing with a very small amount of beings that get turned into a fossil and that is what we're using as our understanding of like life. Yeah. Yeah, it's weird. It is weird. It is so limited I'm not sure when was the do you know when the Sahara was covered in water? I'm not even sure when that was I mean some people say that there's like a mass flood during the kind of young a dryest period Which I think is I think they're talking about millions years. I think it's bones. How old are these? whale bones supposed to be but I think Millions of years ago to assume that it was completely underwater, right? So are we talking like pangaea times like what are we talking about? But even not so long ago like you know kind of 12,000 years ago ever they had these massive River systems like the Tamara's at River system. Here it is 40 million years old. Yeah, 40 million years old What about the whales? Oh my god primitive whales primitive whales documenting. How do you say that word? Sitation how do you say that word? Sitation transition is that they say it? Sitation transition to marine life Serenians and reptiles as well shark teeth from the Genningham formation 40 to 41 million years ago this Trada and I don't say that either Wad al-Hitan belongs to middle Eocene epoch and it contains extensive vertebrae fossils with a 200 kilometer area fossils are present in high numbers and often show excellent quality of preservation the most conspicuous fossils or skeletons and Bones of whales and sea cows Seacow What's amenity you ever see the the precursor to whales like where whales came from no, what did they come from? It was an ancient animal that was like a almost like a hooved wolf See see on a dog. I mean, oh say well and animal. That's why they breed air. Of course. That man was on there. Yeah It's super weird. It's super weird It was some animal that supposedly lived on land and as real freaky looking almost kind of like dog-like Yeah, and that thing Eventually I just like swimming I'm gonna go back in one day. It said I'm never going back to the land. It's filled with assholes I'm just gonna live out here in the ocean where all you have to contend with the shark's article calls that they got of death whale Wow, that's what it looked like That's what it looked like but there's some images of it on land. I'm some depictions. Yeah, that's what it looked like That freaky thing was what whales came from that thing walked around the ground and then eventually he said yeah It's 40 million years ago is that what those skeletons are then maybe Hmm Interesting some of them maybe right because they do know that it was when whales walked in Egypt Wow I was watching I think I don't remember whose podcast it was I wish I could remember But they were we were talking to some guy that found definitive evidence of dinosaurs in Egypt So if you go back far enough There were dinosaurs living in that part of the world as well. What's that one image you just saw right there with the mouth open? Yeah, that one that's crazy looking Pre-historic whale ancestor. Look at that thing Whoa, that's crazy. There's the sea cows This image says a prehistoric sea cow was killed by a prehistoric crock Wow I need my tiger shark. I don't know boy Life is hard where there's no doors that's the problem with the ocean. There's no doors. There's nowhere to hide constant chaos It is just constant things eating things in this 3d space Well, they can go up and down and side to side and that's just nature isn't it? I'm just killing everything else. Yes This episode is brought to you by uber eats summer is here and you can now get almost anything you need for your Sunny days delivered with uber eats What do I mean by almost well? You can't get a well groomed lawn delivered, but you can get chicken Parmesan delivered a day in the sun No a bottle of rum. Yes uber eats can definitely get you that for almost almost anything delivered with uber eats order now For alcohol you must be legal drinking age. Please enjoy responsibly product availability varies by region C app for details. We made it, but we figured out doors We did we figured out walls and doors and they changed the game But when did we do that Joe? That's the question. That is because a lot of people would claim to think and the kind of consensus always is that We didn't do that until 12,000 years ago. We didn't settle down and form permanent communities until the near-lithic revolution And I think that's one of the major Paradimes if you like that we have regarding our past that simply doesn't make sense in light of new evidence I just what is that evidence that they found of wood construction from far longer than they thought Yeah, this is the colombo structure and this is something I talk about a lot in my videos because I think it's a Crazy find and I don't understand why it's not kicking out more of a fuss like if I'm the guy that has to kick up the fuss about it then I'll be that guy because basically we the idea has always been that humans were Nomadic hunter-gatherers that move with the seasons and lived in caves or just kind of walked around for all of our history Intel the near-lithic revolution the invention of agriculture 12,000 years ago and no earlier than that did we ever settle down and live in permanent settlements but The colombo structure was something they found a few years ago in modern-day Zambia and what it is is this These pieces of wood and I'll get to the point about why this would have survived in a minute because obviously You know, we're surviving this long is crazy, but there you go Yes, the colombo structure is these pieces of wood have been joined together deliberately cut and notches and connected together tapered and secured at right angles and they think it was either a kind of raised walkway like a kind of raised platform or House a dwelling a hut some kind of structure and why this is so Paradise shifting is because not only does this Kind of scream that humans potentially lived in permanent settlement So sorry, I haven't even said this this is four hundred and seventy six thousand years old so this predates homo sapiens So Allegedly allegedly as in what you mean allegedly because we yeah, yeah, I recently found out that they live 300,000 I guess it could have been us but what they they had attributes it to is homo Hado against it's who's our last common ancestor with Neanderthal so they're kind of the human species that came before homo sapiens So I guess you're right. It could have been homo sapiens And we're just not sure how old we are but it's It's kind of attribute to homo hado against this and the only reason this structure survived at all It's because pretty soon after its construction it must have fallen into a bog and then that bog kind of got solidified over by the Sun And then it was preserved in waterlogged sediment which protected it from decay for almost half a million years until It was discovered by us recently and how recent I think about five years ago Maybe it was it 2019 or something. I'm not quite sure but it's crazier So last I know the monkey wrench. Yeah, I would say it's a massive monkey wrench because Not only does it kind of really dispute this idea that we didn't settle down until You know 12,000 years ago with the Neolithic Revolution because I mean it's a structure I mean and it's just because it's so Unlikely it's so unbelievable that this would have survived but that kind of suggests that it's not the only one Right there could have been loads of these like structures everywhere and as you said Man Manhattan yeah wouldn't live wouldn't exist in a hundred thousand years So this is four hundred and seventy six thousand years. Yes ridiculous And it's just wood which is less durable than all the other things that we were talking about Yeah, and obviously people may be saying well look clearly things survive But this is an extreme edge case scenario where it's it's like so unbelievably unlikely that this wooden structure would Kind of sink into a bog and then that bog be you know Solidified over and then it would stay in that preserve like it's an end that they would find it and then they would find it exactly because you know Which were four and in seventy six thousand years in the sediment Yeah, exactly because we don't dig that far and look for anything sophisticated because we think you know nothing happened back then And then you find this and it really suggests that humans were living in much more complex societies and they what mean they the fact that they had the cognitive capacity To plan structurally engineer and build a structure completely flies in the face of what we've always thought about ancient humans because We've always had this idea that there's been this very popular idea in In kind of mainstream historical thought that humans only got smart around 50 to 60,000 years ago And that's just Homo sapiens We've always thought that other human species never got smart never achieved what we call behavioral modernity and this has always been the kind of Idea that we went through this cognitive revolution around 50 to 60,000 years ago and the the most obvious proponent of how entrenched this is in Kind of academic thought is have you ever read the book sapiens? Yes. Yeah. Yeah, yeah By you've all know a hot horror it's an extremely popular book. It saw something like 60 million copies worldwide By far the most popular book about prehistory and you know the story of Homo sapiens ever written and Sapiens didn't kind of do anything new it didn't I think Harari himself would admit this it didn't um It didn't it kind of just collected the consensus of academia and presented it in a nice digestible way to the kind of layman audience But he took this idea that's always been present in academia regarding human intelligence which is the While we've been around for quite a long time We didn't achieve behavioral modernity until 50 to 60,000 years ago and that's when we started apparently displaying complex cognitive traits like abstract thinking and planning and bearing our dead and Yeah, exactly in complex language and things like that And but this just completely flies in the face of that because if we had the capability to plan Construct an engineer a structure four hundred and seventy six thousand years ago that means The you know mainstream anthropology was off by over four hundred thousand years regarding The advent of intelligence and the advent of permanent living and that's I mean, that's quite the error Four hundred thousand years exactly so that kind of suggests they could be off by similar margins about other developmental claims because I don't know it's a big big error Well, it's also when you think about the history of the earth There are times that we know that there was like there's great bottlenecks That occurred because of some sort of a massive natural catastrophe like the Toba volcano Yeah, right the Toba volcano which was 70, 70,000 years ago Is that what it was? Brought people down to a few thousand survivors on earth Yeah, there's loads of these bottlenecks. Yeah, and you look at like kind of jastic history and Does that suggest that something happened right? Well, well, well, you're thinking about What evidence there is and then you think about well? There's no one left except a few thousand people 70,000 years ago. So it's possible that there's been this rise of some sort of a civilization and then massive catastrophe and a rebuilding Just like if we're talking about the younger driest which is in this time period We're talking about you know when you're dealing with four hundred seventy six thousand years ago fairly recent Right, yeah, right and think about the six thousand years it took for civilization to reemerge from that Now you think of Toba and You knocked down the entire population of the planet to what did they think it was? See if you can find out what the number was. I think it was very low I think it was below three thousand people on earth On earth. Yeah, just one thousand people one massive super volcano, which is by the way Just like Yellowstone It could it could it could have happened again. That motherfucker is bubbling to Here it is Potentially almost all of humanity leaving around three thousand to ten thousand humans left on a planet That's crazy. Wow And super volcanoes and the only thing there's so many of this but time period is this Jeremy? 74,000 years ago. That's quite recent. Yeah in terms of our story. Well in terms of your theory that I thought was one of the most interesting ones that you brought up That in your videos you were talking about how anatomical humans just based on what we've agreed to Based on what we found 300,000 years like what are the possibilities that there have been Civilizations that emerged and were destroyed and then there's no evidence of them. Yeah because I mean Aside from the preservation problem, which we kind of already talked talked about when you get up to these massive timescales You know very little is gonna survive especially when you think about what early humans were likely Building with yes like it's probably the things they could find in their environment right would hide plant remains You know nothing left not just look at what we know about the Amazon now Because of lidar and because of you know what is this name? Percy? Percy faucet because these people that made these journeys down there looking for these Complex civilizations that at one point in time now. We know did exist there And just a hundred years later They called those people liars because they went back to the same place and there was nothing left. Yeah That's what that's always been you know thought of as as myth or pseudoscience that it's kind of that most popular idea of loss civilizations with civilizations of the Amazon and it was always dismissed Well, here's what's really crazy have you seen Detroit? Have you seen the evidence of Detroit trees are going through houses and that's like 50 years less Or do you look at Chernobyl the the kind of exclusion zone where no one lives Already like trees everywhere and like nature is already taking root after less than half a century Yeah bizarre and then you Hundred thousand years right here stay what's gonna be left that very very little and then if you go 200,000 years I mean if if anatomically modern humans if that we've discovered them at 300,000 years What if somebody digs one up that's two million years old then what do you do? Then you gotta go oh boy Oh boy, I think there's also this thought that Neanderthals were stupid They're kind of abandoning that now too. They think they had language They had tools they had society. They definitely did there's so much evidence and this kind of puts into their cognitive revolution argument which is you know that We were the only smart species like our name that we gave ourselves. So most a pins literally means smart man It's always been the idea that we're the smartest humans and that's why we won and to be fair We did win we did win whatever you might just be the most evil. Yeah, we want the most evil It might be the luckiest ones, you know, well, we're the weakest So we probably had to be evil. We had to figure out weapons that were would be able to defeat In the Neanderthals who had by the way larger brain capacities I think they would just be intelligent as us to be that's nuts I mean that's a that's a claim that probably some people would dispute But I think there's lots of evidence that they were very smart and Well necessity is the mother of invention right and if you're Physically weaker than these other things that are as intelligent as you and far stronger Like you gotta you gotta get devious you gotta figure some stuff out, but like did we even I mean either I mean they got wiped out by something like disease or did they even get wiped out because if you even Look at the DNA of non-African humans. It's something like 20% in some populations. It's Neanderthal. Yes They're kind of still here. Well, they just sort of inner bread. Yeah, which is also weird because most species can't breed with other species Yeah, just you know, but we have very I mean we're very closely related to the under thousand. Yeah It's weird that the whole history of humans is weird and For academics to deny this possibility to me seems so short I did. I know it was silly I think we're on the brink of quite a Massive shift in all perspective regarding pricing so too and I think it has to happen where I don't mean to say this to be cruel, but they the old people have to die. It's that close isn't it? Science advances one funeral at a time Yeah, I think it doesn't take that long though to be honest. I hope it I hope it's just in the next few years There's a lot of scientists don't take care of themselves Which is also weird when you see super intelligent people that are obese and eat terrible food. Well health experts that are such Yes air quote health experts not real ones, but it is to me A great disservice in one of the things that I find very promising is that a lot of young academics are embracing a lot of alternative ideas Whether quietly or whether they're doing it publicly Yeah, I think the advent of the internet And you know shows like this or the medium of podcasting has really kind of democratized the access to information and allowed people with theories that potentially Wouldn't have been able to get out there in the the pre-internet age where they were kind of you had to go through a kind of academic Institution to get a theory heard or debated now anyone can say anything for better or worse And that can you know reach millions of people and then if it's an idea that's popular then it can kind of be in the public I and then it can be debated properly and I think that's only a good thing obviously there are negative aspects to that I think that will increase You know ideas of regarding prehistory for example I think it will crease the rate in which these things will get accepted because Once the evidence is out there and once you start you know talking about the columbar structure for example and how it completely flies in the face of Both these paradigms regarding permanent living and human intelligence It's out there now But people can look it up and people can see that this is completely kind of opposed to what we've always been taught regarding prehistory And isn't it kind of arrogant to assume that they know who built it to? That's weird too because they're did a basing in on this assumption that human beings didn't exist back then at least homo sapiens didn't exist back that Which is also being challenged over and over and over again? Yeah, the fact they based on halo against us is literally just because we found some halo against this remains like 200 kilometers away and they're like, okay, I mean it could have been to be fair But it could have been but I mean right now there's people that are living in Africa and 200 kilometers away from them are apes So if one day they found structures, you know in the future said oh these are made by chimpanzees. Yeah That's kind of crazy. Yeah, it's kind of great. I mean that's the thing about history It's all based on massive assumptions. It's not like a hard science. It's interpreting evidence So that's fine like that's how we do it, but sure that's why I don't let the only way to do it right now It's the only way to do it so why don't get why people make these definitive conclusions and then don't allow anybody to kind of Speculate or hypothesize about anything else. It's gatekeeping It's gatekeeping. It's academic gatekeeping It's also this these people that have been teaching this one thing forever being threatened by the fact they were wrong The last thing in academic wants a lot that wants to hear is like you wrote this book this stupid book this book misled people for decades You were so wrong Like they will fight it with every ounce of their being because it's essentially their identity Their identity is being the gatekeeper of their understanding of human history Yeah, they built a whole career around it and they've you know as you say it's their identity They've been the knowledge the keeper of knowledge on a particular subject and then it's gross because it's ours It's the whole planet. It's all the human beings It's like free to have a few nerds who you wouldn't want to hang out with in real life And these are the guys that are telling us We can't explore these things and those are the people that are attacking Graham Hancock with every possible insult Calling it the most dangerous show on television like this, but it's also It's so revealing because it's so obvious that if you watch the show you like wait, this is the most dangerous show on TV Asian apocalypse. Yeah, like how is that dangerous? He's like just talking about these bizarre structures that exist that seem to defy our modern understanding of how things are built. Yeah, and when I I mean I don't agree with absolutely everything Graham Hancock says But when I look at you know these ideas of You know human intelligence potentially stretching back 500,000 years as displayed by the Columbia structural permanent living And I would argue that it could go back a lot further than that So when you look at when you kind of take into account that these abilities could have stretched back half a million years When I then look at someone like Graham's work it seems So plausible. I don't see why it's seen us so outrageous that because 12,000 years ago Which is kind of when he proposes that could have been a you know a sophisticated civilization that was potentially wiped out by a Cataclysm when you look at that from the perspective of oh, yeah, we've been intelligent for half a million years It doesn't seem very it doesn't seem very plausible to me. Not only that. It's 450,000 years after the first structure now Yeah But no one's even no one's talking about this. That's which weird is it no one's talking about that it's just me It's like those academics as well that found it to be fair the the guy that founded the archaeologist that found it said that he Never could have imagined that pre-home escaping again It may not be pre-home escaping it could be home escaping but he said it's completely paradigm shifting that they had the capacity to plan and build something like this But again There's no there's no fuss about it. It's just a paper was written and it was put out there and then it's that's it Well these things take time. I guess yeah I mean more these conversations and more people have to understand that these things are being discovered and that we are kind of confused about so many things about human history and We're being told that no there's people at the universities have all the answers and that it's literally not possible that they're telling the truth It's not possible and that's why I get so excited about the structures under pyramid because it's a gigantic fuck you It would be the most gigantic fuck you of all time if they found out those scans are accurate and there's these pillars that are wrapped in coils that go down like hundreds of meters and then below them There's additional structures and the whole I think it's who connects it as well. Yes Which is like if Christopher Donna's correct about it being some sort of a power plant and that reveals like how the thing worked and functioned That's way more advanced than us like what is that? In some ways they already own I mean we can't explain how they did it even They kind of conventional model of history. I know and we lie. Yeah, I've talked to so many people like when I had Zoe Oh, yes here a news explaining to me national project. It was the national project like oh That'll fix it we should make our national project to breathe underwater and fly through the air Like we should make that our national project to go to the go to other planets and live there in case earth gets blown up What are you talking about? Fucking talking about Yeah, they just don't want it. It does kind of make me worry like I don't really delve into the kind of conspiracy side of things because I mean I just I just take kind of based in not me. I go right in I do I do in my own time and stuff I mean in my own head and stuff but in terms of like where one do you dive into in your own head the most? I sometimes combine the UFO one with the ancient civilization one I do too And I think what happens if you know a civilization from a million years ago got so advanced that We can't see them and then that's what the UFO thing is It's just someone from this earth that doesn't really need the space anymore and they're just watching us Yeah, sometimes think about that Well, there's a little bit about my videos because I don't need to give anyone any more ammunition to send for me Well, there's also the genetic engineering one. Oh, you mean like that. Yeah Like why humans are so different than everything else in the first place Like that's weird the doubling of the human brain size over a period of two million years is really weird Is that referred to is that from Habilist Araxis what is that is that I don't know. It's uh, but Google it so her people say that and I've always thought I guess that must be From home a habeast a hauma or Araxis from just in years ago an immense leap That is like turns mechanics used to say it would be bizarre if it was a liver of an order The doubled over a period of that amount of time But the fact that it is the very organ that allows us to contemplate and to understand Human existence in the first place and that that organ doubled over a period of two million years like What happened? Yeah, yeah, he's got the wacky theory because he thinks it's still sipping mushrooms I think there could be something to do that. I mean because you know ancient cultures have always Used psychedelic substances and basically all the way up until Western Civil society kind of took hold. It's always been an integral path Human culture and sure society and then us in our modern world have decided to outlaw that and I think that's A tragic mistake to be honest with you. It is and I think history will reveal that. Yeah one day and I think that is one of the also Also one of the good things about discussions that are happening on the internet that are kind of Unchecked and untethered by academia so you could talk about these things bigger blank brains Sony and website says it's actually tripled over the time we've tracked it Slow increase from six to two million but a larger increase 800 to 200 thousand years ago And then article goes that's when the aliens landed Yeah study even by that though because Hado against is have the same cranial capacity is off us and they go back 900 thousand years so The thing I saw before I maybe that's a Rexis that's what can happen. Oh brains don't fossilize Theory leaving a cavity inside the brain case part of how they know some of the simple Sometimes head of insulate the cavity harm me and natural endocast scientists also make artificial endocast to study like the ones above fascinating Fascinating yeah, we're aware to creature well Did you say it's 2017 that they discovered modern humans 300 thousand years ago? I think so. Yeah And where was that? AC Morocco and so that's Morocco right Cretia. Well, did you say it's 2017 that they discovered modern humans 300,000 years ago? I think so. Yeah. And where was that? It's in Morocco. And so that's Morocco, right? You said that. So imagine if they found something similar in China. Well, that would fuck everything up, because it's the South Africa thing and that would really doubt really fuck everything up. But I mean, it could happen. Well, it wouldn't really even fuck it up, but we would just push it back. I guess so, yeah. But we're I mean, we're not even supposed to have left Africa until this time with the cognitive revolution. And that's always been the one of the points like, oh, look, we got smart. We left Africa, 16,000 years ago. But that's never made sense to me either, because homo erectus managed to migrate out of Africa and colonize loads of Asia and parts of Europe over a million years ago. And if they're supposedly, you know, inferior to us, then how can they make this massively prenatal against this? Did it 600,000 years ago? And if they're supposedly inferior to us, they did this. And so I mean, I don't know. I try not to delve into the out of Africa thing, because it's, I guess, a little bit controversial sometimes. It does. Well, it gets controversial when you bring an aliens to it, because aliens become racist. It becomes racist, because now you're not a crediting the Africans to building the pyramids. You know, which is really true. That's how that makes sense to me that, because it clearly wasn't white people that built the pyramids. Well, I watched this very bizarre discussion between some guy that was trying to claim that it wasn't Africans that built the pyramid that it was white people that built the pyramids. So there are people that have this sort of racist idea of the construction of the pyramids, but you can't attach that to everyone is speculating about the construction, because it's too, the things are too weird. It's too weird. And let's assume that it was Africans that built the pyramids. But if we are assuming that like, how were they so much smarter than everyone alive today? How are they so much smarter? Let's say it's 4,500 years ago. How were they so much more? What was going on? Like what happened? Did they get visited by aliens? Did they discover something that allowed their understanding of physics to be just so much greater than everybody else who's ever lived? Like what did they discover? Like what were they encountering? What were they consuming? What were they doing? What were they teaching each other? We lost so much in the burning of the library of Alexandria, right? Yeah, yeah. That's, that's, it's quite sad really, isn't it to be honest? Like there would have been a lot in, I'm not sure 100% what happened with that. I'm not sure if it was one burning or several burns. Yeah, but it's clearly a lot was lost. But then then the question is like, what did they even know? Like what if it's older than that? Like what if all that stuff would have, you know, this is one of the things that Zoe Hawass was very reluctant to, he's like, what is this? I was talking about the Kings list that goes back 30,000 years. Yeah, what if that's accurate? Yeah, it's the Sumerian one does too. Yeah, it gets real squirrely when you only want to accept some parts of history. And that ties into the Greens Sahara thing that I was talking about. Like yeah, they have the King list that go back this far. And yeah, we say that some of them are myth and to be fair, they have kings that range for like a thousand years, which is a bit weird. Probably not. I mean, unless you're talking some kind of alien thing than that probably wasn't human. But that might just be because it would have been a long time ago for them too when they were writing these King lists. Sure, but it doesn't mean that their civilization only started with the first dynasty. What we've decided is the line between myth and fact because that's a modern interpretation after the fact. They never made such distinction. Yeah, and this idea that they lived a thousand years. Well, have you ever read the North Korea depictions of Kim Jong-un's first day playing golf? Yeah, it's propaganda. Is that yeah. I mean, he made like nine holes in one. He was the greatest golfer of all time. Exactly. You know what I'm saying? So it's like you're writing about kings. He lived a thousand years, fire came from his dick. You know, like what are we talking about? We don't know. We don't know what they were writing. We don't know who wrote it. We don't know how fantastical it was. How much hyperbole was involved. But we do know that we accept the King's list when it gets to around 2500 BC. We start accepting it. Yeah. But you don't accept this possibility that it might actually go far, far, far earlier than that. And the whole, the pyramids thing kind of by plays into the fact that stone is one of the only thing that survives and pyramids that these massive stone constructions like ironically, they would be one of the only things from our, not that they really count as our civilization, but from the modern world, the pyramids would be one of the only things that could survive in 100,000 years. So it makes you think like, how long have they been then? I think the Egyptians definitely undertook some, some kind of construction project around the time of 2500 BC. Because there's records of them saying they did stuff, but that doesn't mean because they they have all these records, but there's no records of how they built it. Well, they also, the buildings that they made that were after 2500 BC are dog shit. So how much was this they just immediately forgot how to do it again. It's right. They were trying to copy and they just couldn't do it. They didn't have the math. They didn't have the engineering. The stones are smaller. It's no one's claim, they didn't claim credit for the pyramids, which is weird. Yeah. Why would you not claim it? It's all weird. It's all weird. It's, uh, it's the weirdest, right? So it's the one thing that if you're a logical person and you think you know the timeline of history, you think you understand human civilization, you think you understand like how intelligence evolved and how technology and innovation evolved. And you see that you're like, oh, I don't know shit. I don't know shit. Like how's that statue so big and perfectly symmetrical? That crazy. How are these just these vases that they don't understand? Oh, it's not a replica. This is a three days. And this is a 3D model of an actual vase from Egypt. Yeah. That did some good welcome. It's not many people like, uh, on top of that. So it's a Christopher Don, give this to us. I think he did. It's probably him. Yeah. Um, but, you know, Ben from Uncharted X, he's done a lot of work on these things. Like those, just those vases are very bizarre, very bizarre. And they appear why the stuff of the Egyptian dynasties. Yeah. And they forget to do that as well. We have no idea how they made them. We don't know what tools they used. Anybody that says that they do, you're lying. You really don't know. You can't know that these things are perfectly symmetrical. They weren't turned on a lathe because they have handles the way they measure them when you look at like the deviation from round and like how it's it's like a thousandth of a human hair. Yeah. It's crazy. And it's made from incredibly hard granite. Right. It's the hottest stone to do that. So what are we talking about? Like, who are these people? Yeah. This is kind of crazy. And then you have the statues that are perfectly symmetrically, the facers that just incredible and massive. Yeah. Huge. I believe it. So they moved them there. And then they carved them perfectly symmetrically. It looks like they're 3D printed. Yeah. It's so strange. It just screams at a lost technology. At least. Yeah. Screens that these people had some sort of information and some sort of education that is like on a different path of our, we went the way of the internal combustion engine and transistors and electronics. And it seems like they went a totally different way, but maybe even further. Yeah. But we're we're scrambled in like our pathway to advancement is the only one that the human mind and all its infinite creativity can conceive of. And this is another point regarding like, you know, culture that could have flourished back in 100,000 years ago or whatever. We're always looking for ourselves in the past. Yeah. But there's so many different ways that we could have gone because why did it have to be mass farming, mass population growth? And then as you say kind of industrial progress, it could have been so many different forms of human development and human lives. And well, it could have been if they had enough animals, they mostly ate animals. Yeah. Well, fish or something. Yeah. Mostly ate animals and fish, which is probably healthier for you anyway. You know, really what grain is is survival food. Yeah. We all got like shorter and less healthy. What happened? Yeah. Because we didn't get the right amount of protein. And our jaws like shrunk because people are eating gruel. Like if you look at part of the world where people are eating a lot of like porridge and shit, their jaws get really small. Yeah. That's not good for us. No, it's a fucking terrible for we're devolving because of our diets, which is really strange. But if you think about this time and especially that part of the world where there was so much abundant natural resources that animal agriculture seems super simple, it is a corral, a bunch of animals, you build a fence and then you eat them. And you don't really have to grow rice. So many different ways that culture could have flourished. Yeah. And we always look in for and we just don't know where to look as well in the record. Like one point people always make in like my comments and stuff to try and debunk me is like, oh, we would see pollution. We would see kind of lead signals in the atmosphere or whatever if there was like a big civilization 100,000 years ago. But that's only the case if it was someone on the scale of us now. Because or if they were doing it the way we're doing it. That's the thing we were talking about a completely different pathway. Clearly there's some technology that they had that we don't understand. When you talk about the drill holes that they find or the way they had carved out these enormous massive chunks of stone and we're apparently going to move them. We don't want to finish up this good. Yeah. Yeah. That's crazy. The unfinished objects that that's bananas. It's so many of these things that they they cut out of the ground and absolutely moved our bananas. So it's like what kind of technology? Why are we assuming that it's going to be some internal combustion engine that sprays out terrible pollution? What if they had figured something out? I would say as entirely possible. It's entirely possible because we're going to eventually. If you give us another thousand years, you will not be able to recognize any of this nonsense that we use for technology today, especially when AI gets involved. Like, did you see that thing where quantum a quantum computer supposedly went one second back in time? I did. I was reading that. Is that bullshit? No, they discovered it six years ago though. It's not new. What? Six years ago? They were still at the story of 2019. But still, it went back in time. Yeah, wait. Wait. One second and the way in quantum. What does that even mean? Exactly. Exactly. That's mad. But that's us. Now imagine that technology that was science fiction 20 years ago. Right? Well, go back to like the movie Alien and look at their stupid computers that they had. That's what they thought people were going to have when they were star-faring people. Now, think of this quantum computer experiment where it goes back in time one second and then go for it a thousand years. Which is nothing. When we're talking about 4,500 years ago, we might be off by a thousand. So go to 5,500 years ago. If you're listening to John Anthony West, he thinks it's 34,000 years. That's what he thinks. That sounds so crazy. But then you look at the length of time we've been around and it's still quite recent. Yeah. It's still quite recent. And that lines up with this thing. It doesn't. That's the processional cycle. How much evidence of a quantum computer from 34,000 years ago would be left? So we did get pelted by comments which we know happened. That's a fact. I saw an estimate. I think it was from NASA, but I'm not 100% sure. But it was from a kind of scientific journal. The earth is hit by what they define as a cataclysmic impact every 100,000 years. So that's an impact that's capable of wiping out a third of today's population. Every 100,000 years. And 100,000 years sounds like a long time. But again, we've been around for 300,000 years. So theoretically, we've been hit by a cataclysmic impact three times already during our story. And that both has the potential to completely wipe out anyone that was doing anything sophisticated, but also to wipe the record clean. Yeah. And that's not the only thing you've got, you know, supervolcane cells we talked about. You've got pole shifts. You've got solar flares. You've got glaciers, just scraping across the landscape and just completely erasing the record. You've got sea level rise. Sea level rise is a massive one because, I mean, where have we always lived by the coasts? And if you look at the kind of fluctuation of sea level rise over the last 100,000 years, 200,000 years, 300,000 years, sea level is going in and out by hundreds of kilometers at a time and nothing is going to be left. Right. Wild stuff. I know. It's crazy. It is wild stuff. But again, if someone is a historian, and they got into this, someone's an archaeologist and they got into this because they have this fascination for it for them to become professors and then start teaching and writing books about this stuff and not still be fascinated by the new stuff is to me so weird. It's like you miss the whole reason why you got into this in the first place. You got into this in the first place is because you're trying to figure out what happened. How did we get to this point? And if there's evidence that shows that we don't have the full picture and you're ignoring that or dismissing that but the thing is when you go through these kind of systems and I've sort of got experience of this obviously I've never a professional academic or anything like that but you know, I did history for four years. I was kind of inside and I got to the point where it was almost, you know, it was do this as a career become a professional academic or not. It's very hard to kind of even think this way because everyone around you is thinking within these boxes that we've created for ourselves. And so it's very hard to kind of open your mind and you kind of have to do it in private as well because no one else is talking in those terms around you and you're surrounded by people that think in quite limited terms and I don't say that to kind of be offensive or, you know, doubt any of the culture. Exactly. It's the culture and in these that no one is, it's very hard to think outside the box when you're kind of in that culture and I think that's kind of what creates these, you know, rigid systems of thought. It's also kind of fear-based because it's not just discouraged. They'll attack you. I mean they attack each other even when they are within the box. It's just to think about the clovis first issue. Yeah, I mean that's the best example. It's the best example because that guy was destroyed. He's going to be a great industry. Yeah, destroyed Jackson Mars and they were right. They were destroyed for theorizing that human beings had lived in North America and that it arrived in North America far before 13,000 years ago. That was the established timeline of the clovis people and then when they found these footprints in New Mexico that are 22,000 years old. Yeah. And they hated that as well. They hated that. Of course they hated it. But they hated it just because they were wrong. It's all it is, man. It's human ego. It's so gross and this brings me back to psychedelics because what it would psychedelics do that's most important. Well, the dissolving of the ego. It's one of the most important aspects of it. It makes you realize the folly of your ways. You know, and all of these people that are supposed to be the academics are supposed to be the enlightened ones. They're not enlightened. They have information and they hold that information like it's their identity. And they're right about a lot of things because they haven't studied it and they do deserve credit what they've done is amazing and that the understanding that these academics, these archaeologists and historians can give us of our world and our history is really cool. It's really awesome. But there's a whole lot more out there and for them to pretend and dismiss people like they should embrace people at Graham Hancock and then they should correct him when he's saying something that is wrong. Yeah. But instead of lying and then calling him a racist and saying all these terrible things about him, well, that just shows me that you don't really have an argument and you're trying to protect your identity. Your identity is the gatekeeper of this information that is not yours to gatekeep. It's for the whole human race to understand what the hell happened. Yeah. And I wish that, you know, we've seen a surge in interest in ancient history and prehistory you know, the story of our species through people like Graham Hancock who've kind of created a massive interest in this subject. But instead of embracing that, they see it as a threat and I think that's really sad to be honest. And yeah, I think it kind of hurts the discipline in general because if you kind of like embrace that and like brought him into the table and spoke to him and kind of agreed to have the discussion then it would create a much kind of more healthy debate around these things. When you talk about the Clovis kind of narrative, it because we think that we know what happened and thus we know what didn't happen. It means that people aren't even looking for stuff that now we know was there. So they didn't dig deeper than the Clovis layer until very recently because they knew that humans weren't around until Clovis. But obviously that was wrong. So they could have missed so much stuff and they probably did. I mean have you seen that there's like a to be thought I think Graham mentioned it on the show. The Saruti Mastodon site which is like 130,000 years ago in America. I mean if that's human and which it kind of looks like it is. That's the beta bullet, right? Isn't that the beta bullet? Yeah. Because the way the bones are broken, it could have been from some sort of an accident or an avalanche or something, right? Yeah, it is debatable. But it's also it could be human. It could be easily be human because it kind of looks like human markings on bones. It looks like scraping the scraping the marrow out of the bones or some kind of primitive. But why couldn't it have been human? I mean it didn't necessarily have to be homo sapien, but why couldn't another human species have got to the Americas? Well it seems like they certainly could have if they were here 22,000 years ago. Exactly. What was that time? Why did they figure it out then? And how did they do it? Right? That's the question. How did they do it? And we know that people were seafaring from what was the earliest seafarers? You could argue that Homo erectus seafet 800,000 years ago, which is just mental. Could you really? Well they reached places that were isolated and some people would say they kind of floated there accidentally. Who's there is possible? But it seems a bit weird that you then survive and colonize a place. See that's where it gets so squirrely. If Homo erectus made a boat, that's bananas. I mean Neanderthals were definitely making boats and this points to how intelligent they were. They were making sophisticated boats and sailing across the Mediterranean and colonizing places like Crete well over 100,000 years ago. Well we know that the north-central people, they arrived by boat from Africa 60,000 years ago. And so at least then people were seafaring. Oh it definitely. And probably way earlier than that. So why would we assume they wouldn't get to the Americas? That seems crazy. I mean bigger journey to be fair but then I guess if you go across the top. Well it's all you're doing it. Yeah. Yeah. You go across the top and kind of hop down along the coast. Yeah. Not so hard. Well when also there's a problem. It's like if you go back 12,000 years ago, Canada's covered in ice. Yeah. There's nothing there. It's literally all ice. So where are they coming from? Well they have to be coming from the south. I guess I mean there's the kind of theory regarding the the Polynesian kind of island chain. You know hopping across the Easter Island and then making one last hop across the south America. Or that's a crazy hop. Going the other way. It is a crazy hop. What people have always done, Crete. Just the fact that they did it in the 1400s has been very crazy. And they did that with tech that was you know no tech. They just did it with the stars. Yeah. And would. But then you get to how do you say that ancient Greek symbol that ancient Greek mechanism that they found the Anticha Theora. I never could say that. Anticha Theora. I'll try. I'll try to remember. I think you get it. But I always forget it. But that thing is bananas. Like that when they first found it, it just looked like a hunk of shit like what is this? And then when they got a better understanding, I think it was like a long time after they discovered it. That they go, oh wait a minute. These are gears. Like what? The whole piece of basically. 2000 year old computer. Yeah. At least he thought, and also that's not the first one. Like no one just someone didn't just develop that. And it was like, here we go. Right. Just fucking made a computer. It was clearly like a, you know, a long history of very, very technical stuff in right in ancient Greece. And it could well have been the ancient Greeks. But also it could have been like, well where did you kind of where's the what's the history of this technology? Right. More technical than like this modern automatic watch. Yeah. Yeah. You know modern automatic watch. If you look at the inside of them, it's crazy. There's springs and gears and it's all within like this, uh, say go is like within, I think it's a couple seconds a day. Yeah. Like that's crazy. And it's all these little, and it moves, it has no power source other than the movement of your hand. Yeah. And then that's because they're 70 to our power reserve. So for 72 hours, we let it sit there just from the power of your hand from wearing it for you. Yeah. Yeah. That's cool. Not. And then that's nice. But that's normal. That's a normal thing for a modern watch with these little tiny gears. This thing's way crazier than that. Yeah. And it's 2000 years old. At least. What do they think it was for? I think they thought it kind of like tracked the lunar cycles and the kind of elliptical movements of I don't know. Have you seen the 3D AI representation of what it looked like when it was fully done? See, you can find that because it's that that's the most eye opening of it because you're bringing this back to the time of Christ and someone made a computer during time of Christ. Like, what are we missing? Like, Graham's quote is the best. I love this quote. We are a species with amnesia 100%. 100%. Yeah. And there's other quote that I really love. Things just keep getting older. And things do keep getting older. Yeah. And this is something that people resist for some strange reason. And I don't understand it. I think it's just because it's attached to these folks like Graham. Yeah, that's the one. Look at it. That's nuts. That's what it used to look like. This is a modern reproduction of it. Oh, right. But that that is what it used to look like. Right. That's off of that. Yeah. Pieces. So show me the modern reproduction of what it looked like. Just imagine. Okay, someone 2000 fucking years ago figured that out. And they have these little representations of the stars and the planets of the sun and then all the planets surrounding it. Like, first of all, how do they know all that? How are they seeing these planets? Like, do they have a telescope? Like, how do they know how many planets are in our solar system? What did you base this on? And no equivalent technology ever like reemergent. So we're like, you know, like the 16th century with like Swiss clockmakers. Right. So it just makes you wonder like how old is that and what's that from? And what were the, you know, was there other stuff like this that we never find when I go to first e-fares? Yeah, that I think that's the, but there's no, I don't see the evidence that they have for 700,000 years ago. I think that's the home of a rec-test thing. They're talking that I googled it and crossing the agency. It says they might have been doing, which there's some like islands that were protecting it from crazy weather, potentially made it easier. But that is, I don't know what evidence that is a crazy thing to read. Some evidence suggests that man may have crossed the sea as early as 700,000 years ago. Aren't you happy you're born today? Yeah. Imagine trying to gut it out before like tough it out. Say the boys and go across across them. Yeah. And see in a wooden raft. Yeah. When you want to eat in your friend, because there's no food left. Yeah, it's kind of of amazing that we've got as far as we did. But it's really amazing when they find things like that. Is they anti-cathyaromechanism? I said it right? He did. He did. He'll try to remember. But just the fact that we found one of those and it makes you wonder like what, what do they have in Egypt? You know, what did they have 2,000 years before that? What did we miss? They're going into the stone stuff where I talk about frequencies. There's a, I saw a video recently that doesn't explain all the Egypt stuff. But there were frequencies becoming always rocks that I don't think everybody is currently like studying people have studied it. That's very basic. But like there's the Kings Chamber and the reverberations that happen. I was reading from our committees, I think this quote here when the priestings the hymns of the gods, they sing the seven vowels and do succession. The sound of these vowels has such ufony. I think that's that word that men listen to it instead of the flute and the lyre, the leer. It's from 2,000 or 200 BC. With this like so many ancient sites that all built with kind of acoustic resonance in mind. Yes, that's what I was getting into this. I was trying to find the proof of it. Someone made a video I saw recently where the somatic stuff shows up all over the place in some ancient sites. Definitely obviously in churches and cathedral. But this is what happens when you like put sand on a plate and hum on it or but a certain vibrations. Yeah. And how you stumble across this and it just so happens to be the same thing we're like we're discovering now. What is that image of? What is that, that golden? This. Yeah. What's that? It's a cathedral. I looked at a second ago. Is that in Canada? No, the ark was from Spain. It's in Spain. That is wild. Okay. I was looking into the oldest doors. People found the oldest doors only like 5,000 BC. And it was found in Switzerland somewhere. Huh. There's an act, the oldest active doors in the UK. It's from 900 AD I think. What if those images are sacred geometry from in that right there? It's a Leonardo da Vinci's original drawing of the flower of life. What, what, what, what drugs are you taking son? How is he seeing that? Yeah. Well, that that's ancient imagery, right? That's sacred geometry. Those depictions have been around forever. He was a crazy dude, eventually. In a good way. Yeah. Small and guy. Well, bizarrely smart. It's very small. It's weird when you have these outliers, these outliers that come out of nowhere. He had like a working model of a flying machine. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I had like three jobs. Yeah. He's gone. And he's an amazing artist. Yeah. It's kind of, you know, these outliers. That's just how many of them we never heard of. How many of them were from 30,000 years ago? How many? Just we have such a limited understanding of our history. And I always think like if something happened to us right now, what would really be left? The real problem is everything is either on paper and there's not a lot of it on paper anymore. It's on hard drives. And those things would get cooked. If there was just a massive solar flare, something huge that took out our power grid and destroyed all of our cell phone towers and all our satellites. No more electricity. Even if it didn't get cooked, what would you do with it? 100 or 10,000 years? Exactly. I found that. You wouldn't know what that was. You would have to devise a new version of windows to read it. You know, it would take so long. And it would probably have been corroded and wasted away. Long before that. Especially if something happened, it was underwater. Especially if you know, the entire world is on fire because we could hit with a comet. There wouldn't be much left. And this is like a really shitty way to store information. It does feel like a bit of a risk, doesn't it? It's a giant risk. Everything we've ever learned and discovered and thought about is the least. Well, you know what happens when your phone dies and you don't have a backup phone. You're like, oh no, I don't know anyone's number. And we do that with our entire civilizations, knowledge. Right. And so then you would have just stories and myths of what things used to be like. There was an all female flight crew in Delta. You're like, what? What are you talking about? What does that even mean? You know, all of that can't satellites. What are you talking about? Like, what is the thing is like, I wonder how many of the satellites would still be in orbit or whether their orbit would deteriorate and they'd come crashing down to Earth? I think they would decay like relatively quickly. I think. I mean, I'm not sure, but lots of them would I think. And when we're talking big times going on? Yeah, let's think. Let's Google that. How many satellites that are in orbit today? See if put this into AI. How many satellites that are in orbit around the Earth today will be there in a hundred? that are in orbit today. See if put this into AI. How many satellites that are in orbit around the Earth today will be there in 100,000 years? Does perplexity have an answer for that? I don't think it's unlikely that anyone else was doing space travel and stuff. Unlikely. Yeah. So maybe I'm possible. I don't think there's anything on the moon, for example. I think we probably see that. But yeah, that's the weird one, right? There's bases in the dark side of the moon. Yeah, they're watching us. Are you sure? I don't even think that. Well, then there's the weirdest of the moon itself that it's the absolute perfect size and the perfect distance to completely block out the sun. That is where it is. And that's where you're all. I see where it is. It's real weird. Because it's not kind of right. It's perfect. Price precise. It's very precise. So you would need the precise size and the precise distance. That's weird. And there's also the fact that it stabilizes our atmosphere. Stabilizes our environment. Yeah, I guess the argument for that is we wouldn't be here if it wasn't. Right. If it wasn't the exact right. It's the best answer. It's like, you might have to read the whole thing. But there's thousands of satellites burning up each year in the atmosphere. Oh, shit. Is what I got to the end of. Oh, so thousands of them crashed down. I mean, they had they. So how long did they last? That's the first. That's why I was trying to track that down. The first one only lasted three months. So Sputnik 1, the Soviet Union in 1957, three months later, it fell out of orbit. It seems like they worked up to about a 25 year rule where they don't expect it to last that long. Wow. It's kind of crashed down. So in 25 years, there's nothing left. But I was trying to Google how long would till the last one if they stopped putting them up, how long until last one crashes down. It seems like 25 years. That's why I had, then I couldn't get a good answer that way. Did you put it into AI? I didn't because I don't want to. I don't like asking questions. You don't know the answer to the AI. That's asking questions. I know the answer to this. Well, I just like to see how it thinks. I like to see if it's going to just bullshit you in law to you or if it's going to. That's why I want to know when it's bullshit in me. Yeah. I don't like knowing it doesn't. Yeah. Did you test the trust? Well, it's also basing all its information on websites. Yeah, and I don't know what year it was trained on. I was watching people talk about sports cards. Like it's not updated in the last three years. So you don't even, you can't use this data. It's not good data. Oh, really? Which one was that? I don't know which one they were talking about. That's just so many AI opportunities out there. It's funny watching people on Twitter use Grok and try to get Grok to say things it doesn't want to say. Yeah. And you realize, oh, there's an information blockade of what Grok has allowed to talk about. You could just make it. You can kind of trick AI to say whatever you want it to say. Yeah, I've seen people do that. Like trick it into saying, like, how would you make a bomb? Yeah. And that's almost the bad thing about it is you can kind of become your own little echo chamber off for a while if you want it to, if you can kind of convince it to. Well, we've done a really terrible job of taking care of most people. And when then you give these people access to the kind of power that AI provides them, they're going to ask naughty questions. Because they, you know, it's great fun though. They're not living in harmony. Yeah. Yeah. Because we were selfish being or a selfish creature. It's a crazy thing, the kind of advent of large language modalism. Yeah. Artificial intelligence and it's smart. Well, it's also we're in the middle of it. It's happening right now, which is real weird. So like in our lifetimes, we're potentially witnessing the biggest change to civilization since the pyramids. Yeah. You say, I mean, even in my lifetime, like I was born in 1997, didn't really have, I had to dial up the internet. I remember when I was a kid. And then, you know, smartphones came along. And then, obviously, things like AI and it's just, it is pretty ridiculous. I was 27 years old before I ever got online. That was when I first got a computer and I got on AOL and you've got males. Like I've gotten male. This is crazy. Yeah. And you could go to chat rooms and read about stuff and you could download information, decide print stuff about UFOs. And like this is the future. I'm living in the future. And we're very fortunate, I think, that we got to see what life was like with a primitive use of the internet to what it's become now, to a quantum computer can go back a second in time, to what is coming next. We don't know. What's really weird is, imagine if this has been done before. We're assuming that it hasn't. But imagine if the Egyptians had figured out something similar. It kind of makes sense. I mean, it sounds preposterous that they did, but why? Why if we can do it? Why if we can do it? If maybe it's just a thing, if you leave humans undisturbed for a long enough amount of time with food, they start figuring stuff out. If you can keep them from killing each other and maybe that's the beautiful thing about the way Egyptian technology had advanced, they didn't split the atom. Maybe they figured out something else, that they couldn't turn it to a weapon. Yeah. I mean, they were definitely doing some pretty mad stuff. And then if you look at those kind of granite boxes, they made it completely smooth surface. I mean, they clearly had some form of technology that we don't attribute to them. I think that's undisputed. I mean, it is disputed, but I don't think, I don't see how you can logically kind of look at what they were doing and not think they had some kind of technology that we don't traditionally attribute them to. But whether that means they were like some crazy advanced civilization or it was built by some other advanced civilization, that's a bit more hypothetical, but they were clearly doing stuff that we can't appreciate today. So that logically suggests they had something that we don't understand, right? Right. And when you find it had to get there from 2000 years ago, it makes you just really think, like, what did they have? Ancient Greece was very inspired by ancient Egypt. So that made it kind of welcome from there. Exactly. Yeah. And we, you know, we're just guessing. We're just lost in guessing. That's the thing. It's all about interpretation, isn't it? All of history is about interpretation. It's not a hard science, like, you know, physics, I mean, physics is going crazy too. Look at how it's my head man. That's too much for me. Well, that constant physics stuff. But have you ever had the salurian hypothesis? No. That's so enough. What is it? It's kind of linked to this, it's linked to this ancient civilization stuff. It's the idea that there could have been an advanced civilization on our planet, you know, 100 million years ago, a non-human one. The, oh, you know, was advanced and industrial. And we just wouldn't see any trace because of how long ago it was. And they could have been here. And, you know, we just wouldn't know because it's been so long. It's kind of like where I come from with my kind of human idea, obviously. It's a further time span. But it's been, it was proposed by two physicists. It's why I just thought of it just then. Is Guy called Adam Frank and, I've had him out of mine before. You've had him on. Adam Frank, there you go. I mean, did he might have done that? We had him on, Jamie. Right? Didn't we? You can see me. That's a problem. That happens all the time. We're like, yeah, we've had him on. I know we have. That was 7.30. I knew we have. There you go. That's one of the chapters because I have been wrong before work. We talked about a guy like, who's that guy? And then like I talked over three hours. I think you were on the guy. OK, it's happened before. But so this idea is that something else other than human beings was just the idea that if it had we wouldn't know. And because the earth's been around for so long and complex multicellular life appeared, you know, relatively early in our like 4 billion year history of the earth or whatever. I'm not sure on the dates. But we've been around, the earth has been around. for so, so, so long. And we know that intelligence can emerge because it emerged with us and happened relatively quickly when you look at the kind of massive time scale of the earth's been around and how long multicellular life has been around. So their idea is kind of like, well, what if you know a civilization in the kind of era of the dinosaurs had become very advanced in industrial society? And they say we would see absolutely no evidence. Like when I'm talking about human civilization, we would see some potential evidence like rock, coughs, don't aware of it. But they would say you wouldn't even see the nuclear waste deposits because it's that long ago that nothing would survive. And then I think about that. And I think, well, isn't it almost more likely that something did happen considering we know that intelligence can emerge relatively quickly? Multicellular life has been on the planet for so, so, so, so, so long. Limiting and understanding of the fossil record. Exactly. Yeah. Why couldn't, why couldn't something have happened before? And then you start getting a bit, you know, stone or about it. And you start thinking, well, maybe that's still here because that's what I like to do. I like to go into dimensional. Yeah. Because I think like, well, if you do have these quantum computers, it can go back one second in time and you move forward a thousand years from now and they're run by AI, like what can they do? Like what do they cease to do these being ceased to exist in this dimension? Do they develop the ability to be trans dimensional? Do they, do they no longer exist in our space and time? Is that like the emergence of this new life form? And then they observe us? Is that what's going on? Well, I feel like if you kind of survive, you know, a lot longer than we have and you kind of get to a different like kind of level of intelligence, then why would you need the kind of physical body? Why would you need the physical realm? And why couldn't you kind of diverge different dimensions if such a thing is possible? Like, I certainly could imagine it taking place somewhere else. Another planet with a similar atmosphere that supports life and maybe they live in a solar system that doesn't have an asteroid belt, right? Because I'm sure they must exist. We're not getting pelted all the time. We're just in a shitty neighborhood. We're basically in a neighborhood that gets shot up all the time. And shooting gallery, yeah. Yeah, it's a shooting gallery. Yeah. And imagine them achieving where we are at, but then plus a million years and you can go, oh yeah, well, I guess all bets are off in terms of what's possible. We're, you know, 100 years ago, people were freaking out, they saw a car. Now we're sending video from a tiny little screen on your phone to sort. Yeah. Insentaneously, it's all nuts. And we don't even blink at that. We only get pissed off if it doesn't work. Yeah. Well, fuck all right, it's all this guy on Australia. Instantly, like, why's my phone not working? And, you know, people were addicted to staring at it. It's like it's pulling you into its gravity. It's all very, very weird stuff. Yeah, we adjust very quickly to real quick. Yeah. How technology develops. And it's just getting faster and faster and faster. It makes you think where will we be in 100 years in 500 years if anything happens? Yeah. Where will we be? I think we'll be somewhere really weird. But I'm hoping that as we do advance and wherever we're going to be, it'll help us understand where we came from. Like, you know, like, if AI and super intelligence starts examining the history of the human race, then things can get very interesting. And maybe it could give us places to look. Like we need physical, you know, human beings or drones on the ground excavating certain areas. This is like prime place to look. Yeah, I come, I think I kind of flip between, like quite a pessimistic outlook and quite an optimistic outlook on these things. Like sometimes I think like it's just gone and we're never going to know. And we can speculate for as much as we like, but it's gone. And then sometimes I think no, like, you never know there's so many places that are just completely the AI excavated, completely unexplored that we haven't looked at like, you know, believe the Sahara on the, the, the ocean floor by these, could I have some coffee please? Yes, I'm all right. Thank you. Of course. And then there were these places that, you know, we haven't explored it. As you say technology like AI, thank you. Cheers. Thank you. You know, I think sometimes I think, yeah, maybe we are going to make like these massive discoveries that are going to completely shift our understanding of, of history. And as you say, the kind of geese, the, the findings beneath geese are big. That could be a moment. And I'm always looking for that. But then sometimes I flip again, I think, you know, maybe we'll never find anything. And I just don't know. Maybe I'm just speculating for, for no reason. I should just stop. Have you seen Ben on charted X his, he has a very recent video of these, I don't even know how you describe it. There's these underground structures in Egypt that he says are bigger than the geese plateau that are underground. I've seen that. I love his channel, but there's a historical record of these things where people had talked about them like, you know, way back, even explorers had visited them and found them to be more spectacular than what is actually on the ground that the underground thing was even crazier. And that begs the question, why, why underground? Why, why do we find all this underground construction of the world? Right. Hey. Whoa. Jamie. Was that, and that's his theme music. I even recognized that. Shout out to, on charted X. Yes, he's coming on soon to talk about this very thing. He's awesome. He's really awesome. And he's spent so much time down there. So, um, he did something, are you talking about, he did a video and the kind of, I thought, unknown ancient site. So the unknown age sites need to be greater than the pyramids confirmed with satellite scans. Okay, yeah, I haven't seen this. Give us the coming up. Just put it. Just so many different techniques. The geese, Ganon, Milon, Boris, satellite technologies. I mean, they're vastly different techniques. They seem to be aligned. They're telling you the same things. So they found something. Like there's something down there. What is down there seems to be also quite a mystery. The central object is hard to classify. It appears metallic, not stone or wood. A free standing 40 meter long metallic tiktiktik shaped object. Approximately what? 50, 60 meters below the ground in a huge being open corridor and atrium, come on. Like this, this is a remarkable claim. It's a crazy video. And he goes deep into the history of people talking about these sites and even ancient explorers who wrote about visiting Egypt, would talk about how it was even more spectacular underground. Here it is. This is, how do you say his name? Petri, yeah. He's written a lot because he was like one of the first people's landers, Petri. Yeah. So are those the names of the sites you're talking about? Hawara, B-A-M-U. Oh, sorry. And our zone, our seone? Yeah, Hawara is definitely a farce no, our seone. So it says, on that space could be erected, the Great Hall of Karnak and all successive temples are joining it and the great court and the pylons of it. Also the temple of Moot and that of, how do you say that, Kansu? Yeah, I guess. Kansu and Amamenhotep III at Karnak. Also, the two great temples of Luxor and still, there would be room for the whole of Ramecium. What does that mean? In short, all the temples of the east of thebees, and I'm sorry if I'm butchering these names, folks. And one of the largest of the west bank might be placed together in the one area in the ruins of Hawara. Here we certainly have a site worthy of the renowned, which the labyrinth acquired. So this is an ancient explorer who's talking about, he actually got into this area. The problem now is it's all submerged. So it's been flooded and it's very difficult to do any kind of archaeological work on it now. You can see he was one of the first people in. Yeah, that's the people. They're crawling into these holes and swimming in now. It's real weird. It's like you could die in there. So someone's got to figure out how to get the fucking water out of there. And what is that? So if this guy is accurate with what he's talking about, again, explain that. Explain how you've got something that's even greater than what you're seeing above the surface underneath 50 meters down in the stone. And why on the ground? Why? So much hotter. Exactly. What were they doing? Were they hiding? There's just like what happened when cataclysmous, cataclysm took place. They said, bolson, we need to develop a way to survive these things. Let's get underground. And there's so many of it. What I've the world as well is people are always, well, ancient people are always building on the ground construction. And we can't explain how they did it. Who did it or why they did it today? And again, no one in the mainstream really kind of looks into that. Yeah, that's site in Turkey. Wasn't it supposed to house like 13,000 people? Yeah. And there's like the number, like 2,000 people? At least I can't remember if this was my head, but it's huge. Huge. I think it might be 20,000 people. It's massive. That sounds better. And yeah. It sounds more exciting. But it is massive. And they don't know how they did, and they carved it out of stone. It's in a hibilte. There's no evidence of the stone being left anywhere. It's not like there's a big pile of it outside of it. It's real weird. Yeah, 20,000. There you go. 20,000 people together with their livestock and food stores. So 20,000 people livestock and food stores. Extending to a depth of approximately 85 meters underground. And no one knows you built that. All that I've raised in. That's. And the kind of argument is that they built it to protect themselves from an invading army. But this never made sense to me. Because if you were attacking those people, you just blocked the entrances. Yeah. And then start fires. Yeah. Yeah, that seems silly. It seems like more likely what they were doing was escaping whatever the fuck was on the surface. And so who built that and why? And how are you? Because again, it's stone that could survive for so long. Right. And also, did you build it after a cataclysm? Like, how do you do it? Do you know it's coming? And that's how you build it? No. You didn't know it's coming. Unless it's happened, unless it happens regularly. And they realized the only way to survive it is to get underground. Well, I guess you could be the remnants of an earlier culture that was wiped out. Right. I had like a memory of maybe past down three minutes. Look at how nuts that is. I was thinking to like, no, I don't have a whole, like, leaf cuttery Institute. This couldn't have been the first one they made. And you could get exactly what you're out of, make all those chambers, the breathe and stuff. That's so bananas, dude. That's 85 meters into the ground. So crazy. And then it's so crazy. Another great one is long UKves in China, which is just, there's just zero explanation of what that is, or who built it. There's no record of its construction. Have you seen long UKves? Yeah. I pulled that out. That's nuts, too. Absolutely crazy. How old is that supposed to be? No, no, no. They have no idea who built it. It's just like, what is this? And they don't know who built it. There's no record of who built it. They don't know what it was for. There's no deposits of stone. There's no tools found nearby. Do they have a theory of the timeline? I think so. I mean, to be fair, it's in China. So it's like, it's not, it's around the 1992. Whoa. A farmer. Four farmers. There's 24 of them, like looking like that. 24. At least 2,000 years old. Go to a video of it so we can see because the caves, when people walk around it with a camera, it's bananas. And there's 24 distinct ones that look like that. And it's just like, who can you want? Can you still visit China without going to jail? What happens? I don't know. Oh, this is Mike Collins. He's great. I'm wondering who. Yes. Does all that stuff about that wall in Montana too? Yeah, the sage, very weird. That man, Montana thing is very weird. I go back and forth on that one, being man-made or... Yeah, that's the case for so many. Like, these things, it's like it could be natural, but then not this one, though. This is definitely not fucking natural. You imagine in 1992, some farmers are just fucking around and they find this. And 24 of them as well. And they're like, yeah, what did we find? I think the carvings are modern. Oh, they are. I think from 1992. No, they are. The parallel lines, they don't know what they are. They have no idea why the parallel lines are there. But I think the kind of carvings depicting like mystical Chinese stuff is a kind of modern addition. Oh, like brand new? Yeah. Like, since they discovered it. Oh, really? Even those ones on the wall right there, that's so gross. I think so. I made that. Oh. Might be worth checking. Oh, I hope they didn't do that. Oh, that would be gross. You imagine? Yeah. That's always baffle me because again, if you look at the Wikipedia page for that site, it's just like three lines. But it's like, well, fuck is this? Yeah. So the carvings are those really old? Or those modern? What made you think that they're modern? Because I did a little video and I mentioned this in a video and I drew my research on that. I saw that. Oh, so in the research you found that they were modern. Yeah. Okay. So it seems to be the parallel lines used to be like how they dug all the stuff out, like one layer at a time. Would you think that? Yeah. But like how and what using what? Right. 24 of them. And also they're all so precisely identical. It's like what tool you're using to make sure this was so identical. Right. Like what tool are you carving stone with to make a giant cave? One particular cave stands out for its detailed carvings of dragons, animals, people and figures closely resembling the eight of mortals from Taoist mythology. These depictions suggest a deep connection to Taoism. Whether it's carvings were part of the original structure or added later after the caves were rediscovered in 1992 remains a topic of debate. After close examining of the carvings and noticing of unique method used to chip with a rock for these images, it seems likely that they were added later. Perhaps turning the cave into a sacred place reflecting the religious beliefs at the time. Oh, so some gross people carved into it in 1992. It's so crazy that you did that guys, because that's probably what people have done throughout time. I bet that's you know, the probably the people that like put their dead body in the pyramid. Yeah. And that's the thing with all the other things in Egypt is they people have carved hieroglyphics onto that, but that doesn't mean that that's when the original thing was built. Can you go back to the video, please, Jimmy, of that site so we could see like what it looks like when you're walking around in it. Because the fact that they don't really know who made it and the fact that these farmers found it in 1994 when you see the scope of it, that's where it really sets in unbelievably big. Yeah, because I think like images are cool, but the way this guy's walking around it, you really get it. And then you have to time us out by 24. Imagine those farmers, do we tell anybody? If we don't, they're going to kill us. They might kill us anyway. Which was added then afterwards if they did the, how much like stairs and oh, yeah, all the stairs are added for sure, but right the stairs that that guy's on look too new, obviously. But again, what was this full? Why did they do? They look new. All that shit looks new. Yeah, why did they like what is this carvings? I mean, actually, maybe they're trying to make the carvings to make it seem like it was older and people would come wonder and just come look and it'd be a tourist attraction. Like maybe without art, they didn't think we'd get enough people to visit. I think it's also to kind of connect it to kind of, you know, more like contemporary cultural China rather than because I mean, who knows how old this could be? That's crazy. Because it's done. That's so crazy. The fact that they just found it just stumbled on it. That's what's the weirdest thing about some of the discoveries because that's the same with go backly tippy. It was a sheep herder, right? If someone found go backly tippy in the 60s and they didn't think it was anything so they left it. Really? Yeah, it's like that guy fucking is the boat a little bit. No way. Yes, American archaeologists found it in the 60s. What do you find? I can't remember, but they found like a little bit of it and they were like, oh, this is clearly just some like, you know, contemporary Bronze Age society. That guy must have shot himself. He must have hit the boat a little bit. He could be a Starwick. That could have been the guy. Instead of how fucking sheep herder. Yeah. Because there was a guy who just found like a stone, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, here it is. 1960s survey conducted by archaeologists from Istanbul University in the University of Chicago found some flint in limestone artifacts, but they didn't perceive the site as anything more than a medieval cemetery. Whoops, whoopsies, whoopsies. Yeah, that was the find of your career. And you thought that's what a slip up. So the sheep herder that found it, I think he just found like a corner of something. And he like kicked it with his boot and was like, what is this? And then started looking around scraping it off. And then I think once he realized it was really big, they started to be like, maybe it was a Boston buddy. Yeah. I call somebody a no-sided dig. The whole like 5% excavation thing is so puzzling and go back to these happy. Because I mean, to be clear, that's kind of how that's like normal practice, I think. But you would think they could backly tap a space like a bit more of a special case. Yeah, that's a time for your normal. But it's also, they make a lot of money off of tourism. People visiting it the way it is. And that would disrupt everything if you had a bunch of eggheads digging into the ground all around you. I see that. But you know, then they start doing weird stuff like planting all of trees above the ruins. Everyone was telling them like, hey guys, if you do that, they just do it. These trees are going to grow roots. The roots are going to destroy what's underneath them. Yeah. And they're like, no, everything's going to be fine. And then they realize, oh, it's actually destroying. I think that that's like a microcosm of the problem with a small section of a very vocal kind of mainstream archaeologists. I think the whole tree controversy regarding go backly tap his because it was Jimmy, right? Jimmy brought it in for a certain. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Well, you can't go there anymore, you know. I'm not surprised. I might just snuck in reasonably. He's in a video. Yeah, yeah. But I think he's banned from the country from the whole of its hockey. I think he's banned from the side of the very least. It doesn't make sense because we're mad at him for telling the truth. Exactly. Where have you think of Jimmy? Like he was wrong. Let's find out of his band. I don't want to get Turkey mad at me because I think Turkey's probably the, that's probably the birthplace of civilization. Well, some of what we think of as civilization. I mean, there's so many different things that they found in Turkey now that's starting to to lean people to think that like maybe that spot. Maybe we've, you know, we, there might, it's, there was probably a bunch of places like that in the Middle East where civilization had sort of emerged from whatever it happened before. Oh, the sahara. Or the sahara? Yeah. What do you think about the re-chart? Let's get that in a second here. Oh, yeah. Turkey should have banned me when they had a chance. My pride. Jimmy's so crazy. If my prior work on go backly, Tepi upset them, what I will share in the coming days, weeks is going to take things to another level. But because we are, we were cunning around various security protocols and aided with exceptional timing. We got the footage. Our ancient history belongs to humanity. I agree. Anyone that opposes that has no place controlling our lost history. Good for you, Jimmy. Yeah. I mean, whatever you think about him. He was right about the trees. And the fact that they had these people kind of coming out defending the trees and saying the trees were good for archaeological sites. Yeah. I don't know what Jimmy has a degree in, if anything. But he clearly knows a lot about ancient history. And he's really interested in it. And this, again, this gatekeeping. I'll give you watches videos and he constantly gets smeared with all sorts of different horrible claims that he's this and he's that. And he's like, if you watch his videos, you know that's not true. He's just a guy who is very fascinated and deeply informed on a lot of the timelines of all these different things and how interesting they are. And he likes to make videos of them. And that's a good thing. Why shouldn't he be allowed to speculate? He's just a guy speculating. And he's really fair and balanced with how he talks about that. And he's good at it, man. He puts together arguments really well. And you just mentioned the reshot structure thing. I've watched his videos on that. And like, it's interesting, man, the way he kind of connects what Plato was saying about that land-tis and brings it all to the reshot. It's interesting stuff. It's very interesting because it's also he talks about how Plato would talk about the mountains to the north and the river to the south. He's like, this whole lines up. Like rings. This concentric rings in the same size as was described as it lay. And the Tamin-Rassa river system used to run. Yeah. So it was surrounded by wool. It's up. Like rings. It's concentric rings in the same size as was described as it lay. And the Tamin-Rassa River system used to run. Yeah. So it was surrounded by water system. How come everybody's like, nah. Well, it's because you can't prove it. Well, it's a little bit of that, but it's also because this YouTube guys, the one talking about it. Yeah. And that's if they admit that he was right, that would drive them fucking crazy. They had to with the trees. Yeah. It's a move them. Yeah. Well, I think he's right about Atlanta's too. I think he might be right. There's something about that that's weird. It's also weird if you look at it from a satellite perspective, the satellite imagery where you get to see where it all looks like it's been washed over by water. Yeah. Yeah. Like the whole thing looks exactly like sand looks when the tide comes in and then pulls back. It's all rippled and it looks like it was pummeled by water. Yeah. And match the sinking into the sea in a single day or night. Exactly. And also like how many stories from ancient history depict floods. There's so many of them. Like we can't, are we going to ignore all them as myth? Well, the idea that myth doesn't hold any kind of use in understanding the past is just ridiculous because the myth is powerful because it's the thing we've collectively remembered as a species, isn't it? Yeah. Why would we dismiss that as a kind of, you know, historical record? And then you've got examples of like indigenous cultures that remember, that the remember kind of scientific information through myth. I always go to this example of these kind of islanders during the tsunami in 2004 and they they went, it was the Andaman Islands and the kind of, you know, western scientists that ever went to the island after the boxing day tsunami and they were like, oh, everyone's going to be dead. They're all going to have been wiped out by this tsunami and they were fine because they had this myth in their culture that when the sea recedes, you get to high ground because then the waves are going to come that will eat men. And that myth, you know, that has encoded scientific information regarding tsunamis and that save their their culture's lives and they had like no casualties compared to, you know, western more modern people who were in their crazy. Everybody else was like, wow, look at all this thing. Yeah. And they were like, well, I thought the beach was over here. Yeah, they were going to fucking kill. And then these people with their myths scientific information survived. There's a guy who was hiking in Russia when the most recent tsunami hit and he was on a cliff and you see the ocean come in and like reach the top of the cliff where his dog is, see if you can find it. It's crazy because he films the thing coming in like this guy is way above the ocean. When it starts and then the water is reaching where he is with his dog. It's just father testament to the power of nature. It's just constantly underestimate nature and that was just a little wiggle in the ocean. That's just a little wiggle. Just a little earthquake, little, little, little eight pointer and then you think about the looks of some of the shit that's going on during all time on earth. Comment impacts and like watch this. So look how high this guy is, right? Way up, way up, right? And so as he's up here, you know, he's seen the waves come in. Now he must have known that this was going to happen because everybody knew this was going to happen. So watch how it's coming in now. And now it keeps coming. It keeps coming all the way to the top where he is. It's nuts. Look at his dog. He's like, yo, I would be freaking out. I would be running. I wouldn't trust it. What if it goes over the top where you're at? You're just guessing, bro, look how high this water gets. That's terrifying. Look at that. The dog's about to get jacked. I mean, if you get trapped in that, like the bitch you are not swimming to shore, that's your life. It's over. I don't care if you're Laird Hamilton. Well, he might swim through that. But isn't that nuts? Yeah, you're fucked. That water got all the way to the top of that hill. And that's, that is like, doesn't even register in the news. Yeah. That's just like, things like that. That's a thing that happens. It's just like a thing. Like no big deal. Remember that in five years? No one will remember that in 10 years. But if a fucking comet slams into the ocean right there or slams into a glacier, a comet the size of, you know, a few city blocks, that's a wrap. That's a wrap. You have massive flooding, like instantaneous millions of gallons of water tearing through the landscape. No more ice cap. It's all gone. Yeah. And just any kind of culture that was possibly around, it's just wipes completely wiped clean from the earth. Yeah, you're a good, nothing. You're a done'sville. There's nothing left. And that's real. This isn't speculation. Like that, we look at the Tunguski impact. And that was the same sort of comet storm that we passed through. the same time of year. And it flattened like this enormous chunk of Siberia that still doesn't have trees on it. Yeah. And that was a, that's quite a smooth thing. Yeah. And it didn't even hit his air. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And if that happened over a city, that's like millions dead. Millions. So that could be happening on this planet, on a regular basis. It is. Yeah. It's kind of facts that we get hit by stuff. Yeah, we're always finding a crater. We're like, oh, this one's three million. You're like, oh, it's like a million years old. Look at this fucking crater. Yeah. Three million years ago, everyone's fucked. It's that. If that estimate is correct, that we're hit by a, you know, a catechism impact once every hundred thousand years, then, I mean, what does that mean? Well, that's sort of gets really weird if you're talking about like an advanced civilization, like, you know, millions of years ago. Like imagine if there was some sort of advanced life form, millions of years ago, and then something like that. Have you seen that wheel? Like 300 million years old? Or it's like a preserve. It looks just like a wheel. Have you seen you have this? What did that? Jamie, could you please search 300 million year old wheel? It would be a good one. You might take a lot. Like where you get this one? I've just seen it about. And like, it looks like a wheel. It doesn't mean it is a wheel, but it looks remarkable. Well, there's some of this stuff from, yeah, that's the thing. It just kind of looks like a wheel, and they found it in a mine, and then they flooded the mine, which is a bit weird. There's a couple of better images of it. I don't know if they'll be on this page, but yeah, there you go. That looks like spokes and a wheel. I mean, it could be natural, but maybe we'll focus that, you know? That looks really weird. Now, what are these fossilized tracks? Yeah, these are also super old. That could cut routes. Again, found in Turkey. Yeah, right. Including Sofka, where they, like I said that, where they cover an area of the area approximately 45 by 10 miles. And how do you say that one? It was a lot of words today. Cappadocia. Home to several clusters of tracks, the discovery of these ruts around the world, the spark debate regarding the purpose, age and origins in Malta, especially due to the proximity of the tracks to megalithic structures, and the fact that some are now submerged beneath the sea. Yeah, I've seen some of them in Mozart. I went to Mozart. And they go off cliffs. And they research their suggests these fossilized lines indicate significant antiquity. So if this was like mud that there were pulling these things through or dirt that there were pulling these things through, and then it eventually fossilized into tracks, like what else would be the explanation for something that looks exactly like tracks? Is there a natural explanation for those kind of formations? I don't see anyone providing. No one has a... No one has a... I didn't really know about the ones in Mozart because I went there and kind of researched it, but those ones, they don't dispute their... Definitely mine made, they just... Hold on, they're definitely manmade because listening to what this says, I first saw as tracks in stone, fossilized car or terrain vehicle traces usually called cart ruts, a new gin plantation surfaces, a pennepline in five-grian... For gin? For gin. For gin, for gin plane in May of 2014. They were situated in the field of development of middle and late... How do you say that? Meosine? Meosine Tufts and tough fights. And according to age analysis of nearby volcanic rocks, had middle-mile-seen age of 12 to 14 million years. Yes, this is talking not multiple, but again, I mean, you've got these cart ruts that look like, you know, some sort of track, and there's millions of years old, and then you can find that wheel nearby. That's fucking crazy. And you're like, what is this? I will look at what this says. Cultipin holds... Okay, the region that Dr. Cultipin studied is relatively obscure with guidebooks offering little to no information about it. While mainstream researchers argue that the tracks are merely petrified remnants of old cart ruts left by wheeled vehicles pulled by donkeys or camels, cultipin holds a different perspective. By detecting these conventional explanations, he stated firmly, I will never accept it. I will always remember many other inhabitants of our planet wiped from our history. His research invested a deeper perhaps for gotten history of earth and its past civilizations. Like, what? Because if it's about the scenario in hypothesis, if it was millions of years ago, how would we just be with none? You imagine millions of years ago people had the wheel or something. Mineable people. Something whatever they were was pulling things on wheels. And they had cart ruts in the ground. So maybe they didn't have... This is fucking crazy. Cultipin theorizes that the civilization responsible for driving these heavy vehicles likely built the numerous identical roads, ruts and underground complexes scattered across the Mediterranean region more than 12 million years ago. The acknowledges that petrification can occur relatively quickly, but points to the heavy mineral deposits on the tracks and signs of erosion as evidence of much older timeline. He also connects these tracks to surrounding underground cities, irrigation systems and wells, which he believes are millions of years old. Yes, that's like down the page. So what if never did you as millions of years old and these tracks related to it? This is so crazy. My website, Cultipin wrote, oh, I'm not fucking saying that. We are dealing with extremely tough, lithified petrified sediments covering covered with a thick layer of weathering that takes millions of years to develop full of multiple cracks with newly developed minerals in them, which could only emerge in periods of high tectonic activity. Wow. Pretty crazy, huh? That's the craziest thing I've ever seen in my life. It's crazy because I knew those cart ruts existed, but I didn't look into them. I didn't know what the timeline was. I didn't know that there's anybody that's even speculating that thing looks like a fucking wheel. It was right in the same place. You got this fossilized wheel and these fossilized cart ruts from hundreds of millions of years ago. The wheel was printed in a sandstone on the roof. Guys, drifters tried to cut away the find with the pick hammers and try to take it out to the surface, but sandstone was so strong and firm and having been afraid to damage a print, they have left it in place at present. The mind is closed and access to the object is impossible. The equipment dismantled and the given layers are already flooded. Get in there. Why would you flood that? I think it was something to do with like, I don't think it's like some conspiracy like height the wheel, height the wheel, but I mean, I think it's more just like a the practice of what they would they would finish their mining thing and they found this wheel they weren't going to excavate the wheel because they were like, bro, if that's a real wheel, if someone can carve that out of there and realize like if scientists look at it, if they get a 3D scan of it and they go, okay, we have to completely rethink everything. If something had a wheel 12 million years ago, 300 million, three hundred. What? What are we talking about? I mean, it would be like the saloon hypothesis. It would be another, it wouldn't be human unless you meet, we'd have to radically rewrite everything if that was human. What does that mean then? Like what are we talking about? Different intelligence. What? What about the species? So maybe there was something like us that lived like medieval humans. Yeah, because millions of years ago. It's the same problems. Like if they're living on earth, they're dealing with the same kind of physics. They have to move materials around. Why would you not come up with the same kind of thing? Like a wheel, like so simple invention. That's what's interesting too. And we're always finding new dinosaurs. That's a common thing. If these were a type of human being or something similar to human beings that buried their dead, what are we going to find? What are we going to find after 12 million years? Nothing. Is that for maybe a fossilized wheel? Yeah, or these wheel tracks. Well, what is the conventional explanation of these wheel tracks? I don't know. Well, I know about the ones in molten. They definitely say they're man-made. I don't know about these ones in Turkey. I haven't really looked into it. But those are crazy. And the fact that they go to underground structures help me. I know. They're near there. I don't think they directly lead to like Darren, who you're in a thing, but they're nearby. And then so then you start to think what if Darren Guuuu is like to be fair. I think that's probably man-made. But you know, it's stone. Well, I'm sure it's man-made, but like what kind of man? And it could have been man adapted. It could have already been something there. And we kind of changed it. That would be completely fucked. If we found out there was another type of human that existed that did all that 12 million years ago. Or didn't even have to be a human. It could be any kind of life. It's just intelligence. Right. But there's no evidence. Is there anything other than primates have been that capable of manipulating their environment other than primates? Right. And I guess so. When we also know that there's certain, we're finding new ones all the time. Right. This one that they found, I keep fucking going up, Homo-Julians, is that it? And Antica-Theoria. And I think it's gonna get there. And Antica-Theoria. I'm gonna get that right. But I fucked this one out too. The Homo-Julians. But this one was larger than us. It had a larger brain capacity. And they know that they just, I mean, this was just published in December of 2024. So they know that they're constantly finding new branches of the human tree. Yeah. And then you got a Denise Evans or Dennis Evans, or David, however, you pronounce that. And they just reclassified that. Dragon Man scholars, Denise Evans. And that was a huge... Yes. So Julu-Ance. Is that what I would say that? I would say that. Yeah. Because it's really new. A new big-headed, archaic humans. Bigger than us. With big ass heads. And big brains. Well, then you kind of get into the thing of giants and stuff and like, could giants have been real and you seem to like that's a giant. Exactly. And there is giant primates that have been like confirmed, like gigantic pithakas, or a little bit of a squirt. Yeah. You have Hobbit humans, like Homo-Flow-Rent-Sis, or... Yep. And I pronounced that. Like humans, you have giant primates. Why can't you have giant humans? I think they did. I think that's why giants are always in the Bible. And I think this thing... How old is this fossil that they found of Julu-Ance? So this one existed alongside, I believe, alongside at least some versions of man. Does it say how old it is? 300,000 or million. That's million. So that would just overlap with us, then. 300,000 years old? Yeah. Right. So, but here's the thing. They don't have a lot of this stuff. They don't have a lot of evidence of this creature. So right. So they have, I believe it's one site. Is that correct? Is there one site where they found this? Early on a very large school, found in China. Yeah. So how many have they not found? That's the real problem with us. And this whole fossil record thing is that we're dealing with a very limited amount of information. It's very difficult to become information. It's very difficult to become evidence. Especially when you get up to these, again, it's the preservation product. Right. You get back this far. It's so hard to find stuff. You just see what this thing looks like when they deal with a 3D image of a depiction. First of all, they make it look super primitive. They cover it with hair and give it jack muscles. It looks like this freak. But whatever it is, it's way bigger than us. It's a human and it lived alongside us. So Dave and in Goliath, it's right there. And there's also the, I think it's called Megan Thropis, which is, yeah, that's what it looked like supposedly. Maybe why we probably want to calculate it or... They make everything look like that. Everyone's stupid and walking around in... Yeah. Everyone's stupid, everyone has a stick in their hand. When I was looking up that wheel, I came across the London hammer. Oh, I've heard that too. But I heard that that was, that was solved. I did not see. I mean, it doesn't make sense. I'll just go with that. It's, it was found in 1936, I think. But the line's still in around it is supposedly 100 million years old. Oh, she haven't ever heard of this. Yeah, someone had an explanation for that. Founded in Texas. London, Texas, not England just so... Yeah. Someone had an explanation for that. I don't remember what it was. Looking over mysteries. A lot of people discussing it. Why don't you look up London hammer debunked? I mean, wouldn't someone want to debunk it? I know they would, but I want to know if they're right. You know, I'm sure someone would want to. It's lots of, I'm just going, there's lots of people saying it's real and fake. And there's just not a lot of explanation on how it was found in the old limestone. Okay. Radio carbon dating of the wooden handle and the geological analysis have largely debunked the idea of extreme antiquity. More details. The artifact. The London hammer is a metal hammerhead with a wooden handle found partially in case in a concretion, hard compact mass of mineral matter. It claims some have interpreted the hammer's presence in the rock as evidence of advanced ancient civilizations or a young earth pointing to the seemingly anomalous placement of a modern looking tool in ancient rock. Evidence against antiquity, radiocarbon dating of the wooden handle is placed its origin within the historical period, not millions of years. Geological processes, the concretion itself is not necessarily ancient. This is what I've read. Tools and solution can harden around objects, dropped or left in cracks or on the surface of soluble rock according to Gaia. Out of place artifacts, while the concept of outer place artifacts can be intriguing, the London hammer doesn't meet the criteria of being considered an outer place artifact as is geological context and dating suggests a more recent origin. You know, one of the things that I always go to with Egypt is those really bizarre looking things that almost look like a part of a machine, that wheel thing. Is something, I don't remember what it's called, some kind of a disc, but it looks like a part of something, almost a fan. You're looking at that, like, okay, what is that thing doing? Is that a turbine? Is that in water? Does something spin? Like, what is that? The fact that that's real, that one drives me nuts. It literally looks exactly like something. That's a replica right off of a machine. Jamie, I mean, they found the pieces of I've seen someone put it, they've cranked it up in water and it can like displace water in a very unique way. Yes. I don't know if that's, you know, the use of it, but that's, um, see if you can get it image of the actual one, not a recreation because I think there's been some, some of them, they've recreated it because I think it's a very valuable thing. So when people are looking at, I think a lot of times they're looking at recreations, whatever it was, no one can figure it out, right? And it's carved out a stone. So how? What, what, what are you doing? What's that thing do, you know? Yeah. That thing looks like a part of a machine. It looks like a part, like if, you know, like you have some ancient machine and you've got a, does a bunch of things, like it moves the ear mixer. Right. Which would not, but I mean, if you go with primary rescue, they only mix that stuff up somehow. Mm. Sure. Actually, right? But it's probably be your, but it's probably just one of many different tools that we're missing from back then. If that is just their stuff for making what they call beer, my primary rescue is the guy who wrote the immortality key. I don't know if you ever read any of his stuff, but a lot of it is about ancient eulists, Ancient Greece and the euloceneian mysteries. Psychodetics again. Yes. Psychodetics. Yeah. Yeah. But a lot of it is, you know, what we think of is beer and wine, their, all their stuff was laced. Yeah. It was all laced with ergot and a bunch of other stuff and different psychedelics that we haven't really identified yet. Yeah. And they combine that with that kind of spirituality. Yeah. Everything. And that's why they built the society that they built. Yeah. Which is the craziest thing about, you know, our weirdo technological advanced society is disconnected from that because it's illegal. Disconnect from the stars as well. Yeah. Disconnect from the stars as well. Yeah. And it's really a really fresh and really hectic life of just like, you know, God, God, you just got to do this and just not sitting back and kind of appreciating. What was that? From an unknown author and read it. That's when they put it on a drill. Oh, so they made one of it and put it on a drill. That's great if you have a drill. Man, it's a, so we're assuming that the Egyptians had a drill. I'm assuming they have a drill. I mean, they definitely, I mean, they have two holes, don't they? Yeah. And they find all these cool people like, oh, that's normal. Yeah. Fuck and explain that. The viral thing, I can't remember what it's called, but the, the, the Kristin did like, uh, he put like a thread around it to show it was a spiral. Oh, yes. Yes. Yes. The groove is good. Yeah. And he also estimated the revolutions per minute. Yeah. They would take to do something like that. Yeah. So you're talking about something that like is going into extremely hard rock. And looks like it has some extremely, extremely hard tip that can cut that rock. Like what is it made out of? Yeah. That's it. Yeah. And these are like serious people. The problem is that, you know, archaeologists need geptologists that are all a certain type of person that don't have the expertise in like, no, recognizing machine artifacts. Also their dorks and they don't connect with people because they, they're so arrogant. And when the way they talk about these things, it freaks people out and it makes them not want to listen. This is, I think, the thing that frustrates them the most about alternative historians, like Graham Hancock. He's really interesting. He's compelling. He's a great communicator as well. Great communicator and wonderful guy and people love him and they go, Oh, fuck that guy. He's all right. He says, he says that. He's more popular than them as well. Yes. That's what drives them nuts. But what it should be exciting to them because it's stimulating people's desire to know where we come from. And that's supposed to be your business that's supposed to be what you're into. And all he's doing is asking questions and like putting forward. I don't think Graham would ever claim to like be, you know, certain or to he's just saying this could be possible. Yeah, he's got some ideas that I think are a big stretch. And then he's got some ideas that I think are dead on the head, but he will tell you that himself. Yeah, exactly. He will tell you that himself. He's just trying to figure this out. And that's the position he always has come from. Yes. But they kind of see it and they're saying, how dare you claim that you have proof and other things ever since got proof. and nice and sensitive person that like this stuff really fucking hurts his feelings. Kind of. It's not necessary. Everybody should be working together. They really should. And the academics, everyone knows that you had a limited amount of information before and there's more information now. Like your students are not going to hate you if you say listen, I wrote a whole book on this. This is so crazy. But I was so wrong. They would respect you more. They were probably with respect anymore. Yeah. And I think that's what it is like that book is still out there and academics like to point at each other and make fools of each other. They really love to do that. They really live to I see them do it to each other on Twitter all the time. They'll dismiss someone's credentials and say his work is shit and they're like, God, you're such bitches. That's what that bruise is. Bruce, I learned someone who's doing that. To each other. Yeah. Like high school girls like talking shit about each other and chat messages, you know, or high school boys. They do the same thing. But it's, or fucking grown men do it obviously. These guys are just like that. But it's also I think some of these guys are socially stunted because they've spent so much time with their head in academia and their head in books that they don't realize that the rest of the world sees that behavior in a very transparent way. If you're acting like a bitch online and all you do is say mean things about people, it's that's not, you're not hiding what you are. Every reasonable person sees that and instantaneously knows what's going on. There's this is irrational behavior. You're calling people racist because they're questioning the timeline of human civilization based on evidence based on really bizarre things that no one can explain based on water erosion on rocks. Now you're racist. Like what are you talking about? It's just a way of like, you know, shined down the ideas. It's exactly what it is. It's exactly what it is. But it's done by people that are socially stunted and they don't understand that most normal rational people who see them behave this way are never going to listen to them again. By doing this bitchy thing, you have discounted your own participation in any true like intellectual discourse because everybody knows you're a bad faith actor now. you're a bad person. You're saying things because you're trying to shut down a conversation instead of saying, huh, tell me what you did. How did you get to this? So what is he saying? Water erosion. Whoa, show me. Show me the water erosion. Well, fucking hell, that does look like water erosion. Okay. Maybe we should like reevaluate this. Maybe we should bring you in to teach, you know? Like what are we doing? We're gatekeeping. We're gatekeeping information because it's protecting fragile egos of socially stunted people. Yeah. And they've always, you know, that they not to say they haven't done great things. Exactly. They have done great things. They do deserve the credit for that. But we should give them amnesty for fucking up. But no one, yeah, I mean, we wouldn't be able to talk about these things without, you know, mainstream for what you can imagine. I know, imagine when Harry and the math department, when you've been shitting on a string theory and now it finds, oh, look, look who's wrong about the timeline. Yeah. Oh, it's Mike the fucking genius. Shit, that each other throw it coffee at each other. They're a bunch of animals. They're just like, you're like any other group of men, you know? It's just a human thing, isn't it? We're all just human. Sure. Cheers, players, cheat. Yeah. Even genius ones. And often like these people, this is like, you know, the thing that they've worked on and the kind of biggest success they've had in their lives is they don't want that taken away. They don't want to take it away and they don't want to deal with those other academics. We're going to stick it in their face. 40 years, Bob. 40 years, you've been teaching lies. How does that feel? How about all those college kids that left with a real fucked up view of human history? Because are you, Bob? Come on, Bob. Yeah, I mean, poor Bob. Poor Bob is going to just like write a note and blows brains out. Yeah. I mean, I don't know. I just hope that things are going to shift over time and over the next few decades we're going to see a big one funeral at a time. I guess that is the max plank quote, isn't it? I hope it doesn't have to take that long. And I wish people would shift their positions, man, because, well, again, I think new people coming in. It's like a lot of things. You know, new people come in. They have new ideas and all dinosaurs. Yeah. I think it's, I don't know what adherence to these ideas is kind of distorted our understanding of history and it's kind of prevented us for looking for things because, you know, we assume that these things, oh, shit, sorry. No, I almost unplugged the microphone. That wheel is still freaking me out. Yeah. It's crazy, huh? It's crazy. But we just don't look for these things because have you seen any of Jesse Michael's stuff? He's the kind of UAP kind of guys. Yeah. I haven't really. I do kind of delve into that, but I don't, I mean, I don't like talk about our own thing, but I hear. stuff. He's the kind of UAP kind of guys. And yeah, I haven't really I don't I do kind of delve into that, but I don't I mean I don't like talk about her or nothing. But his latest one is is this do the mummy? Yes, try dacto mommy's in Peru. Yes, the one where they've done scans of them and they have a fully intact bone structure looks like an actual creature fully intact three feet three toes different shaped head than us. Whatever it is like and also 1700 years old like what is that? So what's the like debunking of that? Well, there's some of them that people have made that seem to be a complete fabrication. It's a seems to be some of them they've pieced together bones and created like a fake artifact and tried to sell it off. But then there's these other ones that were found that don't look like that at all. They look like they're they're huddled up one of them has a fetus inside of it. Yeah, yes. Yeah, yeah. They and whatever these things are shown the video when when you see the scans of it. Um, American alchemy Jesse Michaels awesome show. Yeah, he's cool man. I watched a show on here. He's awesome. Um, yeah. M I C H E L S. And didn't isn't there also I might have made this up as a little bit. Isn't there also like depictions of this in kind of ancient? Yes. Yeah, is that J H N R work three finger three toad people with big heads. Well, that's weird then. When you see this thing, this thing looks exactly like these. This is it. This is an actual scan of this mummy. Look at the size of the head. Look at the shape of the head. Look at all the bones. Look at all the ribs. Everything that's fucking bananas. Now, um, Jamie show him what it looks like before they scan it. So they they found them encased in I think it's dichotomous earth. Is that what it was? But how old do they think these things are? Some of them are 700 years old and some of them are as old as 1700 years old. But look at that thing. So this thing, this thing, that is ridiculous. That seems to be an actual mummy of a real creature. Yeah. And here's the thing like Jesse that. No, yeah, Jesse's right there. Jesse is doing real journalism on this. This is what sounds crazy to everybody, including me as it comes out of my mouth. But then when you look at that scan, not crazy anymore. That's one of a smaller one. But the bigger one with the big head, that one right there, that one's crazy. Like what the fuck is that? If that was a person you would run for the hills with a head that shape with three fingers and three toes. And the fact that they have artwork depicting these things that goes back. Yeah, because if it's a fake, then how are they depicting it? Right. What is this? Like did they have look at look at the scans of the foot? Go back to that. This is crazy. It's almost like it defies the possibility of it being fraudulent. It defies it. It's like make that. You show me how you can make that where you can scan it and you see the tissue and the ligaments and the tendons and the cartilage and the joints and they're not human shaped. Yeah, but they're amazing. I haven't really looked into this, but this is kind of enough. These are real creatures that existed at one point in time alongside us. And they're just now finding them. Now then you get to you get into ultimate weirdness because like, okay, what's the Nascar lines for? Because that's the same part of the world. And then there's another weird like artwork of kind of like things that look alien. Yeah. You know, South America. Well, there's one of the Nascar lines looks like a fucking spacesuit. Looks like a guy in a spacesuit. And also like why would you make artwork that you can only see from the sky? That's always puzzled me about that. Weird. So weird. The same part of the world where you're finding these things. And they're like perfectly done as well. Yeah. And they're perfect like, you know, lines and shapes and weird. And they keep finding new ones. Yeah, they do. Yeah. It's very strange. I mean, South America is just, you know, it's I think South America and Egypt slash Turkey are the two kind of areas that are the most kind of, you know, mysterious and like there's so much going on there that I think we haven't quite acknowledged how much mystery there is still left and fascinating, especially when you throw this in. I mean, I haven't really looked into this at all. But crazy enough to start watching Josh. What is that? Yeah, that's my... What if they find out that's not a human at all? Well, I mean, doesn't it look a, don't look a human? No. Right. Like, I mean, it could be. I guess it's kind of human. But bizarre mutation, right? Like those ostrich feet people in Africa, have you seen that? Yeah. Yeah. I guess so. It's possible that there's some weird mutation. And this is a bunch of people with big heads and three fingers and three toes. But it doesn't seem like it. It seems like something different. Also, what are you doing with three fingers? You're operating electronics only. Like you're picking shit up. You can't do anything. You don't have a poseable thumbs. The idea that you have something that looks like us, it doesn't have a poseable thumbs. Like, yeah, that's like a big evolutionary kind of a vantage. What is this thing doing? Yeah. What are you doing? And last, all you do is like put your hand on a machine and you control everything with telepathy and you just control it by touching it. And you don't need, you know, maybe it gets to a point where we stop using our thumbs and they just fucking drift away. We only need a couple of digits. So what I like, what is like Jesse's theories? What? Oh, their fingers have an extra digit too. What does that mean? So, you know, how like, you know, your finger bends in a certain way. They have what is an extra phalange? What would you call it? An extra little, you know, you have like one, two, three bones. They have a fourth, fourth bone. So you could type quicker with the three fingers. I don't fucking know. But it's like, that's not us. That's something weird. The skull shaped is weird, but it looks like a real thing. Yeah, if that's real, that kind of, you know, changes everything. Changes everything. And you don't hear the New York Times. You're not seeing in the New York Post. It's not in the Wall Street Journal, but they might have actually found a life form in mummified form. That's not us. That looks a lot like these fucking aliens that people have been talking about since the beginning of time. And why is it so why is no one talking about except for Jesse? I don't know, man. Look at that. Look at the X-rays of them. Look at see how it's an extra little thing in the end. That's an incredible fake if that's the fake. That's not our fingers, man. That's a little extra joint. And it's not, the fingers aren't even, you would have to be like the freakiest long fingered motherfucker that's ever lived. That fingers that long. Those are weird. And yes, that's not us. That's something different. Again, anybody who tells you that we know it all, they're full of shit. If that's real, you don't know anything. Yeah. If that's real, if that becomes mainstream, if this is from Jesse, and I hope it does. And they do genetic testing on this thing and then someone figures out what it is, and it's got different chromosomes than us and different DNA than us. Like, now what? Yeah. Exactly. Now what? And what are the chances we have to go everything? You know, because these people seem to think that, you know, we've got it all worked out now. In zero, the chances are zero. Never been the case. And we've always thought we've had it all worked out all the way through history. It's always like, oh, now we know the answers. And it's always, we've always a major paradigm shift around the corner. Exactly. So what's around the corner now? Exactly. Something like this. Or the ancient civilization thing. Yeah. Well, it's so fun though. It's really exciting. It's a really exciting time to find things out because if this had emerged 50 years ago, 75 years ago, there's no Jesse Michaels. There's no YouTube. There's no podcast like this to talk about Jesse Michaels and send a bunch of people over to go watch it. More people know the better. Let's like look at this. This might be real. That's crazy. And that's why it probably is coming out in this kind of day and age because the the internet's not been around for very long. But why is an MSNBC covering this? Why isn't CNN covering this? They should all be covering this. They should all be going, look at these scans that this YouTuber Jesse Michaels did. If this is true, this seems like something that's not a human being. I know it's just too alien to real. This is from 2017 that someone that had found just a hand. Wow. It's obviously the same. The ZARS three fingered hand in 2017. Yeah. Mummified hand found in a tunnel in Peru. It said these fingers had six bones and you do. Wooooo. Regular human bonus three. Whoa. Dude. Mummified hand is made up of bone and skin suggesting that it's not fake unless it was somehow made using real bones flesh and skin. But how would you think? How would you do that a long time ago? Then Mummified. Yeah. It's all so strange. And that part of the world, they've had stories about these kind of creatures forever. That's why they have all this artwork about them. Not only that, that is an exact replica. Like when if you ever see the movie moment of contact, the James Fox movie, it's about an incident incident in Brazil in 1994, 96. The vargina Brazil incident where there was a crashed UFO. These police officers went to go and see this crash. There was some sort of electrical storm. And then they found this creature that seemed to have been injured from the craft. The guy picks it up, takes it in his car. They bring it to a hospital. The hospital refuses to treat it. They bring it to another hospital. That hospital, they don't know what happened with the records or what happened. But they do know that the guy who carried it physically died of a horrible bacterial infection that they could not cure. They said it smelled like sulfur and it had three fingers and three toes. It looked like that thing. It had a long head. And this whatever this creature was that is you know, Mummified looks exactly like what these people were talking about from this UFO crash in vargina Brazil. Like it's the entire folklore of the town. They have a UFO when you enter into the town of vargina. They have like this giant statue of a UFO. There's still people alive to this day that live in that town that will tell you the story. And you can go across town. You can go here. They all have the same story. There's multiple UFOs in the sky. One of them crashed. They found two creatures. One of them was alive. They think one of them was dead. Whatever this crash site was, they bring in the movie moment of contact. They bring this police officer to the site and he starts weeping. Like if that guy's, if he's a liar, he's the greatest actor of all time. The guy starts freaking out and he starts telling the story of what he found in the 1990s. It like brings him back to that moment. The women who saw the being, they're like in their 40s now. They were little girls when they saw it. And they all have the same story. And it matches three fingers. Three toes looked like that. It looked exactly like that. Man, if all of us aren't doing the ancient history thing, I'd love to talk about this stuff as well. It might be the same thing. Yeah. I mean, you never know. You never know. I'd like to like make some, you know, connection. But things I don't, I just don't want to give anyone more ammunition to come off the mean shit. Like they're coming after you buddy. They're coming off today. Yeah, they're going to after all the nonsense that we've talked. Probably. It's fun to talk nonsense. And this is definitely fun nonsense. But that body's not nonsense. The vardini thing, I don't think is nonsense either. It's weird. It's a really much. That's kind of story exactly how they're going to go match to the mummified bodies. That's that's weird. Not just that. But biblical stories about creatures that are demons, it's Malek solver. Yeah. Right. If you're terrified of something and you think you've decided that it's a demon because it's actually an advanced life form from somewhere else. And it smells like sulfur. Like whatever they have that got on this guy's skin that gave him this horrible bacterial and fits all documented, the guy died. He was a young healthy soldier and he's dead within like a couple of weeks. Yeah, that's that's not quite. They're given a man about Alex's in 90s. It's not like the yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, they're treating him with modern medicine and he's fucked and he dies. Yeah. And this is the guy that was carrying the alien. Are you fucking kidding me? I ain't looking into this. It smells like sulfur. And it looks exactly like a thing that's a real thing. Yeah. And they have a real mommy of these things. Yeah. And see if you just get an image, an artist depiction. So they had these kids describe what they saw and they drew this three finger, three toad little. It's like almost like a purple looking thing. And you think that's linked in any way. So with this kind of mysterious stone construction, we find in South America that no one can really explain. And here we go. What is the image, the thing that was curled up in the ground? It was like, I mean, yeah, that one that that one with the red eyes. No, yeah, that one, that's what it looked like. Somebody actually made a sculpture of that would exactly what it looked like and gave it to us. We have it at the mothership. But the thing is, it was an alien. Why would it look so human? If that makes sense or less, it came from this planet, I suppose. Right. But does it look human? Maybe that's just like a con, that's a, maybe that's a constant thing when you evolve from primates. And maybe there's a thing about the alien gray to that's always been like this archetype of what we eventually will become. Well, the big skinny limbs. Yeah. So this is how those guys described it. This is how they describe what it looked like. Man, that looks an awful lot like that creature. Uh-huh. The big eyes, the whole deal, the weird, spindly body, that drawing right there where it's hunched over, the ones that run to your cursor. Yeah, that's the ones my favorite. Because it's like, what is 1996? Like, I don't know. I don't know what the hell that is. But what if it's real? And what if those things in Peru are exactly that thing? And what if, you know, this thing has visited human beings multiple times in history. So would you say it's from another planet? And who knows? It might be from here. That's why I think, because if it's got to be kind of similar, kind of like primate form. It might look, if these things are, they're finding these mummified remains in Peru. Clearly it was here. Why would we assume it's not from here? Yeah. Like maybe we just have a really inaccurate timeline of life on this planet. And maybe some things went under sea, which sounds nuts. But then there's all these fucking videos of things coming out of the water. That's where I would hide. If I, it was trying to hide. Or, you know, if you've mastered gravity at the point where you create like a bubble around everything you are and you travel through it without any resistance whatsoever. And they've clocked things going underwater that are going like 500 knots underwater. If no idea how it does that. Yeah. Well, it's kind of, it's like this, I mean, you probably know more about this than me. But my only exposure to the kind of UAP thing was traditionally through. I'm big five, uh, I think 182 and there's a Tom Delong is very time to learn. Yeah, you've had him more. You've had Travis on as well. You need to get him to get him to get Mark. He's the third. He's a complete the set. I've always, I'm in a band. I was like, I don't know love time either. I was crazy. I thought he was crazy when I had him on before. And now I'm like, damn, I think he might be on something. Well, he's so cool. He's always been like an inspiration for me. Like, I make music and he's been, you know, a big, uh, you know, inspiration for me. But he always got me into, he kind of got me into the UAP thing from all. He's all in. Yeah, he's all in. But I do have to say that if I wanted, if I was the government and I wanted to like spread a bunch of crazy stories about UFOs, I tell them to people like Tom. And I guess that yeah. And I tell them to people like me. I mean, I think people do that on this podcast. I think some of the information that gets shared on this podcast is probably bullshit to kind of like, you know, hard to do. Yeah. And to prime people for disclosure, yeah, I think the if I was in charge and if I had done the Hal put off thing, you know, how put off was assigned to do. Yes. So they they gave him a new numerical value for all these different things that would be positively influenced by disclosure and negatively influenced. And you assign a value one through 10 to like what's going to happen to religion. What's going to happen to politics was banking all that stuff. And this was during the Bush administration. So Bush essentially said to Hal put off the Bush administration said, we have been working on a crash retrieval program. We have vehicles that are not from this world. We are not alone. If we release this information to the general public and disclose it, what will be the negative impact? What will be the positive impact? Is it overall positive or is it overall negative? And everyone, they there was a bunch of different independent people that they assigned this task to everyone came up with much more on the negative than on the positive. So he decided to not disclose it. This is how put off story. I can't I can't tell you if it's true or not. But why say it was naked being naked just because it's like the shock. Yeah, the shock, the completely lack of any real faith in authority figures. Like why would you listen to the president of the United States when there's fucking UFOs reading your mind and traveling instantaneously here from wherever they're from? Like all of our systems of power and control, they all go away because we don't you're not in control anymore. Clearly the aliens are in control. People would worship the aliens. But do you think that kind of like drip feeding us? And then at some point it would come out. But then isn't that going to happen anyway? I don't think it's totally organized because I think most things in the government are not totally organized. I guess there's a lot of chaos going on at all levels of the government. I really believe that. And to think that in this top secret, UFO crash retrieval world, there's not a lot of chaos just using chaos and everything. This chaos in the FBI. There having problems. The CIA has its own problems. Every organization has great people and a bunch of clowns and a bunch of nutty people that don't want to lose their positions of power and these little struggles enter office bullshit in every organization with human beings. So for sure that's the same thing with UFO disclosure. And then I think there's also a problem with if there really is a crash retrieval program and it's been going on for a long time and it's been going on without congressional oversight. That means you've been lying and you've been misappropriating money and guess jail. Everybody's fucked. So what's the best way to like you got a slowly trickle out the information and you got to mix it up with a whole lot of bullshit. A whole lot of nonsense and then fly some drones over people and see how they respond. I remember that thing. That was something recently about that wasn't it? The New Jersey thing. There's giant drones over New Jersey and then they try to find them with fighter jets that lights would shut off and they was not take off. What was that? How did they? Who fucking knows? They just brush over that. Yeah. They say, oh, what's ours? Like, did it even tell us exactly what was going on? But it was almost like a national emergency. It was a national story. It was I remember Trump saying that it was not going to go play golf in New Jersey because they were flying in New Jersey. Was this pre election before he became president? I think was it Biden? I think it was during. Was it during? Yes. I think it was. I think it was December. I think it was December. I don't think he was the president yet. No, he became president. Right. Right. Right. Right. But it was a post election. It was post election. Right. I can't remember as Mike Ben saying that this has happened a couple of years in a row and they were waiting for a tap in this year. It did and then he also predicted it would just disappear a few weeks later and it did. Yeah. Like, what was that? Maybe it's just a grand show that they put on for us to distract us from some other stuff. Maybe there's some banking fucking decisions that were going on at that time that we would have probably paid attention to. Yeah. I mean, look at the drones. Yeah. No, that's a real thing. Yeah. Of course. I would do that. I'd fired some drones. Or maybe if I was trying to pull off some shenanigans. Couldn't it just be, you know, like advanced weapons or technology that, you know, we have or, you know, your government has the could most certainly because it doesn't have to be alien just for it to be like more advanced than like the kind of public knows about. Most certainly. Yeah. Most certainly. I would imagine that a lot of what we're dealing with is advanced American military craft and probably done through some top secret research that was real shady. Probably a lot of people spend a whole lot of money doing this stuff. And there's probably some, like this is the people that have gone to S4 and talked about it. You can't, it's all anecdotal, so you never really know if they're telling the truth. But there's been people that have no reason alive. They'd say that they have technology that is 40, 50 years past anything that you can imagine right now. Yeah. And they already have it and they've been spending shit piles of money making the wildest things that your mind can ever conceive of. And they already have it. And it probably looks super alien when they take it out. Yeah. I mean, why would they tell us what the most advanced thing they have is they wouldn't, they would not. Not going to be public information. Exactly. Exactly. So even current history is confusing. Yeah. So the idea of you knowing exactly what happened 5,000 years ago, shut up, bitch. You don't know. You definitely don't know if you find a 12 million year old wheel, like 300 million year old. It's only nuts. Yeah, exactly. We don't know what's going on now. So how could we know what's going on? So the wheel is 300 million years, but the car tracks the car tracks or what 12 million year old. That's what this guy says. And it's all fun. It's all fun. And it's very interesting. And I'm really glad you're out there because I have binge watched your show. You do a great job. It's really informative and interesting and speculative and fascinating because I just love the subject. And I think you just do a great job. So I hope you get a lot of views and you keep doing it. And I'm happy that you're doing it. And I'm really happy that you came here. Well, thank you, Jeremy. It's been a great honor to be here to be out and Austin. I've loved it. It's incredible one experience and yeah, it's been really fun talking to you. And I'm super appreciative of the opportunity. Yeah. So thanks so much. My pleasure. So tell everybody how to find you social media stuff. Just put my name in. I'm Michael Button. And I'm on YouTube, I guess. And they'll probably find me if I'm doing my job correctly. That's me on the screen. Michael Button one. Michael Button one. Yeah. There's someone else out there who's got my name. Yeah. So don't go to Michael Button. I'm a two guy. Michael Button one. That seems so silly. Yeah. Talk to the other Michael Button. Yeah. Maybe he's a nice guy. Yeah. Just go to the name. Just got your name. Yeah. All right. Well, thank you brother. Appreciate it. Thank you, Jeremy. Bye, everybody.