What do you eat now in there directly into the microphone? Fisherman's friend should be illegal, my life or Fisherman's friend. It's like let's like a gross cough drop, right? But you don't feel like doing when I lecture a lot and you're speaking a loud voice for a long time Sometimes I always my throat is killing me. I take one of these things I don't fucking feel anything for 20 minutes. It's like anesthesia or something. It's insane Interesting I have to look you know, but it tastes like shit, right? Yeah, but it's so bad that it's beyond tasting good or bad. It's like it's a whole like medicine too Yeah, it's something else this episode of the Joe Rogan experience podcast is brought to you by carbonite carbonite is a backup option where you can back up all your data and information online small businesses Regular folks like you or I that have a lot of shit that you're trying to back up It's really simple proposals contracts invoices contact lists all essential stuff for running your businesses Uploading it online is a nice safe easy way to make sure it's always there Carbonite is available for all computers It's it works on everything and when you have carbonite you'll never have to worry about losing your computer files no matter How many computers your business has or where they're located carbonite backs up your files to the cloud securely? Automatically and continually which is a very nice thing if you're a guy like me that's always like yeah I got to remember to back that up. I don't back shit up I think I'm gonna back it up. I know I'm gonna back it up and it never gets done But this way it does it easily it does it Automatically and you don't have to think too much about it keeps your file safe Without any hassle for you or your employees and it's affordable We use carbonite here on the podcast and you could try it to use the offer code JRE for a free trial No credit card required plus two free bonus months with your subscription So that's carbonite dot com and the offer code is JREs go to carbonite Dot com and get your free gone back your shit up son. Take it seriously, okay? Please we also brought to you by stamps calm stamps calm is a nice easy way for you to send things through the mail Without having going to go to the post office and waste shit You have you weigh it at home. They provide you the digital scale You enter in the information your computer print up the actual postage on a printer Slap it on the box and it's gone As soon as the mail man comes handed to him you have to deal with any of the nonsense of going to a an actual post office Getting in the actual line and dealing with an actual employee that doesn't actually give a fuck What you're sending it doesn't really want to talk to you and you're you're being annoying man If I was working on the post office and this asshole came in with 36 boxes of different sizes How boring this way you could do it all at home and with this no risk trial Use the como the promo code JRE you got a hundred and ten dollar bonus offer which includes the digital scale and up to $55 a free postage all of it again can be done through your home Computer you just hand the boxes to the post man when he comes and your dignity diggity done That's it you don't have to deal with any more nonsense So use the code word JRE click on the microphone the old-schooly microphone in the upper right hand corner and enter in that Code for your one hundred and ten dollar special bonus offer We're also brought to you by on it. That's oh and and I T dot com oh and and I T and we just started carrying these new Zombie bells these are the latest and greatest of the primal bell type series We started with the ones were just apes with gorillas and chimps and A ranked tens now how are monkeys but now we've expanded into the supernatural and we have actual zombie artwork that we were was created by the same guy who did the the champs his name Stephen Shuben Jr. Very talented artist and he created the gorilla the champs and the monkeys and all these pretty badass zombies So I feel like I'm a in your obsessed with the walkie dead. These are an excellent way To get your work out on and have a little fun with it while you're at it. They're all 3d balance. So they're all They're they're Weighted and balanced perfectly for exercise not just for looks. We made sure that they're they're designed They're designed sort of meshed well with the actual idea of using them I mean it's cool that they look cool and everything like that But you really want to be able to work out with them so you can work out with them just as easy as you can with a regular kettlebell We also sell battle robes weight vest steel maces lots of supple months We got all sorts of new shared that's just come in including digestive enzymes and on it 180 on it 180 is The idea said when you travel or when you go out and get you drink you drink on you It's it's nice to have something that can replenish all the nutrients in your body in one little step To zip one of these little packets and toss it into a glass of water. It has a a lot of different things It combines the neurotransmitter support of alpha brain the best Adaptogens from Shroom tech support some 5h.T.P. from new mood and some minerals for the immune system And these nutrients play a key role in supporting multiple body systems for recovery from stress like a lot of what you're If you if you get hungover or if you fly that terrible feeling that you have a lot of that is just being dehydrated a lot of that It's just lacking water and nutrients and something like 180 can really help you recover from that shit Sun Use the code word JRE no Rogan I'm trying to fuck every commercial up on purpose just so they eventually you're forced to give me one code Use the code word Rogan and save 10% off any no supplements Boom shell lock lock boom Daniele bow lily and Dan Carlin here ladies and gentlemen this shit could get epic The Joe Rogan experience If I had a thing of the two guys that have freaked me out the most with stories of the past It's YouTube gentlemen We do it's a pleasure for out of all the years of listening to podcasts and talking to you guys on the podcast You are without a doubt these the two men who have freaked me out the most you with that crazy story about the bodies on the stakes Was it in Persia or Rome? What was the story that guys? I think I told you to one about of course Impelling and all the fun stuff that was with it and the other one was about the end of Spartacus rebellion Where they crucify some 5,000 people on the road between Naples and Rome. That was it. Yeah That's dark that would be a trip that you probably remember if you take the road on those days Could you even imagine just what I mean just the idea? I mean how many miles is that what is five thousand people? How far do they space them out about a hundred miles something like that? Hundred miles of crucified bodies everybody so many steps one more You know, what is that a blink in terms of actual time on this planet just a blink ago Like these same things that we go to school with and go to the supermarket with these same humans are capable of that Oh, the darkest of dark days From your podcast and from Danielis I think I The understanding of how easy we got it is really cemented home You know your your stories some of the stories like especially One of the ones that I really enjoyed recently is the Martin Luther tale the tale of Lutheranism and the Anabaptists in the city of Munster and all that Fastened to wake up on a huge scale. Yeah Fascinating fascinating stuff and again not that long ago man 1500 something what was it oh a guy like that could arise today too and to I mean they still make those kind of people Yeah, yeah, they do we what you know, but is it about people that fall for that shit? I mean it's just There's a sucker born every minute, right? Why what is the flaw in humans that we're willing to believe people that are that fucking? That's so my take is the appeal of authority. That's why the e-tlers of the world gain an audience is because Most people are insecure most people like a father figure to tell them I got it under control. I'm the strong man in charge I can take care of business look at me And I think there's an appeal of people who have that the issues they like dictators, you know They at that's partly it's likely over simplified But I think there's a part of it. There's also a thing where I think people really terribly want to be a part of a group I like very very much so and the more Extreme their devotion to that group is sometimes the more rewarding the actual experience of being in the group is it means something special to be a part of this Wacky group of crazy fucks. It's willing to murder people like it's almost like this extra charge of being alive That's missing from a lot of people's lives. I think that being involved in a cult or you know Any sort of crazy wild rebellious group that's doing dangerous things it's like it's almost to fill a void That's left in in human beings that we've sort of like there's these echoes of our primal days that are still just Linguing around in our DNA looking to be played upon with the right harp note You know, I think there's almost two when you think about like a Hitler There's some wonderful film you can see of Hitler with crowds on the street And you can see the look in the people's eyes and they look like they're seeing a movie star And they just want to get a little touch maybe my hand will touch his fingers and and you just you think to yourself Hitler as a celebrity type figure, but there's that same thing about about because you're famous because I Don't even know I've never understood the celebrity thing where people just get dumb around But it's the same sort of the look in the eyes and it's like seeing Elvis and instead it's Hitler Yeah, yeah, I think you're on to something there for sure because there's something about the the ultimate celebrity Experience like meeting a guy like Obama or meeting a guy, you know any any world leader type There would be so overwhelming just that the presence of that person now think about this all happening at a time Well, you know, it's fucking really hard to get a book right, you know really hard to be properly educated And no alternative media sources that we face today You know Pete goof on alternative media all you want online and some of it as much deserved But the one thing these guys do is they'll cover all kinds of fringe shit and that'll be their headline news You know like I'll go to salon and people excuse Accuse the lawn of being like to left wing and to you know, but there's some smart people that are pushing it that way I what I like what they're doing is that their front news is like it's not like the front news that you're gonna get on CNN It's front news about you know like gay and lesbian rights and things in the workplace and you know What what what politicians said about you know what race that was deplorable and all that stuff's like front row shit Yeah, that's really really lefty very very lefty, but that's important to like it's it's important to have like a Balance out of super ultra sensitive to balance out the fucking savages of the 1500s They're still rolling around in our DNA, you know You need someone out there on the fringes of super sensitive progressive behavior just to try to like give us a better Medium give us a better baseline well Let me and let me bring it back to that that monster podcast We talked about one of the sub-teams in that was whether or not you remember that the whole question But whether or not regular people should be able to read the Bible Yeah, this goes to what you said about salon or all these alternative media sites because the prime minister and great Britain Overall these Snowden leaks and what the Guardian has done was talking about, you know Maybe we should dial this back. Maybe it's time for some press restrictions in other words Maybe it's maybe this is too darn dangerous that you're getting to read all this stuff And we don't have a choke point to shut it down because in the regular media whether it was ABC CBS NBC the Washington Post There are choke points where you know these people literally just pick up the red phone to the editor of the Washington Post and say Let's talk about this story. You're thinking about running. That's a great choke point When you have the media as diversified as it is now all those choke points go away and the David Cameron's and all these people Miss the choke points and there's people like Glenn Greenwald or Edward Snowden in a lesser extent because he's on the run and hiding That become huge celebrities because of information that they release to people like Greenwald You know, I know they harass him and they've harassed his boyfriend. They detained his boyfriend in England and But the bottom line is that guy became super famous because of this so it's a positive thing Well think of how he changed the world I mean I had a lot of people write when the story broke say this is no big deal Nothing we haven't heard all this kind of stuff. They're not saying that now even even John Kerry The president all these people have come out and said things that oh maybe we shouldn't be doing this Maybe we should be having this discussion. It's really changed the world all this stuff We're talking about now with the NSA. That's all Edward Snowden stuff. Yeah It's amazing that that one guy can have that kind of impact and in the future when they look back on today and I think historically he's getting swept under the rug and what he's done and the impact of it is just sort of getting ignored By the media and more and more they pain him as this controversial figure You know more and more they pain him as this guy on the run from the NSA But there's no support of him like in anything Mainstream right there's no support of what he did or who he is or no There's no call to action for the government to release this guy that he's actually a patriot that he's actually is looking out for the true American way and is exposing people to people not the America But people in America that are making a huge mistake and they're doing it for the name of America and whether or not they think it's right or wrong Ultimately, we don't think it's right and ultimately finding out about it pissed the entire world off That's the facts so if the government was really representing the people they would look at it in terms of like What do all the intelligent people who reviewed this thing? Yeah, it's a travesty. It's a fuck up It's it's anti-American the idea of is ridiculous and the idea this is the only way you can control Security is by spying on every fucking person within the terrorists of one and that's that's a victory because that's terror for everybody That's no privacy that's weirdness that's Employees like Snowden who they kept going on and on about how he failed high school high school dropout high school High school dropout that could read my email man. Yeah high school dropout. That just makes you look worse You guys that pass code to that high school dropout. What the fuck? Why are you goofing on him? You hired him? You know, it's ridiculous. You fucking hired that guy to watch everybody's but think of how you know You were talking about one person just one guy but think about how much that same attitude scares the government one Of there many many many thousands of workers was able to do that Yeah, that's scary on the whole opposite side. You know what it is to I think we're dealing with a bit of a and this is Kind of gets them a little off the hook I think you have a bubble mentality in all you I mean in life you have them in professions I mean scientists get it unions get it bureaucracy get it the army gets it the police gets it where where people get promoted These guys all get promoted to the top NSA positions because they're better at spying they figure out Better ways to get around defenses and all they they don't get promoted to that special room where there's five or six of them Making policy because they did a better job of finding a fourth amendment that doesn't let them spy Yeah, so when they're in the room They all see the world the same way so you tend and this happens like I said in every profession They tend to push each other forward because there's no devil's advocate there saying wait a minute Maybe we shouldn't use every power we have to spy as much as we can To those people you see these NSA guys testifying in front of Congress and they don't even hide how mad they are at us How mad they are that this is even known how mad that they have to be there how mad you're questioning them and it's because there's nobody in the room saying guys We shouldn't do this and and really to be honest There's no obvious line where you should call the dogs off, you know where you should say hey Maybe this is okay, but that's not okay. That does not have they they talk about the fourth amendment But then the other guy goes well, we're not really violating the fourth amendment if we just take everybody's trash It cans and we keep it in the storage locker with their name on it We're only violating it if we actually like search through their trash We will do later if we have to and then then everything's on the kosher up enough if Jaya Grouver wants to search Joe Rogan's trash for evidence of illegal activity You're gonna have to send a physical agent out there to do that now We just collect the trash on trash day bring it to the NSA headquarters dump it in there and we'll sift through it later We have to yeah, they could essentially To an end on anybody anywhere in the world now with a flip of a switch. Yeah, and that kind of powers awesome If you guys are like super enlightened monks that are designed to save the world But it was going right exactly that's a regular person. You can't have that kind of juice regular person just can't have Autonomy over all these people's information. What if Richard Nixon had it? That's what I'll say And you think you're not gonna get another one of those dude would have dic chaney had it he did have it Did he have it? Yeah, you think so absolutely he he put it into place man So they were accessing everybody's emails as far as this all go Yeah, there's a book called the one percent doctrine where they talk about how after the 9-11 attacks The rule that they decided and mainly because of dic chaney to operate under was if there's even a one percent chance of another 9-11 happening Anything is fair you can do anything right to justify and I think what their attitude was is on you know 9 12 2002 everybody would have said oh yeah, okay, whatever it takes man. Don't let that happen again when it was still fresh in our minds Yeah, there was a weird moment after 9-11 where I remember driving to school or to work rather and As I was driving as I was driving to to work It was early in the morning and all the commuters were going and Everybody had a flag on the car. Yeah, everybody had it. It was weird. It was a weird feeling It was it wasn't just a it was like everybody was reminding everybody How long did that last two because I'm thinking I just said 2002 never reason to go to hand don't you know the 9 11 attacks happened it has one but a year later that was still an open wound And so how long how when do you think if you had to guess when did it start to wear off and we started to normalize I mean New York City is exempt because I don't think they ever Re-normalize but for the rest of the country how long do you think it took to get over that PTSD? I think it took a few years two or three years like that I give even more Yeah, like bush sack cuz I mean bush being a real act that made no fucking sense and there any point of view Other than part of the 9 11 bush that he got for a while Was also the real problem with the voting machines that was a real yeah, I openly Reported problem with those di-bold machines and all about the candidate Iran against that's always Good body if you're running against John F Kennedy you lose that election, but you're not you're running against the guy You just go oh really that's my option. That's what kills you. Yeah, well and a lot of people felt like the the Al Gore election That got Bush in the office in the first that was a weird thing to do that was a weird one There's so much fuckery involved in voting man like real open fuckery that should be like really it's treason It's treasonous behavior and these people openly do it in order to help their candidates win I mean it's one of the most un-American things of all time manipulating the vote like that I think somebody who who was a political operative would say to you that it's one of the most American Because it's been going on I mean you know George Washington's giving hard cider to people You know when they come to his little parties to get I mean this is The problem is is that I and we've talked about this before I think there's a certain amount of this that a healthy society the healthy political system can suck up and still be okay There's a certain tipping point where you're not that healthy anymore and what was okay before is not suck up a bull anymore I love that Well, it also it begs the question all the stuff begs the question like first of all everyone's Favorite argument is if you have nothing to hide then what do you worry about? And it's not that What what it is is first of all why do you need so much information and what What have you done that has made so many people so angry? You have to check everyone's email like what is the actual cause of all this that never gets addressed? Like whenever we're talking about how this group hates us that group hates us and this group is playing Why why what did we I want to take what we do? I want to go with what you said that the if you have nothing to hide because I was just I was trying to get a show up before I came here and I failed miserably But one of the things I was going to talk about did you see that story the lawsuit filed from that incident in New Mexico With the driver who didn't do the full stop at leaving Walmart you saw right right so so the police pull them over for California stopping the stop sign decide that he looks like he's clenching his butt hawks in a weird way and This is the part I love goes to a judge and says to the judge while this guy sitting on the side of the road He's clenching his buttocks in a weird way I think we have somebody trying to hide drugs in there and the judge goes I guess judging from the story Yeah, that would be probable cause so they take this guy to a doctor who refuses to do with the police officers arrest They got to go to another doctor 14 hours of anal cavity searches Anamas they sedated him and did a colonoscopy they examined his Stuff right in front of him 14 hours found nothing x-rated multiple I've found nothing and then apparently send him a $6,000 bill for the procedure so when you say What have you got to hide if in unless you're hiding that's what can happen to you if And not just that what I love is the police department spokesman said we didn't do anything wrong This is policy and we had a judge sign off on it So when you say if if you have nothing to hide what do you care this guy had nothing to hide And that happened to him he clearly did because he was clenching his butt in a weird way I know but now now that story is true and the lawsuit claims witnesses and all this kind of stuff And the police officers think nothing was wrong there That's what happens to you when you get rid of these protections that keep you from being searched really nearly or anything like that After a story like that every one in the ward was gonna be stopped by the police is gonna claim she's Batter the weird way. They just the fear of this story. It's like Shit, oh, the little doscope it up. You gonna get people that are butt freaks and that's what they're into they're into Cops checking them out I'd shredgers up there put secrets up there. I didn't mean to I didn't mean to take the conversation Not direction. It's a great direction. It's hilarious It's well, it's fucked up that if you search someone's ass for 14 hours and there's nothing up there That guy should be able to search yours for 28 that should be the rule He should be able to throw firecrackers in there and You know come on man. You check his ass for no reason like you owe him something What bothers me about that is that there's no penalty that actually affects the people who did this in other words That this guy wins his big lawsuit against him. That's the taxpayers who are gonna pay that the people who did it don't suffer at all Yeah, like someone falsely accusing someone of murder or theft or so, you know any crime like that Almost should be worth just as much if you know if you set a guy up for murder and you know He didn't really do it. It should be worth almost as much as like murdering somebody They're talking about that with these podcast troll lawsuits and everything to change the The law that they're working on in DC would do some of that would put like some of the onus on these people Who say these things and if you lose your case all of a sudden you're the one responsible for the day another word something Don't know this story. Yeah, tell that story. I don't know the folks down of it from what I understand someone out there has a patent Says they have it says they have a patent on I'm in a very very broadly paraphrase this I think it was putting something up in serial form on the internet So essentially be like every podcast every YouTube channel every everything we invented that yeah You all this money The idea is ridiculous like if you have the Bolele blog and you decide to number them either you're violating a patent Obviously I might be way off with this, but he sent some or the company had already won they had beaten On a different thing though a different thing an apple on another patent style lawsuit Which may or may not have been more worthy? But this one is strange because he's targeting podcasters and so it's a big the whole goal is to get you Shake down though, we essentially say we're not gonna get you you stole our technology, but it's fine Just give us a thousand dollars a month and nobody gets hurt that much. Oh, I'm sure it's been a lot But it's talk to your friend Adam Corolla. He got a letter. Yeah Yeah, well, that's ridiculous You know the idea that you could patent putting things up in serialized form in the internet It's like in 1994 or something or whenever they claim to have it done. It's what people have always done I mean we put everything up in serialized form. Do you imagine if someone allowed them to do that with television shows? You can never number episodes anymore. It's a stupidest idea of all time like the idea that you could control that But see it, but it's not stupid if you're them and the lawyers and everything because that thing that they're working on in DC isn't there yet You take a shot right, you know you take a shot and you see what happens. There's no downside Yeah, I could see that I could see it from their point of view from strictly business Sure, they build a book we're playing within the rules. These are the rules and this is how you get paid But I think that you know ultimately we're gonna have to agree on something that makes a lot more sense Because you know you can't get money for nothing from people and that's money for nothing you're not contributing anything I really do think you can get money for nothing for people. I'm of the totally I think we do that all the time. Well, we shouldn't I can't get money for nothing. I'm talking about the ideal scenario. Okay, let's make that clear. Yeah, we let's make that clear Obviously people get something for nothing, right? I think we're good We're gonna have a real problem in this country no matter what as long as our financial systems remain so vague and it is it fluctuates Goes up and down today the Dow crash tomorrow the Dow rises Like if as long as that's a possibility like how could you ever have anything stable ever When you're in time the entire foundation of your economy is by nature fluctuating daily by nature up and down So much so that you have to close business at a certain time stop fucking trading You have to blow whistle off and say no more decisions No more to snow you got to stop we have to control this economy We have to allow chaos only in eight hour bursts When those bursts are over we have to literally imagine how many trades there would be the what the second the market opens when they've had a Whole night to digest stuff. Okay first thing in the morning It's billions of dollars We got to get this trade in before because everybody will beat us to it and I think can you imagine what the market would do? You know on opening now and now in the old days that's how it was but now with the digital trading all at one Second there'd be 10 bazillion trades in a second and a half What's a strange idea the idea that you could only make transactions during a very? Yeah, especially in a global economy when the people in Japan are going so we can only trade on American things when we're asleep at night I don't understand yeah, it's stupid it's stupid But if they went 24 hours people would just take fucking out of raw and just hit it hard people be dying of lack of sleep That's right way more than Starcraft all those people that are dying from playing Starcraft Yeah, well that's not even for real money right You know you play your economy you're playing it for real money But can you what do you do? Like can you day trade in the middle of the night or do you have to do it during stock market hours? I think it just up I think you can set up trades to be to be enacted at the market open or whatnot But you can't just ride the wave and go up and sound sell and buy I don't think so unless you're doing it Maybe on Tokyo time maybe you could do the Tokyo stock change When you're a real addict and you all man the US market close working I play Tokyo is just coming alive Yeah, it is like an addiction. I really truly believe it I don't think it's possible that it couldn't be when you're gambling and You mean essentially the stock market is a lot of gambling. Yeah, you know especially the way some of these people play It's one thing to say I'm gonna buy Coca-Cola and sell it in 25 years It's another thing when you're going to buy Coca-Cola and sell it in 20 seconds Yeah, I mean even if you're right like if you say no look it seems like it can gamble to you because you're uneducated But I in fact are very educated on this and it's it's more of a calculated risk But the reward to risk ratio is very high a lot of variables But they got to show it again. Blur old we say it can show you on paper. We you know We've profited you know X amount of years. I wrote. This is not nearly as unstable as you like thinking Part of their charge is the fact that it is a little right. So 2008 happens every now and then We're fucking everybody scrambling and no one's got a chair and the music to shut off What I love about that is when they show you you go to the financial advisors office They always show you the historical the way these things are performed historically and it's always the the graph starts right after the last terrible Crash, yeah, you just go well what about what about the depression? Well the we you know the depression was an unusual situation That'll never happen again and I think today they must start it from like last week an herbal crash. And you just go, well, what about the depression? Well, the depression was an unusual situation. That'll never happen again. And I think today they must start it from like last week. Don't you think? Like, this is your historical performance in the last seven day period. Yeah, we don't know. I think the idea of trying to control an entire global economy like that is preposterous. It just doesn't make any sense. I don't understand it at all. And the people that understand it have tried to comfort me in the sure me that it doesn't fact make good sense. Right. And if that's not scary enough, then you get the collusion of government and the weird economy where, I mean, when you think about the fact that there are no laws against the fact that if you have worked for some companies, you can pick up a government job, overseeing the workings of those very companies or vice versa. You are in government first. And the second, you are done. You can pick up your vice president position in one of the companies that you just finished benefiting. Yeah. That's beyond pervert. It's so transparent. You know, one of the ways that they've said our society could go down, though, and other societies have throughout history is that sometimes they just get too complex to manage. And you can ride that wave sometimes until something bad happens. But a perfect example is, I mean, a lot of people said that the Great Depression happened because what was going on in the financial system overwhelmed people's ability to understand and react and compensate for things. And I remember people saying, well, we'll never have another Great Depression because we're so on top of things now. Yeah, but we have new variables that we don't understand that somebody in the future is going to say they were such idiots way back there in the early 21st century. Well, me is a barely educated fool. When I look at exactly how everything is fluctuated in raw, you know, the crash in 2008 and all, it makes zero sense. Because as a fool, I look at it and I go, look at this. There's the same amount of people. There's the same amount of metal. There's the same amount of concrete. The same amount of plastic, same amount of material things. No one is produced or taken away anything from the pile of humanities creations. And yet all of a sudden, everyone's broke. Like all of a sudden, everything fell apart. And people who were prospering just a week ago are no longer prospering. When I look at something like that, I have to feel like, okay, these guys are obviously far smarter than I and they're running the system. So either it's rigged as fuck and someone just extracted a shitload of money out of the system and did it under the guise of a crash or people were way fucking dumber than I'd give them credit. It's one of those two things. And I feel like when a guy like that, that cat from New York that ripped everybody off in the Ponzi scheme, the old dude, was his mate off. Bernie made off. When a cat like Bernie made off comes along and robbed so many people, I have to go wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. So no one knows how this thing works. Well, but I mean, look, I mean, it's not that hard to understand when people are playing with things that aren't real but selling it for real money. And then you're counting that as something that you own. For example, we take these toxic assets, right? It's not as hard to understand as people suggest. Let's say I put you in a house you can't afford. And all the evidence shows you can't afford it. And I wouldn't have given it to you 20 years ago. And then I take a bunch of people like you and I take all of your bad things that you're never gonna be paying back. And I bundle it into something and then I sell that to someone else based on the value that isn't really there because none of you can really pay it back. And then you say, well, I'm worth this much money. I own these assets and they're worth this much money. And then those assets collapse and all of a sudden, you looked like you had $50 million in your asset tree of stuff and all of a sudden, you don't. You bought something that was worth nothing. And so all that money that you had on paper just disappeared overnight because it wasn't real to begin with. And weren't there banks during this crisis that were actually banking on things falling apart? Hoping that they were. Yes, hedging. Yes, exactly. So, profiting. That often it falling apart. It's supposed to be a risk management diversification tool. Jesus Christ, that's a great way of saying. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. I'm just using the proper terminology. I'm gonna write that down because it's a brilliant way of fucking someone in the US. This is a risk management. Not a risk management for you. A risk management for them. Right. How do they just get risk management? A verification tool. That is goddamn hilarious. I think that's the greatest. That's the greatest. The cops in New Mexico said that to the guys. That's right. Searching your cavity is a risk management. A classification tool. I'm actually writing that down. It's so beautiful. I think you use that for all kinds. Use it in the MMA color commentary. Him throwing that punch that way is a risk management diversification. If anybody hears that, though, if I pretended that I actually came up with it on my own, I would get shit. All the financial advisors who watched the MMA would be going, now he's talking. If I'm saying it now, I have to say it as an inside joke. Yeah. That's a link, link. Risk management diversification tool. That's how we're fucking beautiful. That's hilarious. That's a brilliant way of putting it. I'm out. Then I'm out of it. But just the idea that that could be legal, that you could be loing people money, setting up loans, and also gambling on the fact that you'll profit if those loans, if they default on those loans. Look, we know you can't afford this mortgage, but don't worry. If you can't pay it, you'll be taken out of your house, and we'll win on this other side over here. That's my point as an uneducated fool. When I look at that system, I go, well, obviously, they set it up so they can extract money. That's the only way it makes sense. If you have the same amount of people, you have the same amount of knowledge, you have the same amount of items, and yet all of a sudden, everything fell apart. Somebody fucked you. They just did it in a way that's legal. No, I mean banks, I have to tell you, I started because this is too crazy. I remember when I went from to when it comes to one, after my wife died and everything. And so I applied for the, I forgot how they call it, low modification, right? It's like, how conditions have changed, you can modify the loan to help somebody stay in the house all that, right? So I get two letters from the bank. In the same day, one, I open and say, we can't give you the low modification because you make too much money. You're doing too well, you don't need it. I open the next letter and say, we can't give you a low modification because there's no hope you can keep the house. You make too little money, there's just no way. And I'm like, what the fuck? Did you talk to each other at least? Because you're the same department. You're said really, this is what it's about. They just have, I bet probably like patent excuses, especially when they feel like you're probably gonna lose the house. They're like, good, we'll just snatch up his house. This is where it gets better. I knew somebody was hooked up with the people on the loan. So through somebody who knows somebody, you know somebody, we got to the president of the company, like, hey man, can you do something? Is it something that we can work with and stuff? I keep you know, the guys sent back the world. You give me 20,000 under the table and I can make it, I can make it happen. Oh my God, he asked for a bribe? Yeah, totally. That totally, and if he's doing that with me, I'm imagining that's probably regular business. That's amazing. But you know, there's no paper at the rail, so you know, you can prove it. So you have to come up with 20 cash? Yep. 20,000 in cash, holy shit, that's a lot of money. But he's like, look how much are gonna save over the next 30 years it's worth it, you know, and that's hilarious. I always think to me, it's like, when you talk about, you know, them betting both sides of the fence essentially, how is that different though from a lot of us probably know some pretty darn serious gamblers? And a lot of them set their sports bets up that way where, listen, if this happens, I win and if that happens, I win too and either way I'm covered. And that's definitely how the house handles things, you know. So that essentially when we talk about the financial insiders in the economic realm, that's the house. So the house usually wins. Yeah, and it's not a fair game. I mean, I always say, I love casinos, I love going to Vegas, I love doing fights there. But if you're smart, you look around and realize, how do you think they built this giant fucking strike? That's right. They didn't built it on you crack and blackjack every week. You know, they built it on people losing money here, man. They don't offer you those free trips in the free hotel room to come gamble because they're losing money on that. Yeah, they're so slick that if you win a ton of money, they'll give you free tickets. If you bet a ton of money and win a ton of money, they'll fly you back. They're like, it's just a matter of time, bitch. We got you here just a matter of time. It's like having a fight with came Velasquez. If you don't knock him out, you're going to run out of gas where he does. There's no doubt. It's just a matter of time. He's going to get you. If there was 25 round fights, came Velasquez would never fucking lose. It's impossible for him to lose. He just doesn't have his gas tank is like three times larger than a normal human beings. That's the fucking house. I can't lose, bitch. They got billions. But they do. My friend Dana White is a crazy degenerative gamble. And he gambles millions. He's lost a million in the night. He's made as much as six million in the night, I think he said. On the podcast? Yeah, he's crazy. He's crazy. But he's a very wealthy man. He was at the palms and he whacked them hard. And they cut its credit line in half. And he was like, what? Do we do shows there? We put on UFC fight nights there. And he's gambling off a lot of fucking money. He's getting crazy. But he won. He won a lot. And so they cut his ability to gamble in half. So he left the palms. So he pulled the UFC fights out and said, no, OK, we'll go to the hard rock now. What do you guys retarded? Like, why would you do that? Like, you're going to get me eventually. Don't you know you're going to get me chicken shits? It's like they pulled his fucking credit. They're like two months. They're like two months. They're like the whole posito. They're supposed to push you out into casinos. You run them back. You don't want them to send them away. But you go on. You get numbers crunchers. You don't understand human nature. And they just look at it as like a management tool thing. Well, to get back to our risk management, I think there's a little bit of them going, I don't know how he's gaming the system. But I can judge from the results. He's up to something. Cut this guy, he's counting cards. He's this or that. Just get him out. Just get him out. I don't think he can count cards. I mean, I guess he can. But in blackjack, but my point is they don't know what the next scam is and they can sometimes deduce that something's going on when those odds and averages that they've worked out to the nth degree don't seem to be working with you. Right. Well, if you're a smart player that definitely has an impact on blackjack. Blackjack is absolutely a skill game. And I know they use a gang a deck now. They don't just use one deck. So I bet you can most certainly count those cards, but I think you have to be like a super genius. You have to be somebody like way smarter than Dana. He's just getting lucky. He just knows how to play. He'll tell you he's not a fucking mass genius. He's a business genius. He knows how to throw out fights. Maybe that's because he brings came Velasquez, we team and puts him right next to the other door to the appropriate and he's like, he won, right? Yeah. I'm 100% in favor of gambling. I'm 100% in favor of liquor too. I'm 100% in favor of all options on the table. It doesn't mean you're going to indulge in all of them or nor does it mean that you should. And a lot of the indulgences that are available right now are very unhealthy. Like we talked about the gambling one. I could go to Vegas. You could go to Vegas. We all could. Any weekend and gamble everything we own. I know a dude who worked with a guy. He worked with this guy for 10 years. For 10 years this guy saved up all of them. He might go to Vegas. And his idea was he's going to go to Vegas and gamble and win. He felt like that was his destiny. So he saved up, you know, amount of thousands of dollars for 10 years. That's it in the first 24 hours in Vegas. Came back home to Oklahoma and was just freaked out. Just literally like shell shock. Like he had been attacked and raped by 100 ghosts. You know, just like how this look on his face that he would never recover from. This poor prick. You know, that's natural selection. He's going to go follow a preacher in monster now. I mean, I'm firmly believe that you should know that that's possible. I think we all should know. Big sign on the door. You can lose every walk in these doors and you can lose everything. Welcome. Yeah, but I think that exists for everything. I mean, I think ultimately we have to learn from all these horrible examples that we see on TV and in the news. But every time some guy, you know, gets in a street fight and beats some guy to death and they're pulling him away and we should all learn from that. You know, we should all learn from that and go, hey, you know what? The human body is a lot more fragile than what like pretended is. Who's that boxer that just fell into a coma? Did you hear about that? No, I didn't say that. Did you hear that? HBO the other night. Yeah, he, they put him in a coma and brain swelling. Yeah, he had some swelling and then one they put him in a coma. He had a stroke. His name is, it's really sad. Oh, I just heard him interview. Yeah, magma med. Abdul sma to I'll do solid. What was he fighting? I just, I heard a pregame. Eric Perez, Mike Perez, excuse me. Mike Perez is a badass Cuban boxer. It was a great fight. That guy is, I mean, this is a perfect example of a guy being too tough for his own good. Magma took a tremendous amount of punishment in that fight, but kept trying. He just kept trying to get through the bout. He made it through the bout. I think it was a decision, I believe. It was a 10 round decision. Yeah. And he took a just a furious amount of damage and that fight. And afterwards, they found out that he had broke his hand and broke his nose. He was taken to the hospital where a small blood clot was discovered on his brain. And so they induced him in a medically induced coma. And then while he was in the coma, he had a stroke. So it's, it's, it's pretty bad. That's what's made boxing hard from. I'm, I've always been a huge boxing fan. And it's just, it's football's getting a little like this where you start to, you start to wince. You know, you can't, I never, it's funny. I know this is stupid to say that I would watch boxing and I never, I never connected it with pain. You know, you're watching tactics and you're watching different strategies, working with you and you're watching foot movement and head movement. And never even occurred to me that you're watching, you know, the pain and the suffering and then someone dies and you go, okay, how much enjoyment did I get out of the sport? And I still watch it. But this is the kind of thing that just reminds you of what's going on in there. Well, for me, it has an even deeper connection because I've competed because I've fought a few kickboxing bouts and probably, I don't know how many, Taekwondo bouts, but it was over a period of like six, six or seven years. It was all I did with my life. It was my 100% waking life. So I competed a whole lot in full contact tournaments and I got away with it. I got lucky, but I've seen some guys get really hurt. I've seen some guys get kicked in the head where they were just really never the same person again. Wasn't this go to what you were saying though about, you know, you kind of have a right. You know, it's like you talk to these boxers who are like you said, every day they're training, you're going to tell this person they can't do that as long as they know the risks. To this day, that was one of the most important things that I ever did as far as developing me as a human being because it was terrifying. It was terrifying and I got really good at it. And I got really good at competing in a really dangerous, high, high risk, quick happening situation like the striking, especially like the weight class in our small kickboxing at 160. And these light guys, everyone moves really fast. They all hit hard. It's a scary weight class. A lot of knockouts. And you're when you're competing in that sort of environment, you're training in that sort of environment or regular place. Regular shit just doesn't scare you the same way. Regular people and they flare up and yell or someone gets douchey with you. It doesn't have this overwhelming sense of fear that it has on a lot of people. And I've seen people in confrontations where a guy in another guy or in a confrontation and something happens mostly because one guy like loses his ability to stay calm. Like he's so confused and nervous that he can't react properly. When I see that, I see that's a human with a deficit in the development of their character. I don't think unless you have been there, I don't think that physical violence is something that you're just born knowing how to deal with. You know, it's like either you are used to it because you go beat up at on as a kid or you're used to it because you fought a lot or you're used to it because of something. But you're not gonna, you know, the first time it happens is fucking scary. That's why the scariest kids to fight or kids you've got beat by their dad. Exactly. Those kids, I remember competing against kids that I knew had like really violent relationships with their fathers. Those kids were like really used to getting hit. It was a different thing. Like it was a part of normal everyday life getting smacked around. Well, you know, though, and this gets me back to not thinking about the pain in boxing. I remember there was a Ryan O'Neill, I think it was. He was doing the remake of the champ movie and they had on on site one of these, one of these actual boxers who was going to kind of, you know, teach him a little bit about how to do this or that. And he tells the story. He says at one point he goes, the boxer who was working with him said, I want you to hit me. And he said, okay, I'm not gonna hit you in a long time. Hit me, you gotta hit me. So he finally hit him. He goes, no, I mean really hit me. You know, he says I squared up and I hit him as hard as I could. He goes, no, I mean really hit me. And you start to realize that guys who take lots of punches all the time in training and everything that they're you, it doesn't do to them what it would do to you or not you, me. But to them, the punches can do just as much damage to their brain. But in terms of shaking them or hurting them, it's not the same thing when you're used to it. Well, one of the big things is the shock of being hit. The shock of being hit is how a lot of people, they literally go into a freeze mode and they can't move correctly and they get knocked out like their body shuts off. And it's being overwhelmed by the moment by the fact that you're actually engaged in hand to hand combat with somebody. That's a weird feeling. I've seen it happen. I've seen guys fall apart like in street fights and stuff. I've seen I've seen street fights that happened just because a guy was scared. Yeah. You know, that's that's the possibility too. Because then the more scared you are, the more you call for it because then you're encouraging the other because if you're not scared, it's like then makes the other person think twice. He's like, do you really want to get into with this crazy motherfucker who's not scared of getting hurt. And also it doesn't progress the correct way. You know, the way that like the natural way in an idiot's mind is I yell at you, you either back down and get scared and I kick your ass or you yell back at me and we fuck in puff chest until somebody fucks up and makes the wrong move. But if a guy backs down, you know that you can press forward and the instinct, the natural instinct of the bullies to press forward. Big time. Almost unavoidable. I think that's a people do themselves a huge disservice by not understanding at least some form of martial arts. At least having some experience in it. Hopefully so that we won't need it though. That book that we are talking about right before we come on. It's a fun thing. On the Persian expedition, one of his features when there are this 10,000 Greek guys like way behind enemy lines in Persian territory, they have to make their way back home. It looks desperate. They have no chance. And one of his sort of in this like speech that is trying to give them to rally them up. One of the thing he says is exactly what you were saying about the psychologist. If you guys are scared now, you're all going to die. They're just no way because if you're afraid of dying, that's exactly what's going to happen. If you guys are willing to die because you just you know that your odds are desperate but you're willing to just go for it because you don't have any other chance. that you go for it with honor, the odds are not only you're going to behave honorably but you are actually your chances of surviving improve dramatically. That makes sense. The universe favors bravery. Doesn't want weak bitches out there spreading their seeds. Sorry. Sorry. That's a fact. It's a fact. Right. You know, there's a weird trend today to like almost like encourage weakness. I think encouraging kindness is always very important. But it gets really confused with encouraging weakness. There's a lot of like bitch ass men out there that it would help them. It would benefit them. Take a fucking boot clamp class. You know, just do something with your body other than sitting. That shit drive means saying because you know the fact that we have moved beyond the stupid stereotype of the tough, macho man and the pricy woman who stay back. That's nice. But at the same time, so often as come at the price of people giving up the good sides of the stereotype. You know, if the stereotype of the man was your strong and tough, but you're also emotionally deficient and not very sensitive, rather than working on the kindness aspect as you put it, the idea has been well, then strength is bad. We should get rid of that. Yeah. That's ridiculous. So stupid is not funny. The people associate prejudicially, anything male, masculine, anything unapologetically masculine with suppression of the feminine, with suppression, like with anti-dramonous ideas. Like I have on more than one occasion gotten into it with people that call themselves feminist. And their idea was that something that I had said, like doesn't promote femininity or does it or is anti feminine. The furthest, couldn't be true. I just expect a balance. Yeah. I expect people to just be people. Exactly. When you start looking at feminist or masculineist or, you know, like, I don't, that doesn't mean shit to me. What means shit to me is leave me alone. I'll leave you alone. I'll give you the right to do anything you want to do. But you can't say I'm an ape because I like working out. Okay. You can't say I'm an asshole because I've got some fucking guns. All right. That's nonsense. If you're a man and you don't work out because it's not enjoyable for you, I totally understand. But the idea that someone who does or someone who does participate in manly type shit is an asshole because of that. You're like, I watch this one thing. It was this horrible piece that someone wrote about the, uh, the rape in Ohio with those, uh, those high school kids. One of the most disgusting aspects of male culture. This ability to get someone fucked up and, and do that to them and treat them as a subhuman. I mean, it is without a doubt. One of the, the scariest darkest aspects of, of men that they can do that. But in this article, they were talking about how let's just face the facts all high school athletes are assholes. Yeah. That was the logic I'll conclude on the flow from that. He's like, what? It hurt my hair. Was that? It was a blog. It was a blog. It was just, I was like, oh, come like me. It was a very progressive, very left wing blog that I visit sometimes. And the, you know, they were actually saying that supporting the ideas of competition actually encourages people to treat people a subhuman. That's an old, yeah. And that's an old, uh, idea. What do you think about that? Um, listen, I think we, we exist in a, in a realm where it's going to be competitive, no matter what you do. So I think to pretend we're going to deemphasize these things, doesn't do anybody any, any good down the road. Cause then once you drop them in life, they're not prepared. Well, it is a little bit like what you were saying about the, about the fighting. But, but like with my kids, you don't, you don't want to over, you don't want to crush anybody early on. You want to nurture them so that they can handle the competition. But if you don't teach them about competition, they're, you're not preparing them for life. And that's when you're going to release them into a world where, I mean, those people really don't want a competitive world. Think about how much you would have to do to turn off the competitive world. How much intrusion they would have to be on all of our lives. There goes your stock market right away, right? I mean, the economy is in that a little like what some of the really hardcore communist ideas were where different people have different capabilities. So forcing them to compete is inherently unequal because you and I are born different. So we'll compensate for that and, and blend it out. Sounds great in theory, but the amount of work it takes to recreate a whole system, you know, where you don't have competition. You don't have differences is worse than the disease. Yeah. Yeah. Even cause you're treating people like they are sick. As opposed to treating somebody like you are going to teach everyone, man, woman doesn't matter. That way gender doesn't come into place. Everybody should be strong. Everybody should be kind. Everybody should have both of the qualities that are normally attributed to only one gender or the other. They are human qualities. They're good qualities. They're what you need to be a complete human being. You encourage that stuff and you make the most complete human being the can possible be and they will deal with whatever shit life throws at them competitive or otherwise because they're always going to be challenges. And as you say, if there are no preparation for the challenges that you're are going to come your way, whether you like it or not, no matter how safe you make the word, then you're dead meat already. Then you're going to get squashed the first time the universe goes, Buu, you're going to freak out and crash. For me, the big question in a competitively based system is not the competition part and not the winning part. It's what do you do with the people who come out on the short end of the stick? Because I think in a sink or swim system, you're going to find that the people who are sinking are going to decide that the system sucks. Yes. And we're going to change it because there's too many losers. I've always said that one of the things that you do when, you know, I said in the recent show that poverty is going to come back to bite us all in the ass one day if we don't do something about it, not because you should care about poor people, but because eventually if they're hurting enough, they will make you care about them. They will they will turn the system around. I mean, you can out compete them all you want, but they'll come and burn down your nice house at a certain point. So, so to me, when you talk about a competitive system, the winners aren't the issue. It's what you do with the people because you're going to have some losers in a competitive system. How do you mitigate the downsides of that? And that's what I always try to think about. That's a very good point. That's a very, very good point. You're, you're always going to have good and bad in the world. You're always going to have conflict. You're always going to, and the ability to recognize that and deal with whatever comes in front of you is very important. Well, like you said, you're going to have kids who get raised by parents who beat the hell out of them and who don't raise in the right way and who don't give them those qualities. Daniela, that you were talking about. And then you're going to unleash those people on the world and say, go compete with this guy who went to Harvard and had a great education and it was born with a lot of money. The world's an unequal place. Yeah. You can't fix that, but you can build that into your thinking. Well, it's also there's such a broad spectrum of human beings and what the human being, where they fit into society, where their places, like I have a lot of friends that have like zero willpower, but they make amazing stand up comedians. You know, and that's where they like go together. They're very well mined. Like, Joey Diaz is my favorite example. When Joey has willpower, he gets up in the morning, everything. I have buddies, you know, 300 and whatever pounds. He doesn't give a fuck and he's an animal. He's just have it. But he's also the funniest human being I've ever met in my life. It's like you can't make a Joey Diaz. If you get some guy who's doing fucking sit ups every morning, a thousand sit ups and chin ups and jogging around the block and only eat and kale, it's not going to be that guy. You need a guy who went to jail, did a lot of joke, you know, kidnapped a guy. You need all that. You know, like in order to get a guy who's that wild and crazy and funny. And I feel like the real problem that we have in raising children is all they teach in school is to try to filter you into a standard position in the economy, standard job, whether it's the filter you towards a career and one or more very definable things. There's a lot of people out there with talents that never get nurtured. They just can't figure out their way in that system because what's taught them is so small, such a small chunk of the spectrum is taught. Because schools are designed to make you average. That's what schools are about, which if you are considerably below average because of your opportunities in life, great. That's a step up. But if you are not and that goes for the other 50% of humanity, then it's just designed to make it not nurture your talents, not do all the things and try to make you fit in the little box. And part of the reality is not because the people who create schools are evil and they just want to fuck with your life is because they need to go with something that knowledge or something that can be objectively tested. What is that you can objectively test? Can you test somebody's wisdom or smart they are or cool of human being? They are objectively, not really. What you can do is you can test out well they spit back information at you, which is a skill in itself that it's better than not knowing how you need to have the discipline you need to know some things. It's cool. It makes you, it gives you those average qualities. But it says nothing about what you're going to do with them, whether you're going to be brilliant, whether you're going to be able to use these ideas in an amazing way. And the reality is that gets to most people in charge of schools feel that's too subjective. When you start talking about wisdom, what the fuck is wisdom is? Your wisdom is not my definition. So we can really test it. What we can test is. And so you go back to the, they don't want to get sued by the people who don't do well. Like if I come into class and I say, I'll give you an egg because you're really fucking smart and I can see it. No, you're really are not that good. So sorry, you got to see the person who got to see is going to be a fucking, you know, why are you giving me a show me why, you know, where is in the exactly that I deserve this? And part of the game is the stuff that you can prove in the fashion is not the kind of knowledge that make a complete human being is the kind of of knowledge. The application of that knowledge in a capitalist society is what we try to define as proof that you've actually got some intelligence. or legitimate completely one being is the kind of application of that knowledge in a capitalist society is what we tried to find is proof that you've actually got some intelligence basics white people who you might not even think of that smart but if they're very successful financially you go well he's smart at that right you know it's there's that thing mm-hmm I think what you're trying to do theoretically in an education system is to prepare people to succeed in life and the problem that I think the education system has is that it's stuck in a design for an era where succeeding in life is very different than succeeding in life today you're not going to go on to the factory assembly line you're not going to do those kind of things but the way our system has evolved is to create people who can succeed at that the problem is is that what we have now is a creativity based economy that we're moving towards and teaching creativity one would be tremendously hard and we haven't worked to create that on a mass system where you've got schools that are I mean obviously schools work with creativity but it's a different thing entirely to sit there and go we're going to start in the first grade and by the time you graduate high school we are going to maximize your creative abilities that are unique to you you know Daniel you were saying this part of the problem is you could talk about creativity but Joe's creative gifts are going to be different than yours in mind and you can't have a standard course right well I haven't thought of one anyway that can take your gifts and bring them to maturity unless we all share those gifts because you know your gifts are in one area your gifts are in another the problem is is that in our system there are no assembly lines or few you can't educate the mass of people to take a bunch of jobs that don't exist anymore so I think the system has to redesign itself to push creativity there's also some utopian ideals and raising kids that are contrary to human nature like this new thing that they're doing whether or not having kids win when they're playing like ball games and no one wins you know when they're little this is back to your competition yeah see it is out of me yeah does I kid you haven't heard of this no it's a joke I mean it's I mean it's pretty white it's been going on for quite a while trophies for everyone yeah kind of thing yeah I don't know how I would google that but they're not giving out first and second place anymore they're not you know let's not broad brush I was gonna say yes in places you've made you don't keep score you know do that a lot of kids at the younger ages they don't do that anymore we kept score in T ball when I was a kid and you rub someone's nose in it if they lost there was no coach pitch I had five year old boys you couldn't do anything but hit me with the ball pitching to me all day there are no there are no losers you're just the last winner I have to go throw up I'll be right back I mean I think that competition we all hate losing and therefore we connect competition with being a negative thing I don't think I don't think it's a negative thing at all I think competition is important I think it's important in art I think it's important in everything you know and you might say oh well that's not the the you know the the real spirit of art it's not competition you're right it's not but that competition can motivate the accomplishment of work and the accomplishment of work sometimes you know procrastination or what have you can delay someone releasing your art so in that way competition inspires the creation of art it's not always and most of the time you're better off with that competition being internal or not not even being a competition but rather an embracement of the complexities of figuring out what everything you're working on but that's still you there's there's something going on there's a game going on whether it's going on with you and your head whether it's going on with the audience it's going to review whatever you're creating like a podcast or whether it's going on with you and competing directly against your peers but there's something to me I love something about competition because I love the media feedback it gives you you know it's like you go out there you do what you can to do and at the end of the day you see the results you either pull it off or you didn't lose into me as horrible as that feel as if fucking sucks and you feel like you know you're so mad it's the best thing that can happen to you because that's you know winning you're gonna keep doing the same thing you've always done you have no motivation to push harder because look I'm already doing great motivation maybe fear of losing yeah exactly and then when you do lose then he forces you to go back to the drawing board and figure out okay how can I I ran into this stumbling block how can I go around it and the fact is you know this bullshit about you know no losers no winner no not letting somebody experience what it is to do your best and still lose you're not doing that many favor because the fact is in life a million times just because that's the design of life shit is gonna happen whether you like it or not whether it's fair or not whether you deserve it or not and how you respond to that if you feel that why did this happen to me you know it's unfair it's I shouldn't be in this place I shouldn't feel like well you do now what you know and that's that experience of losing in that case is you're losing at that game of life not necessarily because of your fault maybe it is and now are you out of fuck are you gonna respond to this if you have been there a million times maybe you have developed a muscle to grow out of it if you have never been there the first time that lies lap your round you freak out and isn't that sort of one of the reasons why our economy and society itself is so fucked up it's because we're so goddamn competitive and it's because it's so natural to do and when you start control and some of the money you want to control more of the money you know you when you start making some of the laws bend to help and benefit your business right dude I watch a really disturbing documentary this past couple of days it was gas land have you seen that heard of it I haven't holy shit you want to talk about a must see hydraulic fracturing what they call fracking wow it's interesting why it's scary shit what they're doing this guy breaks it down the amount of wells that they have I had no idea yeah a lot and how many people's drinking water is forever poisoned I mean you're talking about giant chunks of America that are rendered poisonous well understand something this is the wonderful example now of you know if somebody came to you and said how much money would we have to give you to poison your country what is that worth because look at the other side of this fracking as it's called has taken the United States from an energy really insufficient position where I mean we're in the Middle East we're in all these places because of the energy question and I mean in a geologic sense overnight turned us into an energy exporter again and we haven't been that way since I mean we've always exported energy but I mean the 1960s were like the last really high water mark where we had lots of oil and we didn't have to worry all of a sudden we're the natural gas kings and everything again and there's a ton of money that amount of money the amount we're talking about here not just money for now money for ten years from now 20 this is like long term lots of money you that money will buy anything will buy poisoning your water supply it will buy earthquakes that destroy small local home of towns it will it's an interesting thing to see what we're willing to sell for a ton of money that we're going to Joe Rogan or Dan Carlin by the way what's the problem is the word we it's not what we're willing most people had no idea this even happening until it was already too late and during the Bush administration this this documentary gas land highlights how this all came to be and how Dick Cheney signed over these new exemptions that you didn't have to follow the water at the Clean Water Act the Clean Air Act all those were exempt fracturing was exempt so you could just fuck everything up in order to get to it's essentially like a small ocean of natural gas the amount that's under New York and a big chunk of the country in Texas it's huge it's gigantic it's changed the entire energy situation on the planet but these people have water that comes out of their faucet that you can light on fire you can light it on fire there's more than 500 different chemicals that they have to pump into the ground in order to break up this natural gas and then extract it and when they do that they basically everything gets mixed up together the well water gets mixed up with the chemicals gets mixed mixed up with the natural gas and it's just toxic as fuck it's coming out holes in the ground you can come up to it and light it on fire it's mad you know what the best chance and it's a sad thing the best chance you have of combating that amount of money over is when we have screwed up so much of the fresh water supply that the fresh water actually becomes worth more and you're already seeing this happening in some places where they're talking about you know do we sell water rights to California from the Colorado River this or that the other and the amounts of money that they're talking about I mean they're already talking about you know why should water be considered a feature that's owned by everybody can I buy the water in the Colorado River and then can I sell it back to you so I mean the old joke is that if you buy bottled water it's worth more than gasoline you know at that amount if you go to the store well what happens when it really is worth more than gasoline in large quantities then all of a sudden fracking sounds like you're destroying an even more important I can get more money for that water than I can get for that natural gas that's the only chance we have in the system driven by money I think to keep the water fresh it's incredibly short-sighted and the amount of deception that's gone on to cover the amount of damage that's been done is staggering I mean when these people tell their stories it's it's incredibly hard to watch and listen to because people get sick because they were drinking the water the kids get sick the water like for the longest time they wouldn't admit that there was anything wrong with the water and then they started giving people water they give them they set up these giant tanks and pump in water to them every week so that they get their water from that instead of their wells they've had for you know 100 plus years it's crazy shit man it's crazy shit to watch but this is where you see the corruption of our political system exactly which is what's destroying you would think that people who live in places where they can light their water on fire would have their representatives in Washington working to stop that but that's where your free speech rights and my free speech rights are not equal to the free speech rights of these other people this is where I always argue with the courts that say that money is free speech which I don't mind except who said you get 50 or 100 times my free speech rights well now that the the internet I think ultimately is going to be a place where people vote on things and it's also ultimately going to be a place where people can donate to campaigns that promote values that they believe in and I think that is going to be a special interest along with all the other special interest in the world competing for influence but what about that I think that's really really changed things they'd make it illegal well I think it's about money and I think ultimately if if people invest money in a party and a lobbyist and an idea that supports the things that they believe in that money can influence people just as easily as the money that supports fracking or the money support the ideas that it's just trading of commodities here so let's buy a legislator should that just get a group together I'm taking up a cause we're going to buy Senator Ron well Senator Ron White is probably already but you know this guy who's been working for the fracking industry how much do you need dude you know you get on the table how much is it going to take to bring you over to our side I have powerful backers the guy was you know cut off in Vegas he can't gamble anymore he's got a lot of money you know what's it going to take to buy this I mean maybe we should just do that the part maybe that's unfair about this is that you're never offered the chance to buy a legislator that's kept to a small group of people in a smoke fill back room maybe what we need is look if you're going to be sold give us the option of buying too we collectively have a fuckload of money yeah love to buy me a legend it's a write-off isn't it could you buy a legislator isn't that a business expense yes you know it is if it helps my business can't call it buying off though we have to call it something creative risk management just basically that's right you know that you got that podcast uh troll lawsuit I'm going to buy a few legislators and get them in my corner and then I'm going to write that off in US taxpayers can pick up my buying of the because that's how it's done at the best levels right well I think that ultimately that would be a smart thing for them to pursue just by virtue of the fact that there's more money there than there is in all the corporations combined I know it's a lot harder to please all of us yeah just that one guy you're right but the potential for extracting money off of a giant group by 300 million even if you get one percent that's still a huge amount of human beings that are donating money well the audience is going to say that already exists I mean look at all the small contribution but it's not the same as walking up to somebody and saying listen I went to all my friends and here's five million dollars right yeah because the guy you know the corporation was gonna they are going to invest the money to buy off a vote to guy what they want they are gonna make that amount of money 50 times over in the next year right the person who's going to donate to a campaign they are doing that in order to avoid something to be taken from them whether it's good water or something they're not gonna see them money back they're not gonna not gonna make more money on it so there is a little bit of hesitancing out of people like fuck really do I have to pay for something that I still add until yesterday and man you know there's not that payoff of like you're gonna win big is you're playing a defensive game or is like it's a risk avoid instead yeah it's sort of like you have that money and you have to invest it in making sure they don't rob you in the future yeah exactly right there they're investing you to rob everybody else yeah one of the others either get your agenda across but the idea that these business companies these companies that have enforced fracking or encourage fracking or you spent money to make it happen and this guy goes really clearly into detail about how it all took place and you they're ruining like a huge chunk of the country and they're doing it right in front of everybody's face and no one can stop it and the worst part is they won't be around when the bill comes due for being at that either you can't clean it up that's what's really crazy these these people one of the people that got incredibly sick this woman got sick because they turned out that these filters that they had set up don't work with the chemicals that they use for fracking the chemicals actually eat the membranes of the filter so they it was all some of the chemicals were getting through to her and she was getting incredibly sick neurological damage also it's like really everyone's sick right it's it's it's an incredible documentary I mean it's very hard to protect the water supply you remember here in California with that gasoline additive that sunk into the ground and made it into the water and it was a weird situation because of the additive had been put in there to take some of the lead from the air pollution and then it was seeping into the groundwater and so you you dammed if you do dammed if you don't but that's the problem is it doesn't take a whole lot to seep into the water supply and then you're screwed yeah what was that that you just put up it said gas land producers put it up we'll put it up what does it say that I don't know how they could mislead as if you do bunking things about both documentaries on gas landers one and two and they're both saying there's some but we'll just put up the thing that I asked the gas land producer misled viewers on what is the Joe Rogan is spreading well it's fine for me now so we could see it it also it said that it's been happening since the 1930s this isn't necessarily just from the water was flammable before fracking you know it's funny though is every time you expose anything you're gonna have the next day 15 sites saying no you made it up is not real is not that's what public relations firms are for exactly yeah yeah yeah I think that it's hard to know who the fuck is right in that situation but somewhere in the country you can fucking without a doubt guaranteed that these people have been poisoned whether the lighting the water on fire it always existed that doesn't make any sense to me I don't know. The poisoning the citizens is an age old thing I mean we do it at nuclear plants we do it I mean there's been lots of situations where you're living near something that might be bad for you and and that's nothing new that's what's crazy is that is that that's always taken a back seat to somebody's profit somewhere and that's a bit sad that we can't as an entire population being poisoned balance out the interest of those people who decide poisoning is okay because they can go to Hawaii because I mean from their point of view you know you're a corporation you're in the business of making money you're not in the business of being nice you're not in the business of me mean is whatever it takes to make money you'll do it if it takes screwing people over oh well well and even if you didn't want to make money you may have a fiduciary responsibility to your shareholders to maximize that wouldn't that be funny I don't really want to frack but uh but you know the shareholders will take me out if I don't but that's the problem is that's the corporation right the role of government in a beautiful abstract word would be that they actually enforce laws to stop the stuff that's damaging to the public that's only good for those well Joe brought up Luke Paul you brought up a loophole to me that's the biggest thing that I think people don't understand is that you can make all the laws in the world if you let the loopholes happen they don't mean it's like people say to me Dan why do you keep saying the fourth amendment's going away the fourth amendment's they're court's role yeah but you Swiss cheese that enough and it doesn't matter anymore this stuff is meaningless unless it acts as a barrier I got a research this now because a bunch of people my message board are putting up all these websites to say that they're debunking gas land first of all a I would without a doubt I would imagine that if I was working for the fracking industry and someone put out a hit piece on fracking that I would debunk the fucking shit out of it even if it doesn't make any sense the debunk he doesn't make any sense and if you're a legislator who voted to allow it you'd have the same interest yeah that said I haven't read any of the debunking so I'll read that and I'll get back to but even if you don't focus on the specific example you look at the general pictures fucking undeniable there were poison in our environment that I don't think you can debunk that is like no is that just facts so you pick one specific example that may not be exactly one another percent through would a fuck cares the general picture remain the same you know that's not gonna change yeah yeah I don't know man I think that we do really for without a doubt have an issue with the fact that people are super competitive and the people are progressive in nature I mean but I mean by progressive they move forward if they have two dollars they want three if they have three they want four that's a natural weird thing that we do I always like I was trying to explain anal sex to somebody and I was in a girl it's a natural sex like why do guys why do you guys want to do that I go because they have regular sex with you and then they go kind of put in your mouth and they go yeah and they go okay what about that and that's just it's a natural weird progression I mean all that stuff happens when you hear about like crazy how would you not a philosophy major that's how I want to know when you hear about like crazy super freaks that have like gigantic orgies how did that happen did they just start off have an orgies no they started out with regular sex and they got a lot of regular sex they started getting bored so they brought an extra girls and before you know what they have in these freaky sex parties it's a natural thing of progression people if they if they can run five miles they want to run 10 right if they got their brown belt they want to get their black belt so it's competition would you guys were talking about how great it was all the time and now you're slamming it make it I want to say I say it's the ideas gone wild the idea of what makes a human exceptional what makes a human create everything that exists really I think from electronics to the wheel to houses and everything there's this natural desire for humans to prove upon what they've already done and I think that extends to control I think it extends to evil as well it's one of my my arguments when I when everyone would talk about like problems with government and whether or not there's still corruption in government all you have to do is look back on the corruption that you can document for a fact that happened in the 1960s and know that there's nobody's there's no like of slew of people lives ruined careers destroyed parties brought down no it was actually very little if you think about exactly what they're absolutely positively guilty of doing this is very little damage and you know that that everything progresses so the amount of utter and complete total corruption that exists today and the sophistication of it would naturally be above and beyond what existed documentable from the 1960s let me take it to a different level because I think it's a different thing I think that we are incentivized as human beings going back to primate times to look at things through a short term lens there the carrots and sticks are all set up for the short term approach you know you brought up wisdom a while ago Daniel wisdom is being able to look at things from a long term perspective now it's a perfect example is investing in the old days you know tie cob would buy coca cola shares and when he died he had all these coca cola shares on his chest in the hospital that he'd had for forever you know hell yeah he was so afraid someone would take his his so he kept so he's got so he's got all these shares he's owned forever because to him he wasn't going to sell him in five minutes he was in it for the long term our society is set up for the short term making money is set up for the short term there's no interest in saying something like well let's protect clean water who you protecting it for I won't be around to enjoy that clean water by the time that happens I'm dead now what can I make in the short term politics is the same way it's like when people were talking about president obama lying about the health care plan about keeping your own doctor right now that stuff he's incentivized to do that all he cared about was winning that next election you will worry about the fallout later none of this matters if you lose right deal with the fallout of the lie later there's no incentive to not lie the incentives are all only you know it and this is if you're an intelligent human being weighing the pros and cons you are not incentivized to think long term and yet that may be the only solution for the planet you talk about long term if we can't somehow contradict where the incentives are and go against our natural primate instincts we might not be able to make it work I think it's going to take a greater level of awareness culturally than exist today I think that the great level of awareness that the really truly objective view of humanity and the potential possibilities of the future is something that's contemplated by few groups small groups of people people sitting in conversation dinner parties and stuff but if you think of the greater whole of humanity the amount of damage we're doing to the world on a daily basis the amount of like really ridiculous behavior that operates our financial and and and justice system and our political systems it's all like complete and total chaos and yet it still continues in the exact same way it always has before there's only small groups of people that speak out against it I think once the the the the sphere of understanding of like what what a complete disaster this world is because of our actions and because of our inability to correct those actions once that understanding is in place then hopefully it's not too late there'll be some sort of way to turn back the tide but I feel like it's an ebb and a flow thing much like everything in life and I think it's almost like we have to fucking poison the ocean before we realize it's ridiculous and then stop doing it I think it's going to be money I think I think someone down the road when water for clean water for example is worth a bazillion dollars to haliburn and they buy the water then the rules will be you can you can't piss in water anywhere because you know you might then all of the money going to Washington will be to preserve water and let preserve haliburn's water supply otherwise their profits will be impacted when they sell it back to the public I don't I you know Joe you always need you know you you want human nature to improve and and you think it's going to happen and I don't disagree with you the problem is is that so many people like Dick Cheney have to be improved to before this works that I don't see that happening I see it's going the other way their incentives have to become they're still going to want money they're still going to think short term but the incentives have to change so that protecting the environment becomes the the way to keep your millions intact as opposed to you know polluting the environment becomes the way to keep your millions intact maybe but if you look at the dissolving of boundaries between people and information and how that trend is going to continue I think that our idea of looking at the possibility of the future based on how humans were able to run the world just 10 years ago are kind of ridiculous when you think about it from a hundred years from now the options won't be available because the amount of transparency that'll be required to communicate with people is going to be completely different it's going to be very hard to hold back reality you're assuming that there's not going to be some David Cameron crack down you know between now and then I don't think they can do it and I think even if they did the young people that are coming up that are more in line with the ideas of an anonymous or the ideas of open source internet the ideas of spreading information and what a massively important thing that is for society and human culture as a whole I think they're overwhelming and I think they're they're going to continue that trend they're the people that know that the the idea of anybody being able to control information they're literally controlling if they do that they're controlling educational evolution they're controlling the ability for you suggesting they wouldn't want to can't you can't do it I don't think you could do it is that a challenge it's like trying to pull all the sand off the beaches I don't see it have some of the stuff that you guys are saying I actually think it goes hand in hand because what you're saying Joe about the fact that a certain level of transformation in terms of consciousness in terms of priorities that happen at a mass level when enough people we sort of a critical mass that feeds into dance arguments that at that point corporations are going to respond to it because there's money attached to it so I don't think it's just purely from an economic standpoint and it's clearly not purely from a consciousness standpoint is going to go hand I mean it's happening now right it's like more and more people care about environmental issues so companies that market themselves as well nice to the environment can hike their prices a little bit because they know that they are going to have some people who buy them their products because of those values yeah could you imagine if you know you were buying some gas that cost 10 cents less per gallon but it you know it's guaranteed comes from like child labor right and some shitty part of the country with a world where they the dolphin safety in a label thing yeah exactly yeah exactly I think that it's going to be impossible in the future to hide any evil behavior I think right now it's still too muddy still too muddy I think as technology advances and approves this connection with people and ideas and information is going to be cleaner and quicker I don't know what form that's going to take in but all I'm doing is sort of objectively extrapolating what's happened in the past to what's happened recently to where I feel like it's going I just don't think you can hold this waterfall back I feel like there's too much going on there's too many people communicating too freely all over the world and improving upon the methods communication and they're going to get to a point where you're not going to be able to hide a god damn playing and you're not going to be able to make money off of you're going to not going to be able to profit off doing something that directly damages the earth because everyone's going to see it it's going to be it's going to be something that your neighbors know about it's going to be something that I we're going to know what each other we're getting away with but don't you think you end up with the gas land kind of story where you can push a story and maybe you twist 15% of the data to make it a little to make your point a little harder and somebody else based on that 15 or 20 percent they are making up the bank the whole thing and say it's all crap and there's that part of the flow of information is that there's so much of it that for every single thing you hear that seems to prove a thing's going one way you have people who seem pretty credible who give you good evidence to argue the exact opposite things and it leaves a ton of human beings feeling like what the fuck I don't know which one of them to believe they these ones are good these one also makes sense well I feel like we're either going to go one way or the other we either going to go slide into complete total dictatorship brought out by a series of terrorist events or we're going to slide into the next level of evolution and I think it's a battle right now was that quote from Orson Wells that history history is a cod dammit I forget the quote amazing quote by Orson Wells but essentially to paraphrase it what it was saying is that there's a race going on between people who are looking to improve the human race and people that are stuck in the old paradigm that are constantly battle between education and fuck oh damn I hate why I don't remember great quote that I think I have it my finger to need a quote board here up on the walls history or some wells human history becomes more and more race between education and catastrophe there it is and that's exactly what it is I mean that's exactly what we're talking about I feel like the way things are going the what when you hear people like the NSA folks say that you know the angry that a guy like Edward Snowden released all the data and he's a traitor and you know all this craziness we're trying to convince us that this guy is bad because he told us that you're bad see why can't I always see the dark side I want to come with you guys into the light I really do but see all I see happening is another 9-11 attack and then the people in the NSA going guess what allowed that one that was the stuff Edward Snowden told you now see now don't you learn trust us next time and you won't have another one of these I just you know I mean I think things could break in the right way but I think history shows that they're stacked up against us and so I think if you take this attitude that hey things could break the right way you are not girding yourself up for the fight that you're facing and this gets back to what we talked about when you talked about fights if you think oh that George Foreman I'm about to fight ah he's got openings I watched him in taping hit yourself up for the fight that you're facing and this gets back to what we talked about when you talked about fights if you think all that George Foreman about to fight. He's got openings I watched him in taping his left his slow all get in on that and then you you don't account for the right and you get in there and you go oh damn I forgot about that I think you need to gurs yourself and say history shows that there's always a small group of people you know who have a little bit of the ear of the powerful or who have a little bit more money or what have you and they're extremely formidable there's never going to be like we all get this consciousness expansion and Dick Cheney's never getting anywhere near government again the truth is we're playing black Hawk down and Dick Cheney's busy you know buying up corporations and I just I think this is a monumental struggle that's going to require you know what's missing and I've always said this is we don't have any leaders I mean in other generations you can name people you can Wikipedia and search people that were out in the forefront bringing groups of people into directions I feel like we're a very directionless group except for Putin done calling for president and that's what you want that's when you really see how limited the person I am I'm already at the height of my game I don't get any better than this so you put me up to president and it's all over then the reviews on iTunes will be horrible a guy like Putin is like one of the the last real leaders and in a leader in a very gangsterish sort of way but he's one of the old he's old school as old school as it gets yeah yeah I mean the guy was the president and they say can't be president and more goes all right I'll be promised or this guy's the president now fuck heads you know I'm the president again he is he is kind of showing a blueprint for how you take a new democracy and just kind of and and the people wanted a democracy and you just kind of convince them that the way you're doing it is better in interview these people in the street they go oh Russia really needs a strong man really when did you get convinced of that where's your awareness of raising level and everything just to to play devil's advocate for what you said earlier when you were talking earlier about you see it going in the bad direction we were just talking at the beginning of this conversation about how fucked up things were just a few hundred years ago like how much worse things were 500 years ago how much is that really correct were they really that much worse and if that's true then isn't there some sort of a marked improvement in society in the safety and society that we can demonstrate today well the breaking situation was better back then yeah the cold water was locked clean no it was it was inverted with different things were messing up the water people shit that's right bodies they toss bodies in there yeah I mean there's always been people doing stupid shit to the ground because they had short-term interest it's exactly that's a very good point that point that you had about people looking at it and it also back in the day I mean up until recently you didn't really live long enough to see the hustle right you know if you were lucky you live to be 30-ish you know a good 50% of your friends are probably dead by then and then you know the guys that would live to be 60 those rare birds that would be hanging around philosophizing in square they were so rare who you really didn't get that many of them so when you got a guy like soccer tease that dropped all this crazy knowledge like yeah that got been around a long time he made it through wrote some shit down he figured it out most people not gonna get there most 25-year-olds today are half retarded try having a conversation with the average 25-year-old not all right there awareness is gonna compensate for that and believe you me I know that a lot of you out there that a 25 are way fucking smarter than me don't get me wrong I'm not saying it's you but you know those other dudes Joe the bird in the hand is worth two in the bush that's the proverb that applies to this whole short-term thing if you think I might not even be alive to profit off the stuff but I can profit off it today what are you gonna do but that I mean back then you're dealing with like a whole society that was sort of structured on people that never got old enough or never had exposure to enough data to sort of go I don't think or should have a Caesar I don't think we should have this kind of seeing him hey this whole lions versus Christians thing this is kind of fucked man let's not do that but that's why Dawson was quote was so cool because that's exactly what it is is the ugly side is insanely strong and in some way getting stronger the potential for optimism they're also that's also happening and it's one of those races where you're like that's an interesting one you can put the accent on either one the reality is that they're both real isn't that was sort of what we were also talking about about competition earlier that the in and the Yang it's almost like you need opposing forces you need a pull and a push you need something in order to motivate change you it's almost the idea is that in order for society to get great or get better it has to go through stupid shit and if it doesn't go through stupid shit it never gets anywhere that's why I'm curious for I had a question for Dan on that because I don't disagree with your view I mean there's a lot you're allowed to don't worry I'm okay everybody else does no but no I actually most days that's exactly how I feel and even the days that I don't I still feel that there's a lot of it that's true so the point to me is how do you turn that awareness that your stack up against something you know you're an end to trying to attack a tank you know your deodorant what you can do not even as a single individual but even a mass level feel sometimes so limited and how do you wake up in the morning you know how do you deal with the fed that you have to see a strong me straight whiskey power down double espresso shots some of that is true I actually talk about this on our political show because when you feel the most upset about things and the most powerless you start to wonder about the wisdom of caring about this stuff and you look at people who don't I mean I think we all know people who don't pay any attention to politics who don't watch the news whose life is a very in you know it's my kids it's my wife it's my job and and there are times when I question the wisdom of caring about things you cannot change right then someone else will say well that kind of attitude you can be guaranteed you won't change it yes but there are some forces at work that if you alone have to do it it is an ant against a tank right and and and at some point you look and you go okay it's me and Rogan and Dan Yellie and and and that's not enough I might as well do what I can what's it in the 1960s you say you know look at the man in the mirror take care of yourself first sometimes that's all you can control um but if that's the way you look at it you're letting the dick chain he's I'm using him as my my my Darth Vader figure for everything today but I mean then you let them win could you imagine if you got Dick Cheney high on mushrooms I'm not sure that he wasn't the whole time I'm not saying something he would never have that sort of the mushrooms you thought he shot that friend of his just totally sober and straight oh he's drunk okay well that would really clearly none he was not only drunk and not clearly drinking but he avoided the police for like 13 or 14 you think there weren't secret service guys there too how do you not tell him to push put the gun down pointed toward the ground that's how you know how what a real gangster is he shot his friend of the face and his friend of Paul does yeah yeah that is actually very good that is a good it's friend was like I'm really sorry Dick's a great guy I didn't mean to cause you all this trouble with the medium Mr. Cheney I'm sure that my face in the path of your bullet I'll try to my count very bird like in my movements I'm tricky I think like a bird sometimes hunting birds and he probably tuned into that vibe just shot me in my fucking there have been there have been times that I've been you know we just carrying the weapon quite wrong and you know well where's the secret service to take credit for that why didn't they say they accidentally shot the dude right why the fuck did you tell if they're willing to take a bullet for somebody yeah how did that go out how the guy not say he accidentally shot himself but nothing happened right so it doesn't matter you could say a little bit of bird shot in the face you know birds shot is very small people I'm not saying try try a warden you know you've got a few mannequins here that we could conduct some experiments on yeah you know how does that alien thing handle the bird shot well there's a reason why it's so small is when you shoot in the something like a fessan you can't really shoot it with a fucking 12 gauge it'll blow a hole through the bird screws the meal up to you yeah it's useless you feel it's filled with little pellets the fucking half the thing is blown apart so you got to have like a little so that's what the old guy got hit with it's a little baby bird shot in the face no biggie tough it out now Dick's got a new heart in this hilarious what imagine if you had a new heart and then they put it in they just started fucking feeling really regretful for everything started writing you hear the line he said that he hit and I didn't read the story sometimes I just read headlines so you just have to ignore me on this but but do you remember that story about Dick Cheney where he said he feared having his heart hacked or whatever yeah of course he did because you knew because you knew what he would have done in the same situation absolutely I'm hacking Joe Rogan's heart right now which which leads me to believe you and I had exchanged a couple tweets and emails regarding this Michael Hastings yeah fascinating that whole story was Michael Hastings the journalist who was very aggressive to members of the military and you know you're aggressive toward everybody yes very aggressive and aggressive towards like these guys who are fucking killers on a global scale you know when you get to be a four star general or what have you like you're fucking real good at killing people yeah you know there's no other way around it no other way to get that and this guy was being aggressive towards them have you changed your mind I have you altered your view on that I have zero opinion I don't have an opinion one way or the other I looked at it watched the video of the the car slamming into the tree and I thought wow that was most likely you know some sort of a remote control device that caused him to slam it's what I started reading that people said that but I've also read that a lot of people believe that he was unstable and a lot of people believe that he might have been doing drugs that's possible too I mean the kind of guy was so risk-taking that he's willing to go after generals like that kind of guy might do a lot of wild shit right I think it's possible though that they can do that to a car I think that's what I've gained from this what I've gained from this is by reading the experts the technology experts the people that have no vested interest in this politically one way or the other weren't a Hastings fan or denyer the people that looked at the possibilities for what you can do with a remote controlled system in a car now and they can do it they can they can make your car do things and the people that are that were formerly in the CIA have come out about it and said that they believe that the technology exists and it makes sense and even before it exists that remember the guy would then all the exposing of the CIA crack cocaine epidemic like basically accusing the CIA of having help Latin American drag lords weapon to be their friends which guys is very seal you know I can't fucking remember the name I just remember that he was he owns the record for having quote-unquote killed himself by shooting himself with a shotgun so far nothing strange twice which seems a bit complicated to pull off the most interesting thing about the Hastings thing to me now because I can't I'm with you I don't know what you could figure out from Hastings based on what we know I was fascinated and this is gets to your new media thing all the information out there and it also gets to yours Danieli about about false information or muddying the waters do you realize how much of what circulated the globe about this Hastings thing came from that one source that part-time contributor to that local news station in San Diego that Kim Devorek woman she's the one who said things like well there was no body in the coffin and everyone was upset with that well that turned out to be totally false but oh my lord did we all share that did everybody hear that most people not ever hear the retraction that one person saying something that was not true created that so much of the foundation for where we all started because that's when I freaked out I said wait a minute you know the coroner didn't give the body back and cremated it without permission that is tough if you've ever dealt with coroners and that's just not kosher that turned out to be not true and I don't think she ever retracted it but but that one you know in the old days they used to make us confirm sources twice she's in the position where she's supposed to be confirming sources twice she says that the San Diego news station runs it multiple times and then we all retweet it and share it and it becomes part of the urban legend almost but that that that a single strand one person was able to do that with the global sharing and everything that to me is as fascinating as the Hastings thing I agree I think it's just as fascinating and the the the real desire to know one way or another is just a natural part of human curiosity we want to know did did did someone assassinate this guy or did he go wacky and drive a hundred miles an hour into a tree both are possible sure the reality is I don't know and so you know I say when you say did I change my opinion I don't have an opinion when I first looked at it and I said wow it looks like that but I wouldn't be betting on it right you know a lot of weird shit happens just naturally I heard there's another element Joe and the element is is in us versus them kind of thing right I mean we felt people like yours truly anyway felt like Hastings was on our side of the fence right he's reporting on stuff that we're going thank goodness finally somebody's doing this right and then all of a sudden he's gone and in a weird situation I mean that I think the tendency is to say one of our guys got it in the neck and he got it in the neck for doing something that we've been waiting for someone to do and what does this say to the other people out there we would hope would would so I mean I don't I want to say teams but there's a part of me that says to me I don't know if I would have liked the guy on a personal level but he was on my side yes and I feel like god the powers that be have everybody on their side I mean so so I mean there was a feeling like please tell me that somebody working for the good of all of us didn't get knocked off I don't think he did but I there's certainly that feeling where you just go what sort of a message does this send to other would be Michael Hastings you don't think he did but would you be surprised if you found out he did if he did get not you found out he got knocked out I wouldn't be surprised there's a book called poisoning the press concerning a reporter who was the Michael Hastings of his day but a thousand times bigger name Jack Anderson from the early 70s and Anderson actually had the Nixon administration officials Haldeman Erlichman those guys talking about potentially killing him a guy who's show I was on several times G Gordon Liddy Liddy was volunteering to kill him they were gonna run him over with a car now I always think to myself okay so the so the plot never happened but they were discussing it at the highest levels of government and that's what makes you go maybe this Hastings thing isn't that far off well I mean I don't think it's far off the wall at all I just don't know what happened yeah no me either I'm not at all and I tend to go with the safer answer wind out you know I mean that's the nice way of not looking stupid too which is of course my goal in life right I'm too late too late exactly too so I just dive right into the stupid side all the time and go what if because the what if is always there yeah so they're grading us on a curve well that's the on unfortunate reality of history isn't it that if you really do pay attention you go wow they've done it before well there's been concerned you know people conspire they've gotten away with it they did they did false flags they they lied to get us into wars they lied about certain actions that were going on they assassinated people lied about that then got caught they had a short term in the same thing yes always always has been the thing that's weird is though when people are doing the exact opposite of what we're doing right now which is you know it could have gone this way you could have also released a colleague on this way I don't have the evidence either way and people bet their lives one way or now yeah like I know that this is what happened and there's this conspiracy or no you're totally full of shit you could never happen and it's like how the fuck do you know I got out of an argument online the other day on my message board about the JFK assassination I get to that when I just go okay I'm good I got a step away I know too much about the JFK assassination I've studied it for far too long and it drives me absolutely fucking bonkers when I see people that are 100% convinced that Lee Harvey Oswald after the long right I'm like I don't know if Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone but guess what fuck face you don't either right and the reality of the evidence is not that cut and dry yeah the Warren commission itself was a massive contradictions it was clearly designed to achieve a predetermined conclusion and they ignored all evidence that went contrary to that predetermined conclusion that conclusion was there was a single shooter are we gonna go into this is this is are you are you opening this topic for discussion not I'm not my message board will love my point is that when I see people argue I don't know if he acted alone he might have acted alone yeah I leave that open but when you see that stupid bullet that supposedly went through both of their bodies and shattered bone and came out looking all pretty and beautiful you're like yeah the fuck out of here what that just showed up on governor Connolly's gurney at the at the hospital it just magically was there in perfect shape and just happened to be from the same rifle that you're attributing to the guy who's dead now who got shot by a fucking mob man right come on now I have to jump it's I change my mind on this subject look at that bullet that bullet Dan Carlin I've seen the magic bullet pile but and you know what's funny is that I don't dispute any of those things what if the government had a really good reason that you would have approved of to cover it up and and we're doing a podcast on the first world war right now and Kennedy was famous for having given the guns of august the book that's about the lead into world war one and how nations were kind of sucked into something they didn't want to do based on an assassination of a world leader sitting in an open car next to his wife by the way um and and if you're Lyndon Johnson and you're the people around Kennedy and it's a year after the Cuban Missile Crisis right you almost have world war three a year ago and a guy kills a young popular president in front of his wife who's you know in there in the in the Chanel close with the blood and brains all on her and his children are orphaned and your mad as hell and the guys tied to communism like nothing I mean he's fair play for Cuba committee he's one of the few people who defected to the Soviet Union he's one of the very few that came back would you maybe be worried that the American people would be so angry and so ready to somehow punish the communists who may have even been behind this attack I mean there's there you can create a scenario where it might have been a national security interest to as much as you can disassociate Cuba communism in the Soviet Union from the assassination of the president because even if it didn't happen can you see the Republicans in the administration make that go we need to do you can't let them get away with potentially shooting our president with that's invade Cuba what's I mean I'm a little confused yeah are you implying that you think that they made it look like Lee Harvey Oswald didn't do it because if he did do it then that's communism killing the president no I think I think what most of us when I was on the side saying that I think there was a conspiracy is you point to all the obvious things the government hit and that that to me is always a red herring right you say well they hit the magic bullet couldn't have been this and that and then you start to think well would there have been a good reason for a government cover up well the first good reason is because they did it right so you go well bastards could there be a reason where you would sit there and go oh no I understand why you did that you did that to prevent a greater evil and I'm not saying that that's the case but once you sit back and do that you go there could be multiple reasons so you're saying they would blame it on Lee Harvey Oswald instead of blaming it on the Cubans no I think I might try to obscure the idea that this was something involving communist Cubans and I think I think can you imagine if Oswald had actually had to take the stand someday and testify about this and taught I mean this may have been the thing where the government said listen this is just one guy who did this but it's going to open up a whole can of worms with the political opposition I mean remember there were there were posters of John F. Kennedy saying wanted for treason in Dallas the day he was killed that the right wares down there had pushed what do you think they would say of Lee Harvey Oswald is tied to communism so closely a year after we just avoided World War three that's a really stoned idea I think you must have been hit in the long hard core and you decided I look at things from multiple angles baby hey you may be right I mean look I'm not asserting that I'm saying no it's it's you got to throw it into the man you do it's probably you're gonna play the game where you throw all the other stuff into the middle well Jack Ruby had a direct connection to the mob the mob had a direct connection to Cuba those three things are that's fact those are facts and so Jack Ruby was assigned to go kill Lee Harvey Oswald in front of the police thus sacrificing his own freedom to do so that he knew he was doing it while he was doing it was the total suicide bombing the that's that alone is a direct connection to Cuba yeah I'm old for uh you know what is that noise I'm hearing it too I'm sorry someone's car alarm I'm just glad your studio is not a whole lot better than mine it's stopping noise it has to be something car alarm for us to hear it but how fucking dumber car alarms nobody goes out and looks when they were first made people like this is it there's got no more theft you're gonna hear this alarm and everyone's gonna run out with a gun nobody run nobody fucking pays any attention to car alarms anymore they yell out shut it off like if you're in the apartment building and it's going out people open up the window and yell out shut it off that's all they don't they don't yell out someone's breaking into your car they don't believe in it yeah it's quite wolf too many fucking times let's break the work yeah I gotta go over here saying so because the I'm old for thinking from multiple directions but I stick with Joe's theory about the bong on that day because now I agree what I don't understand is the what Joe has said is an objection the idea that if you are trying to avoid the communist connection to avoid World War III wind the world then would you want everybody to know that the guy responsible is a guy who has communist connection you know what I think you're stuck with that I mean you know if they kept your Oswald and they arrest him you're stuck the trial right if there's gonna be a trial is gonna bring all this out and imagine that trial would have taken a year would have been on TV the people are just gonna fume you know the communist things gonna be brought up by the prosecution I you know I guess what I'm trying to say is I try to figure out we always assume that when government covers up it's it's to hide something from us will be angry about are there ever occasions where they cover something up because we would want to if we were in the same position for the good of things are there ever times when government covers stuff up for a good reason I don't think there's smart enough to do that I really don't well you might be right I think that this Lee Harvey Oswald case would it may very well be is one of the best examples possible that we're living in a simulation yes because it's so theatrical costumes idea yeah it's so theatrical I don't know how many people have had that idea but a lot of like really legit oh physicists oh yeah they they they actually have a mathematical formula that says it's more possible than not yeah that we are is that we look at the if you just look at the progression of technology and you think like where is it eventually going to go a thousand years from now 10,000 years now it's inevitable if we don't blow ourselves up we're gonna be able to recreate reality and it will be completely it's an ant farm we live in an but here's the way you know it we already play games on our computers that are really really primitive versions of that already yeah if somebody came out to say hey we've got the brand new version of sieve and this time you'll have real people yeah I mean you'd be like how much is that I'm on that right now that's why it leaves that opening like if that was real where would it be and if it was here already would we know if you're gonna make it indissernible how do you not know it's not already there and then there's things that are just so dramatic and so ridiculous like the Kennedy assassination so such a perfect piece of theater the way it ties up so loosely and leaves you with a bunch of confusing facts and how about the fact that within the decade after the assassination more than a hundred witnesses to the crime or dead like the some of them died they were murdered people died in car accidents and strange diseases and they're poisoned and I mean the odds are staggering that that would happen that a hundred people who saw the assassination would but you just said you don't think the government's smart enough to do this that it but they're smart enough to murder people that's pretty easy to do and I think I think if you're gonna defend government's competence you gotta gotta go one way or the other either they're really competent to the really incumbent well that's just I could go with either one that's just tying up loose ends I don't think that requires the extreme amount of intelligence I think the average person knows that if someone out there knows something that they shouldn't know or they can contribute to some sort of a case that you believe might be coming down and eventually put people that you know and jail the people that are hiring you in jail if there's some way to stop that data from being shared the what that's how you cut it off you cut it off by killing the people they were witnesses that's a lot of people they should have still killed then that they didn't get that's true because they killed a hundred I mean let's kill the hundred people yeah let's assume that they actually did it there were more than a hundred witnesses were dead within a decade well you should have gotten some of those guys right in those books that sold so many copies just get them early yeah I mean and by the way just in the in sense of the interest of fairness there there have been arguments against this general posener and and this bull yoshi both wrote good books on the other side of that um yeah but not that good those books were not that you didn't like you didn't like no I thought I thought they did not leave open the possibility first of all they did not leave open the possibility for conspiracy and there were the reality as you do not know to call it case closed is nonsense if you weren't there if you didn't see it happen if you weren't part of it I think you're guessing I think you're doing a lot of guests but that's all that's always yeah but if you're guessing you can't say case closed you're full of shit okay I see that point I can see that calling it case the show the way those books were directed were very clearly directed in a presupposed idea that Lee Harvey Oswald actually well they were written and this is the thing I was trying to tell people is that don't read those books if you don't know about the Kennedy session don't because they're not directed at you they're directed at people who already know a ton of them I love it was one of the few books I'd ever read where they didn't footnote stuff they said you know you remember this book and they addressed other people's books without telling you about them so you had to just they they figure you read all that stuff already they could address um well you see is such a good prosecutor though he he told me on the phone he said he said it would have been a slam dunk convicting Oswald that doesn't mean anything no it does if you're saying does that mean he could absolutely not see he's just thinking about it as a person trying to win a game he's not thinking about it as a person trying to find the truth the reality of the truth is he doesn't know I don't know you don't know that's true there's only people that know are the people that were there that played apart in that murder or didn't whether it's Lee Harvey Oswald and other conspirators or the other conspirators and Lee Harvey Oswald being the Patsy that he claims he was whatever the combination of things were whichever number was correct those are the people that know everyone else there's a giant amount of guessing and to pretend there's not a giant amount of guessing means you're an asshole if you're pretending that you've got it nailed right you're an asshole yep yep this is the fact yeah and so the people that are arguing in an online me I argue it online as well but the people that actually believe that they know for a fact one way or the other it's not true yeah and the magic bullet theory there's a lot of problems with the way people describe it a lot of the the the trajectory the the angles of the bodies wasn't nearly as magical the path they were trimming to if you look at the fact that Kennedy was above him that the seat was actually raised and that Connolly was actually leaning and turning around in the idea of their what's much more damning is Connolly's fucking testimony himself that he was not hit first and that when Kennedy was hit he turned around and he heard the gunshots and then he was hit afterwards his own testimony refutes the idea of the magic bullet far better than anything else when you see Connolly talk about the series of events and how it played out inside the limousine he throws the magic bullet out the window right the reason why they came up with the magic bullet theory in the first place because they had a tribute there was a bullet that hit a curb stone underneath the overpass they had to attribute a bullet the liharvey Oswald shot or someone from that direction of liharvey Oswald shot to that bullet because that ricocheted and hit a man and the guy went to the hospital so because of that then they had to come up with one bullet doing all this damage right it doesn't mean it's logical bullet bullets sticks are weird though Joe I mean bullets do weird things they do do weird things and know what they don't do and when you talk about witnesses in a car remember this is faster than the speed of sound the sound hits at a different I mean it's under percent it's a liharvey right you're absolutely right however the if you look at the possibilities is it possible that a bullet hit these two bodies and smash bone did very little damage actually left more fragments inside the bullet than we're missing from the bullet is that possible I don't know I mean you could have yet a freak bullet that had like extra shit on it and that maybe maybe they're attributing certain thing maybe it's poor science and they're attributing certain things to being pieces of the bullet that weren't actually pieces of the bullet but the odds are that that was not a bullet that's smash bone if you've ever seen what a bullet looks like when it hits bone it doesn't look like that can it look like that man and I may be under some really freaky circumstance but that's the aberration that's not the norm the norm is a bullet distorts wildly when it hits bone that's part of what they're designed to do they're designed to break up inside the body and do more damage they're designed to hit things and spread out you know what bulillosis and positors book though did that I thought was fantastic and it goes back to that Kim de Vorek Michael Hastings thing we talked about a minute ago they showed what a lot of the conspiracy writers deliberately left out of their work because it messed up their theories right I mean making that one of the big pieces of evidence that that really kind of changes a lot of minds is the idea that Oswald took a shot at the general in the weeks before their theories right i mean making that one of the big pieces evidence that that really kind of changes a lot of minds is the idea that as well took a shot at the general in the weeks before he shot president or maybe allegedly shot president and when you realize he's he's out there trying to kill people already makes him look a lot less like a patsey and a lot more like a guy who was god i missed the general hey guess what president kennedy's coming in a motorcade and i work in a building along the route i guess i remember myself being upset with some of these conspiracy authors whose work i liked because they left this out and i remember thinking what that bastard left this out he knew that this was there but it makes us the real bad any left it out that's where i started to get real angry at people whose work you're reading because you want to believe it and trusted that's a very good point and there's certainly possible and but you know what it's also not an either or i agree with that i agree with that i agree with that i agree with that b-harvey aweswell acted in conjunction with some other people absolutely there's a lot of very many people wanted to president that that's the real issue that real issue is did did the president at the time create enough enemies where they were a gang of people that wanted them dead and that is uncontroversial right do you think so wait now i'm leaving to say in controversial well because here's the thing that that i think all of our stone did a great job of distorting was this idea that somehow president kennedy upset the military industrial complex and all this kind when in reality the guy had just in it done the biggest peacetime military buildup in american history he had just read member he campaigned on something called the missile gap so when he got the job he increased military spending by a ton but he still wanted to get out of the uh... he didn't really want to get out of the not even going to move assets to louse and can't body of uh... i guess my point is is that he was not an enemy of those very forces that all of our stone had him being the enemy of i see what you say that he he was a hawk but was it that black and white no no no it was not that black and white he was not and you don't know what other things they may have wanted that he was pushing back on and see we just don't know what you do know that he said he wanted to get rid of the federal reserve i don't know enough about that i can't i can't comment intelligently on that i mean you i can't he comment intelligently on almost everything i said but it doesn't stop some of us stop with the membrane some of us are more competitive jr k federal bank but i mean that's a thing though that when you what's funny about these arguments is when you see people who are really good at pushing forward all the evidence apart in their conclusion and the staff that doesn't fit with their conclusion it's not there it's like poop i just forgot they do just the same thing that he accused the government doing right hiding and emissions and all that stuff and that's why you read one book and you're like he looks really convincing and all the points they are making looks really good and they are like wait why the hell did you leave this stuff out and when you find out they leave it out you start to distrust them to absolute i don't trust the government or some of those conspiracy writers the idea the conspiracy theory site theorist site is this executive order one one one one zero and this was issued by kennedy on june 4th of nineteen sixty three and this executive order delegated to the secretary of the treasury the president's authority to issue silver certificates under the Thomas amendment of the agricultural adjustment act as amended by the gold reserve act and the order allowed the secretary to issue silver certificates if any were needed during the transition period under president kennedy's plan to eliminate silver certificates so the idea was that he was moving in on the institution known as the federal reserve because the federal reserve as most people realize isn't really a federal kind of a thing at all it's it's it's not a part of the government oh look it's the horn again hopefully the police are on their way to stop this dastardly person from stealing someone's pens and change you name a car radios you can steal anymore they're all integrated into the system would see me if you're not gonna steal a car if you do steal a car good luck trying to fucking hide it everybody's got a goddamn GPS in their car now yes stupid fuck so the idea that they espouse is that this is the executive order that that started the beginning of the end I've also seen a lot of people say that they think Lyndon Johnson had something to do with having somebody just sent me that book I haven't looked at it yet but the Lyndon Johnson killed out a kid killed Kennedy book or something is it a new one that's out I think yeah I had I had just even tour on my show a couple times and now I get all those books without even asking you but poor bastard it's bad I um I did a show with the people that did his show and uh you know there was a couple of times where we had these sort of discussions about uh conspiracies and you know what's and I'm like you know they're all juicy and salacious but the idea that if you look at too many things as being a conspiracy you do a huge disservice to what might actually be a conspiracy yeah you're playing into the hands of the people exactly whether you realize it or not I mean to be like a crazy right wing radical like the the fire and brimstone sort of a guy you play directly into the hands of the guy people slam me I'm getting this slam like I'm an anti-conspiracy person and they're all saying I'm a Dan Carlin energy somebody even wrote a review on iTunes it's something like he doesn't understand how the world works and he's just giving you the problem line yeah but they're a conspiracy's out there but like you said you do yourself a disservice when you buy all of them Dan Carlin you got to stop listening to critics I do you stop listening to Joe was telling me Joe was telling me that before the show he goes to hang on I'm gonna listen to anybody listen you you can learn things from people's critics feedback is good I've learned a lot from people's criticism but you also have to understand human nature and there's a lot of people out there that are sad as fuck and they want you to feel sad too you want you to hurt and instead I mean it's because their water is lightable on fire and flammable and yours isn't it could be that it could be the noble ones to fuck them I'm going with the ladder most of the time it's known once the fuck them and you have a deficit you have a desire for friction well I wish they'd put that in the review then let's let's I'm probably saying this because I'm 496 pounds I shit my pants in a daily basis no one's touched me in a decade that's wrong about those experiences doesn't know shit about how the world works these out there confusing us yeah I don't know man I think that you can get a lot out of it in terms of you can get other people's eyes I think it's helped me a lot with my stand-up it's helped me a lot even negative criticism I go okay I can see how you see that I think it's good it fires you up makes you want to perform better makes you want to you know analyze things with under more critical eye under a knot it not a non-inductionated eye I think it's good but I also think you got to know when to listen to and when not to when someone says damn carl and just know how to world you know you're all right dude well I do think it shuts people down we were talking about why more people don't don't get ahead and the competition thing I think that kind of criticism does shut some people down where they just they're they're not they can't I mean obviously we all can handle it because we all do something where we're criticized on a daily basis but I mean I think there's some people that just I they don't want it so my boss does it but I don't want it in public right it I was reading a thing the other day it's just I've been railing on about this lately about the idea of people are going on about what they're calling fat shaming and fat shaming is making people feel bad for being overweight and I read this one article where this woman was talking about how she was being fat-shamed because she went to a family function and everyone was gushing about her cousin her cousin lost 20 pounds and that they were making such a big deal out of it that it was clear to her that they were judging her for not losing the 20 pounds so it made her feel awful and she didn't understand how they couldn't understand that what they were doing was fat shaming her that by life by complimenting someone on losing weight your fat shaming the person who hasn't lost the weight and that it made her feel awful and that it was incredibly insensitive of them and that you know I'm fascinated by that kind of thinking I really am I'm fascinated by that sort of like like reverse victimology sort of a thing where instead of you being the victim of your own handiwork you become like a persecuted person because they don't accept you for the flaws that you have or even mention the possibility of those flaws existing by virtue of complimenting someone for having gotten over the same flaws that you possess hilarious I think without even knowing the specifics on on particular issues anytime somebody's so wheeling to embrace the victim role is melt-travel right away yeah I'm like you know there's a reality to losing weight that we had this Dave Aspery guy who's an expert in a lot of aspects of nutrition he's a fascinating guy and one of the things he was talking about was he was giving overweight people a pass who's saying the level of addiction that these people actually have for food to say that they don't have willpower is really unfair because they're so overweight like a lot of these folks are so far gone that they used up all their willpower just to get up in the morning just to walk to the to the bus stop just to go to work just to get their their their chores done during the day like they don't have the same level of energy that a healthy person has so to tribute them to having like this this this like backlog of energy they're not tapping into because they're weak willed it's not that like they're they're already so far in the whole it's almost impossible for them to get motivation they have to get something like incredibly extreme has to happen to them and I thought that was really unique and looking at that the best people too yes yes people out shade people who depressed you can see the in with people that are ruining their life too whether it's through addiction you know you see that as well it's like why can't they see it the way other people see it well it's almost like they can't like they're so trapped up in the momentum of whatever it is whether it's gambling or food I mean I've seen people with food addictions that you can watch the gears spinning in their mind when food is nearby like they know they're supposed to lose weight they know they're not supposed to be eating it but the the gears start spinning in their mind and it becomes the primary focus of their existence get that fucking donut I need that donut that donut is huge it's it's it's critical for fueling whatever whatever trouble is going on in their mind and it's a weird aspect of human beings and you don't do that any favors by pretending that encouraging someone who lost weight is a bad thing the idea that socially that's irresponsible because you're fat and you're near them no it's actually responsible because that terrible feeling that you have it's supposed to be the bump that pushes you towards eating a salad instead of a cheeseburger should be the bump that makes you write down everything you're in eat that day and and state some goals this is what I'm going to do I'm going to use my willpower to overcome this horrible obsession that I have with shitty food that's also possible it's also possible but by you going home and blaming everybody in the blog that you've projected yourself away from any potential benefit from having these bad feelings again he's the the same as about a competition somebody will never learn how to lose in the same in avoiding criticism yeah like you gotta look at it it feels like shit but that feel like shit correct it so it doesn't feel like shit anymore I thought the show is very disorganized until you guys just tied it into beautiful bow like that it's all it's got a theme that's running through it we meant to be planted this way everyone I have a finger it's a way to bring this bitch around oh it's an art form it is oh most certainly is right I mean for sure actually podcasting is an art form look I tell everybody and I'll say it even though you're here your fucking podcast is one of my favorite things that I listen to what am I absolute favorite things it is a national treasure it's so interesting it it educates people on aspects of history that were completely ignored and it does in a really entertaining and dynamic way it's so important dude dude I do not do can I just tell you I don't get it I've never gotten it I've never ever gotten it you know just why you can do it that's why it's good I mean I'm grateful don't get me wrong but but I've never quite seen it as others see it oh that's good that's like mongles that's what I think you know I do yeah all about the mongles that's what you got me I know that's how you got me because I have been a fan of chaos it's not a fucking coincidence I'm a stand-up comedian and I'm also a cage fighting commentator that's true I mean it's that's not a coincidence I'm a massive fan of chaotic events I'm a massive fan of this these explosive things that that throw the norm in the question and completely change the paradigm of the existing reality that we operate under and when you listen to something like a podcast on the mongles it's like Jesus that was only you 1200s there wasn't that long I forgot to bring this shirt I got this badass gingas con world do you that's great back it has all the fucking the towns that he sacked and all the people who are now you got a severe photo I tweeted out I'll buy you one I'll send you you owe me it for all these appearances I've done for you I do that's an I we all owe each other man but I definitely owe you for many many many I have to stop you I have to say I hope this doesn't embarrass you did you read with that one comic set about being on Joe Rogan's podcast or having Joe Rogan adorsum was it Bill Burr or someone like that said you are the Oprah of podcasting that if we come on your show it just all of a sudden everything is rainbows and unicorns for us once we're on Joe's show which is true by the way but otherwise I mean the favor you've done to all the rest of us not to kiss anybody's ass here but it really is I mean you've made a lot of people aware what we do well I'm honored that I could do that but you know on my in from my perspective all I've done is let people know things that I found that are awesome that's not that difficult Joe Rogan book well if you're honest if you're an honest person and I pride myself in being insanely honest to the point where you know I'm like one of the reasons why I'm really good at accepting criticism because I'm insanely self-critical I mean I'm good at avoiding going nuts I think all are I think that's kind of what makes me you can't do what we do without being that way I agree yeah I agree but but my my recognition of the role I'm I'm aware of it I'm also I'm honored and I feel like it without a doubt I have an obligation but I also feel like all I'm doing is letting people know about amazing shit that already exists it's beautiful to be that sort of a conduit to be sort of a funnel point where people can know they can a portal where they can go here and they can learn about all sorts of cool shit but if the cool shit didn't exist I would have run out of things to talk about a long time ago no that's true but it's also through the fact that what you have done for so many people right on the right I mean when I think about you went dankan for me in my life the impact that it has had coming on to your show and dankan show in particular it's fucking unreal you know so it's like that's why I always say as a joke but maybe not as a joke whether like you guys ever need help moving a body somewhere close the up again you know what I mean it's important that you guys are out there you guys are out there providing us with entertainment information in entertainment form that expands my view of the world you're personally responsible for expanding my view of history above and beyond where it would have ever been without you that's a fact and when I look down in iTunes and I saw your show rising through the ranks I mean I was I was so happy for you we were the Oprah book club pick of the month yeah what was the highest you got on it fourth that's insane that's all of it yeah and and and and that's your help baby well what would you what would you and your listeners too by the way before you ever came on the show what was the highest you've ever been we got up to like eight a long long time ago before we had any of this competition we have now it's you know and I don't know folks understand that it is so competitive now there are so many things out there with so much promotion that that to reach 20th now is a bigger deal than reaching seven or eight five or six years ago I mean it's yeah it's much more competitive but you know I mean we hover around 12 14 15 something like that the numbers of people making podcasts right now it's crazy and the back yeah but I think that's a great thing absolutely and I and and I become an evangelist and I tell people all the time if you've ever thought about doing it you ought to try it right yeah why not yeah you never know I mean I would have never known if I would have never known how did you start you I don't mean to say so to bring up a subject maybe your whole audience already knows how did you get the idea to do this well we started just putting it on a on use dream we got an idea so that was first yeah well actually before even used to use dream there's a thing called Justin dot TV and we were on that we would do we would broadcast from the green room and like take questions from the green room and people enjoyed it it was fun but what made you think of even I mean because the idea deciding to do it is such a especially back then it was such a weird step to take well there's a lot of people that had already done it um Adam Corolla and current no Corolla didn't do it did he yeah he had done it he had went straight from radio to doing it that was the first episode we had snowflakes on the background and we just did on use dream we didn't know what we're doing and I did it with Brian um the we went from that to also opiate Anthony opiate Anthony I thought he had a great radio show on serious and their radio shows so similar to the way that I started doing podcasts where's this to hang it's just a conversation right I mean sometimes I have questions for the guests sometimes it's kind of structured in that way where there's some things that I want to get to because I know that you have an expertise in that area but a lot of it is just a bunch of people shooting the shit and just talking honestly about life and I've always found that incredibly entertaining and Anthony started doing this thing out of his basement he set up this thing called life from the compound he's he's a nut he's a gun nut he has like 50 caliber machine guns and shit and he put a green screen behind him and he was doing karaoke where he's singing with a gun in his hand he's fucking crazy but I was like this guy's got like a professional studio set up in his basement I'm like god damn it we should start doing something so we started doing it just on ustream and then start putting it on iTunes and now in the end of next month it'll be four years and you know we were 400 plus episodes in this look what iTunes has done for for the whole you know what I thought the greatest thing they ever did for people like us was was not separating the ESPN's and the and the and the professional content from the stuff that we do because it allows us an equal playing field in a way that if they said okay here's your professional stuff now here's your amateur stuff in this pile over here in this in this grab bag of singles nobody wants I I feel like in the same way that we just said you know I mean I owe you I owe iTunes there's a lot of people that made something possible here I don't know what I'd be doing anymore without a podcast I'm no longer a news reporter kind of guy I'm no longer a radio talk shows I'd be like janitor and I would be really bad at that too so I mean I there's a lot of people we owe for where we are today no doubt yeah if there wasn't some sort of a form like iTunes we could just upload it to that and then people could download it from the RSS and the hosting services and everything yeah yeah yeah yeah your number six right now in the world son oh geez six on I gotta be making more money don't you think number six in the world you get in fuck did you see what I drive here sometimes I wonder if this is America I wonder if it's the US what's got some BBC stuff on there I don't know I don't know if it is whether or not is actually the country or the world but whatever it is your number six of the all podcast and I owe your audience and you know your audience is awesome by the way I mean I hear from them and they always say the same thing I found out about you from Joe Rogan just so you know fine cool shit don't lie to them that's it yeah fine cool shit be honest be honest about how you feel about things don't don't be transparent in the way I mean even when I talk like if I talk about something like the magic bullet theorator someone will argue something the bottom line always is I will tell you exactly what I actually do know and I don't know I don't know what happened you can't know right and I think finding out about cool things and being honest about the cool and encouraging that sort of really objective discussion about things that that's a that's the thing that we're missing that's a thing we're missing in our social circles just thing we're missing in light people get attached to ideologies yeah like we were saying well people will say one way or another and then just fucking argue it to death I know Michael Hastings was killed by your credibility is on the line and everything yeah whether it's big foot or fucking UFOs or being a Republican right there's there's people that get on a fucking team and they will are and those people were a problem they're a problem to themselves they're a huge problem politically yeah because because as I said you know it it doesn't hurt us that one party does something but then when we forgive it when our party whatever a party that might be gets in power there are Democrats who if George W Bush was doing what president Obama is doing would be out in the streets of signs because it's their guy they don't and vice versa that's such a good point and and one that I really get on progressives and left-wing people about I might your acceptance of war crimes done under democratic administration the idea of the same exact things being done under the Republican administration would be horrific war crimes and you the acceptance of them is so gross and so telling and codifies the whole thing you were so against when the other guy was doing because now you don't have a leg to stand on when the Republicans go back in office do this what are you going to say you're going to complain about it again then it reinforces the idea of this being a fucking simulation and that's all I'm liking that idea more and more it's the beginning yang it's the theater it's the two party system it sounds like they brought in a fourth party but there's too confusing it people didn't know what to follow anymore they start tuning into different channels so that parole character came along right fucking through a big monkey wrench to the whole situation it's too much let's go back to two and a fringy that's why we have it had a third person at those presidential debate since yeah well the commission for presidential debate it's a privately funded institution with half democrats and half republicans on their staff it's hilarious and they try so hard to make sure the weirdos don't get in the Gary Johnson's of the world the the people that are gonna throw can I ask this though why are they all weirdos because I keep feeling like that's almost like part of the rigged thing that if you have somebody who has some ideas you go finally somebody saying the right thing about this and they go yes but I'm also a secret clan member just you know you go what why do they always have to come with some baggage like that that's because you're not doing it that's right my my nazi newsletter from the past will all come back to haunt me right that the only type of people that have the balls to step out like that are socially a little wacky for everybody else it's a big rare let me talk about that like if you're Anthony weiner and you know there's more pictures out there but you run anyway knowing they're gonna catch you again and you do it anyway yeah that guy obviously he's got a few fucking screws he's running for president next time just be ready but the publicity is gonna turn it all around yeah wonder what what a guy like that eventually one's up doing that is an interesting point you can have a podcast of course probably good at that yeah good at talking think about what you could tweet right there that's a good promotion of you share it with your friends before they caught him the first time being a freak they it was a great video of him speaking on the floor and and just like really passionate screaming and yelling a very eloquent very articulate and like wow this guy's like fighting same thing KKK letters in your past I mean why do you get one with the I mean it's crazy why think that most people when they get to be a certain age they have a family and they have obligations mortgages and they have certain risks that are not willing to take and one of the big risks is you don't want to go against your entire government say everyone's corrupt like geez Christ they'll come after you they'll take your house you know your kids gotta go to college so like for the guys like the Ron Paul's of the world you know it's like they get to be a certain age where they're just they don't give a fuck like what are you gonna do you gonna shoot him he's fucking eighty five years old right every is you know he's he's last run for president is done now it's up to his son and his son apparently he's been using cheat sheets what's up with that plagiarizing I gave the guy a lot of credit for that wonderful filibuster he did for the fourth amendment got the best publicity the fourth amendment's gotten in so long and then you go pull that on me make me look like an idiot for people don't know what you're talking about that's apparently he had used some some words from some very speech that were exactly the same exactly is it possible that he has writers and he doesn't know that's what his father said the newsletters were that got his father in so much trouble but remember Rand Paul who I've said nice things about also has as one of his main advisors that guy who did the southern Avenger you know confe oh yeah the guy he what of his advisors was the southern Avenger and he wore a mask and had a Confederate flag behind him in so it's like a YouTube show or something and then when they said are you gonna fire this guy he goes something like well that's all in his past and you just go what's up with this why are these people all crazy if you talk about freedom in our constitution you're crazy that's adorable yeah maybe it's the southern Avenger look at his father is that him oh my god sit wait if that guy's on your staff and somebody you could honestly say god I didn't know he was a southern Avenger once they tell you don't you fire him five seconds later yeah I think it's probably he didn't so that's him he right there you go great thanks for taking my my pet issue of the fourth amendment and trashing it with your southern Avenger guy what is the southern Avenger stance maybe I'm on his team I think I don't know I have never watched the southern Avenger I saw clips hanging with a broad blush brush the Confederate flag does that for you it seems so sad though like I don't know what could he possibly wait for he's confusing shit out of me already conservative libertarian independent look what he's done he's he's he's he's he's destroyed conservative independent and libertarian in one tagline he's probably you know working for a group who's designed who's trying to discredit all those things I'm surprised it doesn't have a TM at the end of it you know look at the logo it's a better logo than a lot of people have yeah I mean what is he trying to do does this guy still like a wrestler doesn't he does is he still have a show no he works for Rand Paul now still they didn't fire him in where's Brian he's supposed to look all that stuff he's not a look at I was just gonna interrupt oh he's he's been banished this is a temporary banishment but Rand Paul still has this guy working for I can't say I can't comment on that do we know if the southern Avenger said anything bad he's to speak at the same conference as Rand Paul hmm after Neo conservative alter ego was revealed hunter left a post on the as the Kentucky senator's social media that's the guy that's a southern Avenger Jesus I can see it looks like guy's a little bit of a manger look at that photo over his right shoulder with a left shoulder that's disturbing is that guy you know shirt on there's like a bunch of people and one guy has no shirt on that's a gay orgy about the how the southern gay orgy they just said we just have some chicken we're fixing the fuck look at them the guy has no shirt on in a big chest tattoo what if that chest tattoo is like some fucking conservative you don't know what's on his back statement yeah a big confederate flag cover the fucking but to get back to the point is how come whenever you get someone who's saying some important things in a halfway you know decent way they have to come you know people say to me all the time well we vote all the time and the the course the country is on is based on voters voting for people how come when we get somebody who would like to change course in a direction most of us would like to see half of them is really fantastic and the other half of them is so crazy you'd never like to person like that in a million years why can't we have somebody who has some common sense and doesn't sound like that two words my friend simulation theory I think I'm back and diverse of risk management diversification tool yeah I wonder you know I think he's hedging his bets in case white people take over the world again you know in a very dominant sort of way we'll have the southern avenger on staff he can advise us you ever watch those extreme preppers shows the little shows or dudes or fixing the preparing for the end of the world all the bunker people stockpile and water and creating escape routes and battering rams they're welding to the front of their pick they're like the opposite of the hoarders because they're the hoarders that are doing it for a good cause right yeah they believe that it's all going to come crumbling down and those I think that there's a mentality and the same kind of mentality that is the type of person that wants to get in this rebellious position of power rebellious position of you know railing out against the government real they're very similar to these people that are prepping it's very similar to their extreme folks like those the only people that make it to the front of that crazy line they have to be a bit nutty it's not that the ideas aren't interesting to you or I when look at a guy like Rand Paul the things that he says that you agree with or is dad the things that he says that you agree with but it's to get there right you he's facing so much opposition there's so much bullshit along the way so much pressure so much so much back and forth debate so much frustration so much suppression of information by the time he gets to a position where the world is listening to him he's already broken yeah he like broke every bone in his fucking soul just to get to the front of the line you know what's funny the people say to me all the time you know can you get a staff together to do what you do so you can do better I want more history shows can we help you do this and I always say the same thing I said you can't help me because I can't watch y'all and I can't keep track of it that's what all these people do they you know what was it a Paul said Ron Paul said well this guy who wrote he was doing my newsletter for me I was in Congress I didn't have time to do news letter so he did it and he wrote all this stuff and I didn't know what was happening that's my fear is that you're gonna hire a bunch of people and then you're gonna turn around and go what did you do for me what we started the Southern Avengers show if you thought it'd be a good promotional vehicle for your show dad no doubt yeah no doubt I think that there's it's a catch 22 you do you give away some of your control or do you keep it you know where you know everything's cool but the minute you give it away you got rogue people you know with your name running around graffitiing the side Banksy and Carlin were here somebody isolated the photograph pull this the photograph it's all a bunch of wrestlers they why say the Southern Avengers like a wrestler yeah these are like old school Southern wrestlers dad I was probably right they probably butt fucked each other as soon as this was over and this guy's got this in the he's got Carexler. Yeah, these are like old school Southern wrestlers that I was probably right. They probably butt fucked each other as soon as this was over This guy's got this in the the he's got it framed on his wall in the background of his fucking study So yay Southern Avenger yay Simulation theory. Wait does it say he parted way so there so so he got rid of him finally Yes, I guess that the human cry was a little too much for a sitting senator from Kentucky to have somebody named the Southern Avenger on his staff Well, he was a co-author of the 2011 book with Rand Paul the Tea Party Oh, gosh, I had maybe forgotten that I liked it out, but you're right It's it is funny that the these people they have to be yeah We can't have a fourth amendment person who's not well I mean I guess you do you got guys like widen and you'd all in some of these people But but when you get somebody who's a real lightning rod for this stuff Yeah, and you think finally we've been waiting for a guy like this forever They come with these poison pills that you just can't swallow. Yeah, it's an unfortunate reality of the The control that has been exerted on the political climate I mean the fact that the two party system exists just shows you how much power the people that are in power You know the people that are running things how much they've actually been able to exert on our system They've locked it down to two Pow two parties that are both often supported by the exact same corporations George Carlin said you know exactly how many people you have to bribe Yeah, Bull Hill Hicks had the best bit He's like he goes well I like the puppet on the left. He's more to my liking well the puppet on the right supports my beliefs Hey, wait a minute. There's one guy holding both puppets. I mean that's really that was like his Description of America. That's a really good one. How come we don't get it then Joe that this is what I don't understand Is that if we're gonna work toward this awareness and if we're gonna get better and and more involved in enlightening How do we not see through that scam that would it be like first scam you have to see through to get to anywhere We don't see through that. Well smart people that are on the democratic side or partially the blame Just as much as people on the conservative side But on the democratic side I've heard so many people use the term we like we need to get into office or we need to get more this Or we you know we control the house. I'm like we we like Hollywood people I have had Maddening conversations with people in Hollywood that use the term we to describe the democratic party, right? And I'm like they're not you dude. They're not you by a long stretch and you perpetrating this stupidity I understand that you worked 12 hours a day and you don't have the time to investigate this thoroughly But you pretending to be a smart guy and and going with this team we need to do that We need like how much of what they're doing are you really fucking paying attention to because this democratic party that's in in charge right now is As Republican as it gets when it comes to whistleblowers as Republican as it gets It comes to giving rights to corporations that are the same rights that used to be attributed to individuals So the all the things that we were afraid of during the Bush administration are all being done to a much Law the attacks on whistleblowers to a much larger degree the attacks on secrecy and privacy much larger than has ever been exhibited before Those are all Republican ideas so when do they become democratic ideas? I had a famous political reporter here in LA When I was learning about news explain it to me this way She goes I'm gonna give you the secret to what the difference between the two parties are and she kept it from me She kept it from me and then one day when we were going to interview Dan Quay all of all people believe it or not when he was the vice president She says okay the time has come to let you in on the big secret between the two parties So I lean forward. I say what is it? She goes at the Republican fundraisers you get your wine in a glass at the democratic fundraisers It comes in a plastic cup That was it. That was this big piece of knowledge that was waiting for the difference between the two parties is what they serve the Wine in when you go to their get-to-get they're so deeply entrenched in money and when I'm saying that those are Democratic ideas or those are Republican ideas I don't mean it as then they are actually a Republican ideas I mean it as and the people that are on the democratic side that believe in equality and freedom and left-wing values They think that those ideas are only things that the Republican support so when they're clearly being supported by the Democratic party Whose who what's going on is up down is down up is there is everybody getting paid here? Like what exactly is going on? I think we assume these people have ideas when really they're taking much 20% of them do But I think 80% of them have the ideas you pay them to have and also It's a giant group of people in order to play politics Right you have to appease certain groups and you have to be very good socially at this sort of given take system that they've put into place The crony is a system. I mean when you look at the that all these people that are lobbyists live in Virginia That's right outside of DC and they come in there's all this money concentrated on making things happen there It's totally against the concept of we the people it's totally against the concept of The interests of the individual the interests of the greater good of the society as a whole It's totally against that it's against it and it's transparent and it's right in everybody's face But I think a lot of people do get it like I don't think it's an issue of lacking awareness at least now You know if you talk 30 years ago You had maybe different story but Post-nix on ever since you know confidence in government has been collapsing sharply confidence in the political system You know everybody to some degree or another hates it feel like it's corrupt I think there is a level of awareness of that What there isn't is the okay then what do we do about it? You know that part is the? We have the knowledge that this sucks, but what can I or my neighbor the next guy do to change this? What steps could be taken and that's when people go? Don't you think more people know it sucks now than ever before yeah more people know why it sucks now Well, you know what the real and this this ties something else up in a bow We talked about earlier with the fracking and the environmental damage everything else part of the problem We have to is we have a system here in the United States that is is designed to be moderate and not radical Which sounds fine most of the time But if you put off problems long enough the solutions that are moderate to fix them are no longer useful I mean if your house is slipping on its foundation and you get to it early Maybe a little bit of money and a little bit of work and you can fix that if you put that off 10 15 years The solution to that problem is a lot more radical We have put off a lot of huge problems in this country and solving them for so long That the solutions are so radical that we have a system that is just geared to to tampon down that sort of radicalism But what does that mean if that's what it takes to fix some of the problems? That's a very interesting point and then there's the idea that we're going to come up with some way in the future to clean up all the Mess that we've created it will fix it later something will be invented thick analogy with the car What we need to do is get our backs against the wall because that's when America's that's that's right We got our back against the wall tell you what we come out swinging the better mouse trappell emerged Come up swing and we're gonna make some GMO fish that eat plastic and send them bitches out there and then we got all our problem Sol we're gonna have the greatest population of fish in the history of the fucking ocean because we're gonna have plastic Eat and fish that we've made in the lab they got a steel lining to their stomach and they they run on fossil fuels Forest consciousness expansion Maybe they will prompt the awareness by putting the hallucinogenics in the water and there you go Well, a lot of people believe that they came in asteroids to end carlon They came from other planets Accumulation there are no other planets. It's a chemical the chemical composition of mushrooms The four phosphoryloxy and dimethyl trip to me no, however you say it wow Things being in the phosphorus in the four positions The only one only group of them in the entire world so there's no there's there's no immediate ancestors to so I think we're talking way over my head. I'm talking over my head way over my head I'm pitting some shit that I heard Terrence McKenna say oh the the the idea is we're clear on that right? Spores can survive in a vacuum the idea of Pansparia Panspermia is a well accepted idea in astronomy and that idea is that life the building blocks from life water even came from other planets asteroid impacts on other planets that large bodies into space they landed on earth many of them perhaps You know billions and billions of billions of years ago and actually created the oceans actually created a lot of life itself the building blocks for life So in a sense we are all of alien composition period But other things are continuing to come this way including spores which can survive in a vacuum and when you have large doses of Silasaben mushrooms one of the weird things is You feel like you're communicating with something you feel like you're and the whimsical amongst us Believe that what you're actually doing is communicating with an alien life form that has come here and wants you to eat it in order to tune into it You know I I actually have some thoughts that I agree with some of that and and this is coming from someone Who doesn't talk about this very much? But I've always been fascinated with how things like that have been used by humankind throughout history as a means to open up other You know to use Huxley's term doors of perception It's fascinating to me when you think if you think that none of this stuff is You know if you think about evolutionary things right? So this is all stuff that evolves why the hell were hallucinogenic mushrooms What's the evolutionary benefit to the mushroom itself to have that is it's supposed to ward off birds from eating it because they get a Bad trip if they do I find it fascinating how much of a role you know We did a podcast once about the the hidden side of Intoxication in history well I think you could make a very good case that hallucinogenics of all kinds have probably played huge roles in history That we don't even know about especially with tribal peoples who have played huge role I mean why did the Germans decide to migrate into Roman territory at just this time? Well, they have sorcerers in which doctors as part of their culture who lose use hallucinogenics Who knows that they didn't go to the chief in there and say you remember that thing? I told you we have to do I was just told now is the right time move into that Roman territory and all histories different I mean that's the side of history we're never gonna get be interesting to find out how much of history has been determined by things like that That is all about it was hilarious. I remember you like that one Well, you came to problem is that you can't know so the whole thing is speculative You could say well Napoleon had opium the night before water Looney slept late and he was sluggish how much of that in fact history And some you got to go you got to use the little teeny pieces of the jigsaw puzzle You know about to construct a totally fictional narrative that might be true. Well, there's one thing that's undeniable people love altering their consciousness yes, yeah, that's true. They love it so much that in this day and age We have partnership for a drug for America and they're who are fucking against the trend right who not only that are funded Initially by alcohol and tobacco companies now mostly by pharmacy or my son of course Which is so rich there and so delicious? The way I described it I go that Having pharmaceutical companies and allowing them to do literally commercials against marijuana is like hookers making commercials against strippers Right, that's it's like most ridiculous things it is the idea behind it is you know, it's so preposterous but we have We still have a method as long as you give people a method they'll accept a certain amount of restrictions as long as the method is good And the method is very good the alcohol method is great Well think and think about if prohibition hadn't been repealed I mean think about how interesting a world we might live in today had that stayed the law of the land I don't think it can I don't think you can have no options for people to well the one thing that's interesting is during prohibition marijuana was legal marijuana wasn't legal until after prohibition Henry and slinger and all those yeah Harry and slinger and William Randolph first they actually Originally done it they really originally did it to try to suppress hemp as a commodity right because you got so much more Out of them then you got out of threes and if you are in the business of making paper and yeah business of the login industry And that's a also perfect example the difference between controlling information back then and today They were able to sell this idea that there's a new drug that was forcing Mexicans and blacks to wait rape white women and they even name this drug marijuana Which is a name for a Mexicans slang term for a wild tobacco had nothing to do with cannabis You know what does blow me away though? It blows me away I can understand you making the case that this has to be illegal whatever we're talking this has to be illegal because it's so dangerous And we know it's so dangerous What I don't understand is that we basically have a policy in this country that there will be no new intoxicants If something is invented in a bathtub tomorrow that doesn't hurt anybody that has no hangovers at nobody gets in car We're gonna ban it the day after tomorrow on general principles And that's what I don't understand not only that there are beneficial drugs that they have to attribute to disease Is in order to get them passed through like there's a thing called provigil and provigil is this smart drug that all these is Silicon Valley on you know a lot about the stretch. You know all pressed some impressive stuff Yeah provigil is pretty wild and it gives you this buzz But it doesn't give you a caffeiney buzz. It's not like a heart rate thing It gives you this clarity thing. It's a very strange sort of intoxicant or of a sort of a pharmaceutical drug rather But they they couldn't just sell it as a performance-enhancing drug So they had to sell it as it's some sort of a response to a disease So they came up with narcolepsy so yeah, narcolepsy. Okay. I've heard about this But it was originally created in order to like it was created to benefit consciousness But you can't do that you can't have a drug that just a drug that makes you smarter You literally can't you there has to be something wrong with your fucking brain So they have to come up with something right that's a weird rut Here's the weird thing if that's how it has to be. Why don't they all go back and then find things You know what couldn't you sell the old drugs that way? Yeah, I guess they are kind of I mean if you think about it That's what the whole medical marijuana kind of thing could be construed as if you wanted to well If on a new way to market this thing it's a solution to a problem. Yeah, well medical marijuana is the reason why they're that's the back door Yeah, I think we all understand that even if we think that there are and I do think there are medical uses for this stuff There's no question that it has been used as a back door to sort of open the door to what would not have been possible without it Also in genius. I would get insane. I'm just throwing it out there getting people in government addicted to the money in the revenue That's true legal that's true. You don't get at all of the deal legal The money still goes in the economy and that's that's been really documented in British Columbia that the economy is very dependent Even though it's illegal But the taxes that you would get from selling it the government actually is what loses out on marijuana being illegal The government loses out because they're not getting any of the tax money from it being sold Still one of the things we create and do well in this country, too You think they'd be hard to sort of safeguarding the few things we do well in producing in this guy Well, they're just starting to now pass laws and on it we sell hemp protein powder But we have to buy our hemp protein powder in Canada. It's legal to possess its legal to sell. It's not legal to grow That is so acinine because you're not even talking about a psychoactive plan. You're talking about the male version of the cannabis plant It's roped the very yeah the different variations the the cousins of the cannabis plant There's there's more than one different type of hemp, but all of them what they all have in Share and common is the amount of THC in them is insanely small So what you're getting out of it is just a textile you're getting you're getting clothes You're getting oil you're getting food that you can eat and we can't even grow it in America We're buying it in bulk from Canada and then we sell it We try to buy the best stuff that we could possibly find and it's really difficult Like because unless you can grow it yourself Like it's hard to quality control You have to you have to like really search out these farms that are in another country that are growing this shit And it's so stupid so they're just starting to pass laws that are allowing farmers to grow it in America California has recently passed it they're trying to pass it in other states I believe they passed it in Colorado And I believe they passed it in Washington state because those are the two places where they've made it legal to consume for adults I saw the one of the best look my entire self seen on these there's these look my entire coast standing silent nation Which is what I've been a few years ago on to find the reserve a showing south for those who are Italian accent impaired He said standing silent nature Nation nation. Please. Yeah, my understanding. I don't know what you're talking about standing silent nation So that was really cool. It showed what happened on Pine Ridge Which was you know one of the poorest reserve nations in United States where prospects for economic growth are really deemed And so what these guys did they figure you know we are Somewhat of a sovereign entity because that's how a reservation saw right there in this weirdly and if you go okay We can Plant in the Australian will cultivate it will do this whole thing and you see the progression through the commentary of the viciousness which which the The egg was after them to just stamp it out and you see the facts that you are listing right now You know the THC aspect the fact that this is not a drug You know, we're not talking about a drug. You're not talking about marijuana as You know even marijuana as they're decolosed But let's that's a whole different story There is there are none of the THC that you find in it's the same plant But it's like marijuana without the stuff that gets you high and you use it for Emmiliencyings that as you say it's legal to own the products in the United States But it's not legal to grow it where we can actually make the product in the United States And there's no argument for it just make no sense. It's it's a commodity It's a commodity that's being banned because of a close association with an intoxicant Intoxics can by the way. It's the safest known demand exact one that has massive amounts of medical benefits Documented for sure for real non controversial medical benefits. It's illegal I never understood why we don't have you know because I always thought one of the arguments That that screwed up kids the most was to put marijuana on this list of terrible drugs because then they when they try to marijuana They think you're lying about the heroin. I always thought that there ought to be a a checklist that the government used to Decide if something should be legal or illegal you know 100 questions how addictive is it likely to be you know How dangerous how many blah blah blah and then if you pass or fail You know you pass it's legal if you fit that that also would be used if you invent some new bathtub drug tomorrow Okay, well, let's run it down the checklist right and then you could say to the people well Look, I mean here's how it scored in the checklist and I think the damage to that would be because alcohol might not score very highly But certainly I don't think that there's any way marijuana doesn't score better than most of the intoxicants that are out there today And I think I guess what I'm saying is I think it would help me in raising my own children and keeping them off these harder drugs to be able to Have a decent argument There's a good reason this heroin isn't in general use kids. It'll really hurt you trust me It wouldn't be illegal if it wouldn't really hurt you. Well, what's mind boggling is that that's not even schedule one I know because medical use that's right head of heroin is scheduled scheduled to schedule one the most dangerous of all drugs marijuana And that I remember it an insult Ronald Drey gun in the 80s marijuana is the most dangerous drug in America. Yeah Oh, that was a great speech Can you say it? It's hilarious. You know they found that cone snail venom There they can make a drug out of cone snail venom that is a hundred times more potent than any existing pain medication And it's completely non-addictive So it works a hundred times better than all of the oxy cartons and all that other shit and it's not addictive Listen to this because the message this evening is not my message For hours despite our best efforts shortages of marijuana now being reported From the early days. This is not really this is a parody. Yes, parody You know fail fail part dude. It's what I have to say to my mythical producer all the time fail. Oh dear you Yeah, it becomes an insult and it becomes one more piece of evidence that we're getting fucked And it's it's bad to have that out there if you want to run a government because it fuels the resistance It fuels people's it turns the citizens into the enemy. Yes, that's what it does Yeah, there's millions and millions of fucking schedule one criminals in this country It turns the butt up clenching guy who run the stop sided Walmart into the bad guy Well, he didn't even have any marijuana on him. That's the part I like but marijuana was the risk. Do you know that that's what they suspected him of having so here's the thing So I'm walking in my car and I've got some marijuana. I want to smoke later But I'm afraid if it's in my car you'll find it So I shove it up my rear end so that I can smoke it later. I did the whole thing is so insane Yeah, it's beautiful We're living in a simulation, right real a meener. He's not real weener show it is weener Come on none of it's real. It's not real. We're all mad We're mad as a hatter and we're just alone by ourselves somewhere linked up to some computer Trying to pretend that this fucking simulated society we piece together Makes it very interested to hear what they're writing on Rogan's message board about this wide variety of interesting topics What do you mean it's old script that I get right back to it? Let me see what he says here savages Well, we're a new world order mouthpiece here at the Joe Rogan experience podcast I don't know if you know that I became a new world order mouthpiece once I started doing that Joe Rogan questions everything Oh, it wasn't really willing to question everything I Thought I thought the eye rolls that you did were absolutely artistic in some of those things very much Well, it got to a certain point where I was like You know what I can't do this anymore. I can't keep talking to liars You know and and pretending that we're putting together a TV show when I'm talking to a guy who told me you saw a bulletproof wolf That popped out of a vortex of mist somebody told you that yeah, it's true by the way Also told me saw a UFO season on a regular basis and went and found Bigfoot the very first time and went looking for it I was like oh crime any like what am I doing with my life? This is like we're so far off of the reality road that I'm never gonna Find my way back. It is hard to maintain the straight face thing. It's not worth it It a certain point in time you're like oh this is just a broken idea These this is a person with a they're chasing down thoughts that are bad and they don't stop chasing them down And they're reasonably intelligent so they can argue the way around these things when confronted And Michael Sherman had a quote about that about really smart people who believe in really dumb things because they're smart to argue it And I think that's that's the case with a lot of these folks and the flaw in the thinking is so obvious So when I didn't believe in chem trails that every fucking airplane that you see a contrail that's persistent is the government Spring that's with evil chemicals all of a sudden people are like you're a fucking mouthpiece for the new world I told you I got that too though for questioning the Hastings thing and yeah You know you're gonna get that that's the problem when you have a ward of you nuts No, and when you want to Wonderful word. Yes. Thank you by the way for getting away that now the public understand I first say everybody got it everybody got it, but yeah Because the fact is like the reviews you got or the feedback that joys getting about this stuff to me is not surprising because Anytime you have a position that's not stereotypical where you're not clearly one camp one-handed and 50% Where is the as well did it or no that's total bullshit? How can you believe that or you know about anything right when you start asking questions that? poke a holes in one line of thinking But then at the same time when people start feeling reassured at oh, then you are on this side then you start saying well Kind of about wait a second because there's something here that's problematic here And you're just keeping an open mind right it doesn't mean that you can't commit to an idea It doesn't mean that you are flip flopping you're just consider in the pros and cons and some time is not that black and white It drives people crazy because the media doesn't want you to do that You because they used to tell me on the radio a listener has to know where you stand on every issue Within three minutes of turning you on and I said that's a cartoon carrier That's not a real person and it's the same thing where I had just done a show recently where we were talking about Go ahead good wrap this up. No, no, no, boy Is it that that whole idea that that nuance is a bad thing somebody called me? I'm being called a moderate and a realist more and more today which is coming from like tin foil had crazy radical territory And I haven't changed my views at all in 20 years Well a couple things but basically it means that society like you said has started to pick up on things and has moved in a direction I used to say to people the NSA spying on everyone and they said no, they're not you're crazy Get your tin foil hat out now. I say the NSA spying on everyone and they go I know You know so so society is just sort of moved in a different direction and and nuance That's what society's missing today. Yeah, I've been called a conspiracy theory with good reason for Theoress for a long time about a lot of different subjects But I've always found that really odd that the idea that people haven't conspired on things is So attractive to people right like people want to be able to debunk things Just as willingly as other people want to find conspiracy and things and there's some things that are not debunkable There's some realities You're bunkable. Yeah, there's some realities like the reality of the fucking central bank the reality of the realities of the influence of the Buildable group the the realities of the influence of corporations and special interest groups and lobbyists Those are real. Yep, those are real things. So if those exist Those are probably some of the biggest conspiracies the entire world has ever known and they're right in front of your fat Fucking face. No, okay. Look at the reality of money today and what money is controlling Whether or not this gas land documentary is 100% correct even if it's 50% correct that 50% is fucking terrifying Right and every one of those examples that they showed that if those were the only examples and I don't think they are We're doing something crazy and it's all being done because of money We're ruining this world forever whether it's the ocean patch that's bigger than Texas It's all plastic that's floating out there and choking birds and whales and a whale was just a beached whale just died It's stomach is filled with plastic I mean we what we are doing for real that we're doing bad is fucking insane So anybody who's not willing to look at the other possibilities like Man your rigid view of the world is fucking your head up There's some weirdness of foot. No simulation theory gone down Short term gain baby that whale wasn't doing any good for me Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone case closed I say on case closed Well listen, I think we could do this at the end of time the end of today But we're not going to this is it. We're gonna wrap this up, but we could fucking do this again God damn it Dan Carlin Thank you for coming up with this idea. This is Mr. Ballelli's idea. I came up with it without telling either of you I I felt both of you those of mine meld and if anybody wants to listen to Danielle Ballelli's podcast is the drunken Taoist it's available on everything right I tune That's and is it on stitcher as well? Stitcher and of course Dan Carlin is not one but two fucking podcast Jesus Christ is if you had enough free time to absorb them all One is hardcore history which is absolutely sensational the other one is DC common sense little mediocre Lies they're both awesome lies and you can catch them on iTunes He gives the way the first 50 for free is just to get you hooked and then the rest of them you get by prescription Prescription I should say prescription because you can learn fucking. It's good for your brain Subscription, but they are fucking worth it. They're goddamn books. They're audiobooks They're lessons on life and the history of this wacky ass country. Thanks. So bro get them bitches go get them go go after it and I want to thank our sponsors for sponsoring this podcast specifically carbonite Carbonite the awesome backup program use the code word JRE for a free trial no credit card required Thanks also to stamps calm use the promo code JRE and get a 110 dollar bonus offer. Thanks also to on it calm. That's o n n i t Use the code name Rogan save 10% off any and all supplements. All right We love the fuck out of you guys. We have a great week next week including I got an astronaut coming in fuckers I got that guy commander what is it? He was the dude who let me find this this email before we wrap this up because I have to be Dude Dude Oh, boy isn't this fucking great way to end an awesome podcast. Let me search you through my fucking email Colonel Chris Hatfield Chris Hatfield was he was up in the space station until recently the Canadian astronaut that was in the news he'll be here on Monday and we also have Next week we have Graham Hancock is coming in on Wednesday should be fantastic and Anna Casparian from the young Turks she will be here on Tuesday So it's a fun filled week you freaks and I will see you guys Saturday night in Edmondton at the River Creek Casino with the lovely and talented Sam Tripoli and thank you. Thank you Dan Carlin. Thank you Dan Yellie Billelli It was a beautiful time had by all. We love the fuck out of people see you soon