Okay, I wanted to do this I I wanted to meet you. I heard about you from my friend Shawn Ryan, wonderful man. Um he was going on about you and the work that you're doing on the darkest things happening on the internet, which we'll talk about in a minute, but he said this is a guy who really understands how to use the internet. Open Oh, just open source. Um and also non-open source since he's also an expert on hacking. But uh so let's just start there. What can you learn about someone you've never met on the internet open source? Basically everything. And and they what I did with you cuz you know, I was told in advance that you're not really a a computer guy. >> own a computer actually. >> You don't even own a computer. >> not own a computer. I have I have an iPhone, which is I don't know how different that is from a computer. I've I haven't owned a computer since 2011. Because I just I just disapprove, basically. Well, hey. To each his [laughter] own, right? But that is a computer that you have right there. >> is a computer. You're totally right. Back when I was even when I was a kid, that thing is like 10 times more powerful. >> right. And I always say I don't have a TV, but like I get X or whatever YouTube on my phone, so it's like a distinction without a difference. It's just it's a absurd pretense that I keep up. Hey, well hey. It's a you know, I did when I was doing the research, I I confirmed that, you know, running your phone number, running your email, there's not many accounts connected to them. So it's >> No accounts. Yeah, I have I don't have email uh that I use. I don't have email really and I've had the same phone number since 1995. I found I found some old like I'll show you in a second, but the you know, old you know, news-related emails. There was one with s.carlson@ We know there's an Oh, I found all your old emails, but it doesn't seem like anything is active. So for me it was the 20-minute challenge was you know, you I think you might you might be shocked. >> challenge? 20 minutes to find out what you can about somebody? >> Yeah, that's all we we call it that in the office, you know, just to see what we could find on you and uh and let me pull out my laptop and show you. So, you do own a computer, is what you're saying. I own a lot of computers. >> [laughter] >> I am a nerd. Yeah, there's something about I I don't know. I just we're not in charge of the growth of technology and its increasing power over our lives. I'm certainly not in charge and yes, I did put in Starlink in my hunting camp, um which is a huge mixed blessing, but I just I just want to say out loud that I disapprove. >> Disapprove of me. I do. I just do. No, I don't disapprove of computers. I Well, we can smash this thing right here on camera. No, no, I'm not that unreasonable. I just I don't I I feel like human autonomy and human consciousness, like our ability to think for ourselves is is threatened by technology and I'm upset by it. I agree with that and this might make you even more angry. So, um is this your social security number? Let me get my glasses. Yeah, yeah. It certainly is. >> [laughter] >> Okay. How do you have my social security number? Well, so I have your social security number, um I have your full name, obviously. I don't think that's a secret. I I I see all your fishing licenses and and you know, hunting licenses from Alaska, Oregon, Virginia. I mean, I found all all the places that you do your thing. >> Alaska, Oregon, Virginia, huh? Yep, I even have your driver's license number in Florida. Oh, it's Looks like you haven't changed your phone number in a long time. >> 1995. Okay, so that was Every every mental patient in America has my phone number. Every Everybody has. I'm not afraid of people. I'm never going to be afraid of people, so. One thing I want to tell you about how I have your social security number and why it's kind of ridiculous, to be honest with you. Have Have you heard of the national public data breach? No. Okay, so Can I just say that I keep my assets in gold coins buried in a place that, you know, only my children can identify, so. Well, you're not I'm totally safe. You can't drain my bank account. Well, let me show you something. I might not be able to drain drain your bank account, but here is your signature from your warranty deed. So, having your How do you have that? That is my actual signature. Yeah, yeah, I'm aware. Which is not my name. So, I don't know how you would have that. Oh, I pulled it from public records. >> This is crazy. Yep, so if I use your social, I have your I know general location. I know you use a PO box to buy, you know, buy everything. I found behind, you know, I found behind the PO box. Um, I saw your your motorcycle transaction that you made with I have the old plate and the new plate with the Harley. Um, >> [laughter] >> I found as much as I could in the 20 >> You found my Harley? Yeah. >> [laughter] >> So, >> Not something I talk about. That's so funny. Wow. Okay. But the my point here is >> The new six-speeds are amazing. Can I just say that? My old car only had four speeds. >> I love motorcycles. I do too. Yeah, secretly do. Very secretly. So, the national public data uh breach was ridiculous, to be honest with you. Um, it was 2.8 billion records about a year and a half ago, roughly. And a Florida sheriff ran a data broker website, which had you know, just you could look up somebody's name, similar to white pages. But for whatever reason, this Florida sheriff got access to all of this data and was using it to, you know, I'm I'm assuming sell data, make money on it. Well, he decided to reuse credentials for uh a demo project or old project on his main production system, which allowed 2.8 billion records to be exposed with, you know, we know there's about 300 million Americans. So, if there's 2.8 billion records in this database, um, there's a good chance that you're in it with your social security number. And you're in there about, I think, 15 times if you look at that document with everywhere you've ever lived. Um, you know, including anyone associated, etc. Um So, and this is all publicly available now? >> It's publicly available and and what we did was because since since like I said, I could you know, maybe you have all your assets in gold, let's say. Like I have the ability to call your electric company and pretend that I'm you. And what do I not have about you that to confirm that I'm you? Um you know, there or if I want to open up a credit card or if I want to buy a Harley, you know, there's not much that's stopping me. Um so or you know, we we decided like and I'll get into some of some of this in a little bit, but like you know, we started a cybersecurity company using the methodologies that I used to locate these predators and traffickers. And instead of doing something like, you know, targeting bad people, you can you can sign up for it and protect your your digital footprint. So, um we we were you sitting in a hotel room, this data breach came out and we're like, we want people to know if they're in this like immediately because if your social's exposed, you should be freezing your credit like right now. And we noticed nobody else nobody else was allowing anyone to search for this. So, we threw it together as fast as we possibly could and um it was all over the place. Tucker like, we didn't realize that the news was going to pick up on it the way that it did. Um there were uh congresspeople in in New York even showing how to demonstrating how to use our search on our website. Um I believe it was Ritchie Torres in New York. Um and there was a a bunch of them, that's just the one that's coming to mind. And uh you know, this is not me trying to advertise, this is just relevant to the story, but like people would go to npd like national public data dot pentester.com and uh and you can run your name, you'll see if you're in this breach. If you are, it doesn't cost you any money whatsoever to freeze your credit. And we we give you the instruction on how to go to TransUnion, Equifax, Experian and um and freeze it. And people think, well, if I freeze my credit, it's going to affect my score or whatever. It doesn't hurt your score to freeze it, it just stops people from being able to run a soft or hard query against it. And when you're ready to go do something that requires your credit, you just click the unfreeze button, which takes 10 seconds. They run your credit and then you freeze it again. And this will alleviate a ton a ton of issues. I mean, I don't know if your credit's frozen. I'm hoping by the time that this episode's out it is because I don't have any credit. I don't take any loans. Okay, well, if you're not worried, you're not worried. >> [laughter] >> I don't WANT CREDIT. I DON'T like money lending. Period. Understood. I understood, but most people would be worried, but there's a good chance there's like this is not me fear-mongering. Your your social's most likely in this database if you're if you're watching this episode, you know, so it's a the way that you didn't know about it even though it was all over the news a lot like almost everyone I meet face-to-face is not aware that they're in this data breach. And and we're we're doing a good job at exposing that it exists. I cannot take this data breach off of some hacker's computer in Russia like or you know, whoever downloaded it. I can I don't know how familiar you are with how these data breaches work, but like I can't remove your data from a data breach. It's just a file that gets shared amongst many people. It's out there. So your social is on as many people's computers as down that downloaded that data breach. So we're doing the same thing, but showing you you know, we're allowing you to search through that file. And then we give you the the options to to freeze your credit. >> to need biometrics really soon. I mean, that's probably the point of this, right? To get us to biometrics cuz Yeah, well, I mean, I just don't understand how the sheriff in the first place got got access to every single American's personal information including their socials. But from there we thought okay, how how can you clean up your digital footprint, which I'm going to show you something that I think I don't know what your thoughts on facial recognition are and all of that, but I want to show you some cool stuff that people are scared of, but they should also look at as you know, you have a digital footprint even though you don't use a computer. Like people need to realize that. They have to understand >> people's porn records get leaked? Immediately. This is like I could show you an example of it right now. And um, you know, the way that the way that we built this platform was, like I said, to how we identified predators and traffickers, but now it's any consumer can sign up for it. Um, see what's out there on them. See what accounts are connected to them, their kids, if their kids have some secret, you know, accounts or or anything like that. Um, and uh, let's say they were in a wedding photo 4 years ago and they were in the back corner and half their face is showing, that might be enough identifiable information to identify that, you know, they are, you know, what their name is or who they are just by them walking down the street and being in a photo, which I'll demonstrate so that makes more sense. Um, you know, we could use somebody here that doesn't have as much of a public image cuz you and I, we can take a picture and you're going to see a ton of results, but somebody if they're willing, if not, I'll show you my own face or yours or whatever you'd like. Um, we built that because, you know, we I'll give you a good example. This happened recently. So, we hired Are you familiar with Wynwood? In Miami? No. Okay, so it's an art district in Miami and there's awesome graffiti artists down there. And we decided to hire a graffiti artist that, you know, is most likely committing crimes when he's not being paid legitimately to to paint our office. And um, the guy was a super nice guy, but he went by an alias and he was going to be in our office for 6 to 8 days. That's what he said to us. So, we said to the guy, uh, you know, we we asked him what his name was. He was a little bit hesitant to tell us. He, you know, he he honestly didn't. He just told us his alias, which was a three-letter word and um, I took a picture of his face and I I ran it through our system. I found a picture of him with his grandparents that had their full names in it and I said, "Look, man, this is how easy, you know, with surveillance camera or anybody taking a photo of you can identify you in 2026. You know, we could get into the whole Europe privacy laws with facial recognition in China. But like in the United States with this technology, instead of using it for good and in our case where we're showing you what's out there about yourself, people can use this for bad to identify you or your kids or you or you know, your family. And it's it's very dangerous and um you know, we we just want people to know about this stuff. So, we built some really cool technology if you want to check it out. That's amazing. A lot of people hesitate before getting traditional therapies for cholesterol health. They don't want to wind up stuck on capsules for the rest of their lives, pills. They'd rather feel like they have some say in how they take care of their own bodies. And that's why more Americans are turning to more gentle alternatives with ingredients they recognize. Ingredients like ginger and pomegranate. One of those alternatives is a dose for cholesterol. Dose for cholesterol is a clinically backed cholesterol [music] support supplement that targets triglycerides, LDL, HDL, and total cholesterol levels. We know a bunch of people use it and the results have been overwhelming. They no longer fear having blood work done because at last the results are good and they're not on some kind of weird chemical cocktail. It actually works. We wouldn't partner with them if it didn't work. Dose is easy to use. It's a daily 2-oz liquid shot that tastes like mango. Ooh. No capsules, no powders. It's seamless to use. Visit dosedaily.co/tucker. Use code Tucker for 35% off. That's dosedaily.co/tucker. Code Tucker for 35% off. It's worth it. So, can you do that for anyone in the US? Yeah. Yeah, anyone. Yeah. I mean, I Let me see. Like Do you mind if I get up and show you the computer? >> you will. All right. Amazing. And then there's all of the addresses that came from the data breach. Uh hold on. Oh my gosh. Probably going back a long time. That's my childhood home. Yeah, I mean, these are I haven't lived in 40 years. Wow. Wow, that is crazy. Okay. So, you've just taken a picture of my face and you're feeding my face into the database. Uh I'm not going to feed it into the into the database this is not going to be stored or anything like that. We We're We're only doing it just to show an example of it's it's taking 120 measurements of your face. Uh so like for example let's say you were wearing makeup or something or you had purple hair. It doesn't make a difference because there's other measurements that will and like I said there could be it could be half of your face or a quarter of your face. It's just going to try to use those measurements to identify you um not the actual image itself. There's a difference between reverse image searching like looking for an identical image and reverse facial recognition where it's trying to measure like this nostril is this many centimeters from the lower earlobe, you know? And a lot of different measurements. Let's just say you're not a criminal you have no interest in breaking the law here in the United States, but you don't want to be identified on the basis of your face. Is there anything you can do to disguise your identity and foil facial recognition? Unfortunately, wearing a mask I mean you you could still be identified by the top half of your face. I mean you could wear like a COVID mask or something if you're one of those guys, but you know, you could do that. You could you could wear I mean it's it's it's extreme though, you know, like a wearing wearing a full face mask to cover it's put a hood up and walk past cameras with your head down. I mean you can't really get around this technology. You can't. So, sunglasses don't do it. No. No. No. No. We could We could try to mess with you in any way and I guarantee you I mean I Yeah, so here you are all over the place here. I'll speak loud, but you see these these URLs underneath of them? Yeah. So, in each one of these and there's going to be and there's an endless supply of photos of you on the internet, Tucker, so it'd be kind of pointless to go through these for you. Um but let's say your average person. Let's say you're in your 40, 50, 60 and you don't know what's out there on yourself because it's not possible to search by your face unless you have a specialized tool to do it. Law enforcement usually has this, you know, ability, but consumers don't. And um what we did is uh we we allow you to search and we show you where that image is at. So, then you can either reach out to to us or if you can take it upon yourself to contact that website, whether it be let's say as I used a wedding wedding photographer. Reach out to that wedding photographer and say, "Hey, I would like my photo taken down off of your website." Or if it's, you know, maybe you're at a a kid's sports game and it's showing pictures of your children like, you know, you want to know that that stuff is out there because somebody else could be searching you. It's, you know, it's not about Everybody's like, "It's not going to happen to me. It's not going to happen to me." But then sometimes it happens to you. And uh and that that's why we built what we built and we're trying to hit every angle. We're trying to hit your your, you know, your digital footprint as a whole and then we're automating as many removals as possible uh for you so you could just, you know, essentially put in your email, put in your name to Pen Tester, uh as much information as you're willing to give us and then over time it'll start to build out a profile on you. The same way that that I did in that little challenge, but automatically and then you'll start to see removals happening over time and you'll see where it got removed from, where, you know, how many are pending, how many are left. It's it's a super cool easy process and um and I'm going to sound like a car salesman, but like it's less than 20 bucks and I don't know why it's a I think everybody should should be doing it. Um there's just nobody out there doing this and uh you get all of this for $20. It doesn't seem like there's any privacy possible in the United States. Absolutely not. No. And when it comes to technology, you are fully exposed. It's like you're naked, you know? I mean, I came in here, you know, we met one time before in person and and you know, it's not like I snuck your social out of your wallet that day. I got I came in here saying, "Hey Tucker, I have your social security number, your warranty deed, and your your signature." Um, yeah, maybe you don't have credit, but most people most people in the United States do. And it's a big deal to them, you know? Of course. And I didn't mean I understand that and I the system is set up against people, which is my main problem with the system. You shouldn't have to be heavily in debt in order to live here if you've got a job and you're like a responsible person who works 8 hours a day, but you have to have debt. No, you shouldn't have to have >> Then the system is designed to enslave you, which ours is. So, that I'm just opposed to it. So, but I didn't mean to be like, "Oh, I don't I didn't say I have any debt." No, I have No, I'm very privileged not to have debt. And by the way, it's the very first thing I did when I made some dough. I didn't buy anything. I paid off all my loans because I despise being indebted to anybody and I despise the people who put you in debt. I do. I mean it. >> Understood. From the bottom of my heart. Yeah, I >> As I would despise a slave master and they run around like, "Oh, we're making American dream possible." No, you're you're stealing it actually from people. Um, and you should be ashamed. Totally agree with you there and um >> [laughter] >> No, you're good. You're good. >> see I'm filled with eccentric resentments, but And I think in a normal society we would recognize that and anyone who's lending money at like super high interest rates committing usury at that level should be prosecuted for it. 110% I agree with that. I mean, even those payday loans, for example, are horrible. The reverse mortgages are being marketed like crazy right now. I mean, there's a lot of dangerous horrible loans. >> and they're always running around calling everyone else immoral. Um, but that is immoral. And by the way, I gave a speech once to the payday loan lenders in the Bahamas back was 25 years ago before I really had any views on anything. And they were amusing, but man, that was the sleaziest group of people I've ever met in my life. I I have no doubt. I don't know how they sleep at night. >> I agree. Well, here's a pretty awful statistic. [music] Over 85% of the so-called grass-fed beef sold in this country comes from other countries. It's not American. That's not good for our farmers. It's a tragedy for them. And that's why it matters to be intentional about where you buy your meat. That's why we buy our meat from Good Ranchers. Good Ranchers partners with local farmers and ranchers deliver 100% American meat delivered right to your house. It's pasture-raised. There's no antibiotics, no added hormones, nothing awful or bad for you. It's quality meat and you can feel good about eating it and serving it to the people you love. We use Good Ranchers meat for dinners here. It's awesome. We could eat it every day and never get bored. It's like a dog eating dog food. Every time you are thrilled. We are anyway. Start your plan today and you'll get free meat included with every order plus 100 bucks off your first three orders. Use the code Tucker to get that. Visit goodranchers.com. The code is Tucker. That's free meat with every order and 100 bucks off your first three orders when you start your subscription plan this month. Or if you just want to try it out, you can get $40 off your first order with the code Tucker. goodranchers.com. American meat delivered to you. Yeah. So. So anyway, so anyway, but I'm sorry. I didn't mean to be like I can't believe people have to have jobs and I get it. Everyone is in debt. Everyone has to be. >> You know, I totally understand that and and the way I look at it in my personal belief is that you know, there's good debt and bad debt cuz you can in my in my life I own software companies and and I real estate and and you know, taking an equity line out to buy another property. >> at a different level. I've never been in business. I'm just like some employee who talks for a living. So like I have a very simple financial picture of my life. Don't have that much money, but I don't have any debt. And I think in my business where you like make people mad, if you have debt, boy, that you know. >> They go after it. Yeah, you can you can see why. Your means are are are public as well. So, you don't have any, obviously, but it's a usually you they they you know, people could find them. Well, you wonder why all these members of Congress and the hair hats on television are all saying exactly the same thing cuz they're exposed. And everyone thinks it's exposed sexually. And a huge number of them are creepy sexually, but it's not just that. It's the money. It's the debt. It's the leash that keeps them in line. That's wild. I think. >> Yeah, yeah, you you might be right. You might be right. Sounds like it. It's a it I I've never had this conversation before. You I never Normally it's you know, for me it's like No, you're fine. You're fine. It's a it's Well, if you're if you're if you know, if you're in debt to anybody, you're literally in debt to them. You owe them something you haven't yet paid. So, that is um by definition, uh their control over you, right? Yeah, they have control over you and they can take your assets if you don't pay them. So, Yeah. Yeah, totally understand it and um it's it's a risky it's a depending on the you know, depending on the type of person, some people are are more risk-taking when they don't have the funds. They you know, I don't believe you should be taking out loans on that you can't afford. Yeah. Um it you know, people saying don't spend money you don't have. It's a it's something most people are aware of, but some people don't practice that. Yeah, I I used to feel that way. Now, I'm kind of like, I don't know. I think people should stop paying their credit cards. I know no one else agrees with me. And oh, you have a moral obligation. Really? Well, you have a moral obligation not to send credit card applications to kids in college. So, this goes both ways. It's like just blaming the drug addict and never mentioning the dealer. Someone's selling the fentanyl. And that person is on the hook, too. So, that's how I feel. So, like, is it a sin to rip off your drug dealer? I guess. It's not one I'm going to judge you for. Yeah, I think I It's 100% agree with you there. Yeah, >> [laughter] >> I can't argue that. Yeah, so anyway, um Wow, well, that's all very shocking. Let me ask you a super dumb question cuz that's the only kind I have, which is when someone has your Social Security number, like how threatening is that? So, when when someone has your social, it just gives them the ability to, uh, you know, pretend to be you. So, whether it be you know, we we talked about loans and credit and all that stuff. Take that out of the picture. Imagine if, uh, you know, I think you've experienced this based on just a rumor. You you've been SIM swapped before. Like somebody's stolen your phone number and tried to >> Oh, yeah, multiple times. So, you know, you I'm assuming your your carrier now is a lot more, uh, strict with your phone number. >> We've locked it down, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, [clears throat] but to I for for your average person, if I call in and I say, "Hey, I'm Jane Doe. I have your social, you know, I have her social security number." I can sound like a man and they can't judge me in 2026. So, I'm Jane Doe with that with a man's voice with a social, they're going to let me do practically anything I want to the account. That doesn't mean essentially every time is going to be a SIM swap, but I can authenticate to pretty much anything as you. Your electric in your house, let's say, uh, you know, I I report a problem with the electric and they they turn the power off and on a, you know, Friday night and you don't get your power back till Monday. That could be a problem in some cold areas or some hot areas. >> Yeah, for sure. >> there there's real-life consequences to a Social Security number, which is such a ridiculous way to identify somebody because they they're incremental and I think it was 2011 is when the prefix of them, like the first three digits, started becoming randomized. Like the first I think it was the three digits meant like the hospital and the next two was the time frame, something like that. After 2011, it was changed to completely random, but, you know, Social Security numbers are are not, in my opinion, a good way to keep yourself private. Well, because they are not, and this is what I sort of half-asked you a minute ago, because the system is so obviously flawed and the internet itself is not secure cuz it was designed to be open and it'll never be secure. There will always be data breaches, always. And because everything takes place on the internet, specifically financial transactions, don't we have to go to biometrics? I think we need to, yeah, and it's a it is absolutely a possibility now if, you know, fingerprints have been around for a long time for fingerprint locks, and now that you can go to Home Depot and buy a fingerprint lock for your home. Um, but you know, we have biometrics for for retina scanning that are that one I seen it at the airport before with clear. I think clear might have changed from retina scanning to just facial recognition, but we have the ability to do all of these different biometrics that are are pretty, you know, pretty solid ways to authenticate yourself. Um, the the issue, which we could get more into this later, but there there's platforms out there that are trying to use biometrics like facial scanning to determine age to allow someone on a platform. Um, it's failing miserably. Uh, and Why? Because it's just the technology is doing a bad job at identifying the person's age. Uh, like like for example, if I scan my face, it might say, you know, I'm I'm 32 years old, but it could tell me that I'm 50, it could tell me that I'm 18, it could tell me that I'm 16. It just depends on whatever that platform decides. >> Yeah. And in my experience, it depends on the kind of life you've lived. Honestly, >> Yeah, that's exactly right. >> [laughter] >> Yeah, and and I have lived a crazy life, so who knows what the I don't know. This is in in particular with the last couple weeks with Roblox. Um, so Roblox implemented this as a safety measure after a guy named Schlep, his name he goes by, uh, and and myself went on some podcast, talked about the dangers of that platform, and and showed some real examples, which, you know, I'll show you some some stuff in a a little bit, but um, their way to combat this issue was, it you know, at least what it seems, um, is using kids, yeah, they have to scan their face and then they get grouped into, you know, other grouped into lobbies with other kids their age that they determined from a third-party company that we don't know what they're doing with the biometric data of the children's faces. Um, and, uh, and a lot of the time they're getting it wrong. And to make matters worse, you can go on eBay and buy accounts for certain age ranges. So, what do you think a predator's going to do with, let's say, you got a 13-year-old account 13-year-old account already verified Roblox for, you know, $15 on eBay. Now the guy can go target 13-year-olds because he just spent 15 bucks. It's a it you can, you know, but the but the moral of that is, you know, Roblox has a huge responsibility. They're a big platform. They're the largest platform for children in the world. Uh, they're, you know, they they're multi-billion-dollar corporation and, uh, but, you know, I can't fully blame them. I don't think they've made good decisions. I don't know if you know that they've banned vigilantes from their platform. They don't let law enforcement on there. >> Okay, so can you describe for people who don't have kids at home what it what it Roblox is? Okay, so Roblox is imagine Legos. Like, you know, I'm sure most people know what Legos are. Digital Legos where they're walking around the screen, they're chatting with each other and they're playing games with each other like, uh, like just to keep things simple, uh, tic-tac-toe virtually. I and they look like little Lego characters and they're the children are able to type to each other and talk inside of these Roblox games. And there's, you know, four, five, six, seven, eight-year-old children playing this game. It's very very popular amongst them. And, um, you know, with this, you know, with this age verification situation that they just added, um, it [clears throat] makes it more dangerous, in my opinion, and I have solutions on what they could do. I have a friend that I can't name, but they're federal law enforcement. They, uh, you know, have been in child crimes for longer than I've been alive and they didn't even get them to the second interview stage. I found out that they don't have anyone this could this this is just me being told something, but I found out they had no one that's ever worked child crimes for for our government or legal state working on their team to to help with these issues and as the largest game in the world for children, you would think that they would do everything in their power to keep predators off of that platform. And oh and the point that I was trying to get at was that if you have a platform that's full of kids, it's going to it's going to attract a child. I'm I'm sorry. If you have a platform that's that is full of children, it's going to attract a predator that cuz that's what predators do. They they put themselves in positions like becoming teachers or becoming, you know, police officers or camp counselors or you know, whatever where whatever gives them access to children. So, yes, Roblox is it for me to say is Roblox intentionally trying to make a platform for predators to groom children, I don't think that's their goal, but I think they're doing a horrible job at trying to combat it and there's easy ways for them to make this problem a lot better. And what I want to do as an individual is is educate as many parents out there that you know, cuz a lot of them their kids are playing this game. You know, 150 million daily active users or or something something like that. Some crazy high number of kids around the world are playing this game and uh you know, it's it's it's saddens me that parents have no idea. They just hand them an iPad, they hand them a computer and they just they sit in a corner and play this game where strangers are getting access to them and asking them for some of the most horrific things that I've ever seen in almost eight years of child crimes and trafficking which, you know, I I there's a lot it's it's a lot easier to show you what I mean by that than by tell you that cuz it's you know, parents parents, you know, can hear uh internet has predators. The park, there might be a sex offender at the park that's that's staring at a kid. But until they see it or or it's happened to them, it's usually not real. Um and of course, it's easy to say somebody like myself who works in this space is going to be an extremist or somebody that's that's going to immediately assume everybody is bad because I deal with this every day. I have no evidence to believe that that it isn't a significant problem because I can't I'm finding in my in almost 8 years that there's more people that are willing to meet or talk with a child inappropriately than not on not just Roblox, but any social media platform, chat app, and I've and I've demonstrated this live on on many podcasts. And it's never failed, unfortunately. I wish that I could fail. I wish I could pull my laptop out, go to a chat site, pretend to be a child, and not have a grown man asking me to do something inappropriate, but I have never failed, unfortunately. It's a pretty overwhelming time in history, certainly in this country, and that's why prayer is more important than ever. Prayer keeps you connected with God, and it reduces [music] stress. It puts your life and the world into perspective. Our friends at the Hallow app just launched their May prayer challenge. It's called the Detachment Challenge. It's about taking a step back and getting that perspective on the troubles of this world. That's not to suggest we should abandon our responsibilities here or care less. We should care more. But fundamentally, it means placing your faith in God. Work and hobbies matter, but they should not carry the full weight of your heart. Being more present with God is the only thing that matters, and it's what changes you and the world around you. Through simple daily prayer and reflection, you learn to trust God more deeply, find a kind of steadiness that does not depend on everything around you going right. You don't have to have it all figured out. You just have to show up and stay true to your faith, and Hallow helps you do that. Download Hallow and get 3 months for free at hallow.com/tucker. It is absolutely the best. Part of the problem is it's too upsetting. And I think we were talking about this off camera. I think it's, you know, they're the most upsetting things, and children being hurt being at the very top of it. Are people can't even face it. They don't want to think about it. They just compartmentalize it and move on cuz not because they support it, but precisely because of how violently they are opposed to it. But it's just really upsetting. I understand that. To give you just a counter to that, I mean, right after my interview with Shawn Ryan, um a 13-year-old girl from the same exact group I was just talking about was hanging by an extension cord in the parking lot. Um and in the chat room while she did this live, we're saying that they would, you know, she took her clothes off, it'd be hot or she died. They, you know, in the parking lot. This happened right after >> Actually? Yeah, yeah, there's there's there's been a ton of suicides. This is This is a significant issue, and that's why I wanted to talk about it. And And Shawn brought it up. >> What platform was this? Uh that was They they They're luring through mental health support groups. They're looking for vulnerable kids, um and then they befriend them. And then after they befriend them and they, you know, pretend they're they're boyfriend or girlfriend, they exchange nude photos. And then after the nude photos are exchanged, instead of uh sex-extorting them like a Nigerian scammer might for money, they try to get them to harm themselves in exchange for not having their photos exposed to, you know, their friends, family, school. It They're sex-extorting them, but they're They're using uh instead of money, they want them to carve group names and usernames into their chests, into their wrists, into their bodies. And then, you know, sometimes it'll escalate to harming animals, uh like their pets in their houses, or hurting strangers. Literally, there's been murders of strangers, lighting homeless people on fire. A guy torched himself in a hotel room just to prove that he was worthy of being part of one of these groups. I mean, this is This is not just happening in like a little part of the country somewhere, you know, randomly. This is on a mass scale and you know, there there there's some people that are saying that it's that one of the biggest dangers for children at the moment is is these groups. Which I would I know it's sad. I know people don't want to hear this stuff. >> Well, it's overwhelming because there's no motive. They don't have a motive. They're a nihilist extreme extremist group. >> So that I mean, I think is the definition of evil. The whole point of it is the suffering. There's no It's not like you, you know, robbed a liquor store and shot the clerk in order to get his money, which is obviously evil, but at least it's explicable in human terms. This is just spiritual evil. It's spiritually evil and and there's they their logo is is a pentagram. They they identify as a satanic cult um and and the the the original group is called 764 group. That was it was the original the first one that ever came out that had this uh ideology or methodology that they use and they they have like guides, literal guides that teach you how to groom and extort these children and they they spread them amongst each other. Well, now there's hundreds if not thousands of these offshoots that do exactly the same thing using different names. And um you know, Has there been any effort to arrest these groups? Yeah, so this is what makes it a little bit difficult. So there's 450 active investigations right now with the FBI. Not nearly enough. I mean, I'm I could show you one group that Sentinel Founda- Sentinel Foundation and I, which I'll explain how I even got involved in a minute. I can go on one of those groups and there's more than 450 targets in that group alone. I mean, it's and more needs to be done from law enforcement, but I understand that there's difficulty because it's not like we're going after the cartel where there's a ring leader and then you can arrest all the guys underneath of them. They're all in the same town or they might get caught together. These guys are from all over the country, some of them international and it's going to be one at a time, you know, and and they don't use their real names, they don't use real photos of themselves, they go by aliases. And um and you know, it's it it's really uh it's very sad. And uh but the way to tackle this issue is not by arresting one guy at a time, because the groups these groups are just massively getting larger and larger and larger, and a new offshoot comes out that the second one disappears. What what happens is uh it you know, in my experience, parents uh being aware of the issue, knowing what it is, knowing what to look for on their children's devices, um that's going to cause a lot more impact and and fix this problem, or at least make a huge dent in this problem, rather than making the total of 30 arrests that have happened in the five on them, maybe it's a total of 35 arrests since the inception a couple years ago. Um you know, I think alerting parents is going to do a a way bigger 35 people totally been arrested in five years? Yeah, well, I think it's like three or four years. I I don't quote me on that, but it's >> a lot. >> Not signifi- Yeah, it it should be way more than that. It should be way more than that, but it's not. And uh and these guys aren't some like crazy hackers. Or they're connected to hacking groups called The Com. It's a it's very deep. It's a long story. But um they're not like these elite hackers that are impossible to find. You you know, a lot of them are 16, 20-somethings uh that you know, they're they'll feel comfortable with somebody, pretend that they're I'm sorry, they'll feel like they're actually their friend, and disclose their real name or phone number, or where general idea of where they live. And um if that person gets arrested, you know they're snitching, you know, they got 30 years to life or something. They're telling on everyone they can. So, but it's not a it as I s- as I said, like yeah, we can make as many arrests as possible, and I'm all for it. But um when it comes down to you know, the the the scale of this issue, one 30 35 arrests, let's just say it is, is not nearly enough. So, I think educating parents is going to do a lot more. And that's why I'm doing these podcasts. I'm not doing it for me. I'm doing this for for parents. And children, of course. Where's the forum? You said there are these chat groups where this begins. Where are those? So, I have some screenshots of of these mental health support groups. Sometimes they're official, like actual mental health support groups where a child may be having suicidal ideations or eating disorder or whatever it may be. And and these guys will join there looking for the child that's you know that's suffering and then they they reach out to them and pull them out of that site. So, there's there's the official real sites that that really will help you for your mental health. Um and they're they're luring from there and then they create their own fake ones where they'll post on Twitter that'll say, you know, are you struggling with XYZ? Join this group. They join the group. Everybody's all nice to you and friendly and bubbly. And then the second that you send that nude photo and and I'm sure you know if if you if if like for me when I was a kid getting bullied in school for example, I just it's something that at the time I thought it would never go away. I thought that my life was over. I thought that no matter you know, no matter what I did like nobody was ever going to like me, you know, and and I relate with these these kids that when they send these nude photos they think my life's ruined, you know, if they if this gets out to my school or to my family or to my you know, boss or whatever it may be. Um that they're never going to come back from it. Like yeah, they made a mistake. They shouldn't have been sending a naked photo of themselves on the internet. I I get that. But um their life will be okay. It It doesn't mean you have to end your life over it. And and that's what these these guys want you to do. They want you to hurt yourself to the point where they they're recording it. They they create, you know, content from it and send it to other groups and brag about what they're doing. And um you You and the end result is is them trying to get you to end your life and cause as much violence and extreme extremism as possible. And and like like I said, I have video after video of these people live on camera talking to these group members stabbing strangers, lighting people on fire, kicking old women down the steps. And I could go go on and on and on. I mean, it's very disturbing stuff, but it's it's happening and kids are are susceptible to this and they're seeing like they're at risk. I mean, they genuinely are at risk. This is not me I'm not like putting a tin foil hat on right now and saying like this is a problem. This is a problem. Like a significant one. So, I would like to show you that. I know you're uncomfortable with it. I just want you to see >> Please do. Okay. I'm just as you're talking, I'm thinking like how did we get to a place like this? Evil. I think that, you know, we could get on a deep conversation about this, but I and people might say I'm I'm nuts, but I believe that we we could be in the end times. Like it it's the world's pretty messed up right now. So. Yeah. The love between people will grow cold. That is a predicted. It is. >> And it clearly has. And to hurt people for the for the pure joy of hurting them. That's it. There is no other benefit. Yeah. And I've never seen anything like that in my life. You know, I especially coordinated and and connected with real Satanist groups like Order of Nine Angles, like a real Satanist group off of the internet. They have a direct connection with them as well. Like they identify as Satanists. >> say Russia banned Satanism. Putin banned Satanism. That's one of the reasons they hate Putin. Um and if you look at who hates Putin the most, it's not the anti-Satanists. Um oh, you can say whatever you want, but a normal country would just ban this. Sorry. You can't you can't try to evoke spiritual evil in my country because you'll destroy it. And they have. Yeah, well, I mean, it's definitely illegal what they're doing. There's some weird law with, you You cuz child sexual abuse material, see Sam is obviously a a child that's naked, but when a a child cuts their wrists or they they do something like that, unless it is sexualized, it's not considered uh CSAM. So, I believe that the same way that we made an exception in the United States with AI-generated uh child pornography or CSAM, uh we made an exception that we we treat that as the real thing. Cuz people post pictures of their kids all the time on social media, and I have these groups I have screenshots of these groups that 30, 40,000 users in them that are using other people's children with AI and and putting them in vulnerable, horrible positions. And it's like it's I don't want to be the guy going on social media saying, "Hey, don't post your child that you're so proud of, um because these guys are weirdos." But like this the size of these groups, they have a pretty good reason to say it, you know, and and I can prove it. It's not me just saying it. Let me show you uh this group in particular uh like cuz I I may I put it in folders. Um And And it's going to be it's trigger warning here. Uh we don't you know, it's it's a lot tougher, so Here, speaking speaking to the mic here. There's a lot here, and and it starts with luring, which this is a little, you know, this is some mental health stuff. Um join cool, friendly server to help you go through your hard times. And you can see harm nation here. That's one of the things that they use. >> Harm nation? Yep, and you see that says calm. So, calm is connected to 764. So, this this looks like, okay, that looks like a younger girl. Join this friendly server for, you know, to help you through your depression. Another one, Outpatient Wellness Center. Um and then the description kind of gives away what it is. No child porn, no gore, leaking, no drugs, guns, or nudity. You mean, you shouldn't have to be specifying that in a outpatient wellness group. Um And this is uh there was a a girl who um did something horrible to herself as well who was interested in gore sites, and she was a you know, she you know, she wasn't looking she wasn't supposed to be looking at this type of stuff online, but she was interested in the edgy stuff, if that makes sense. And and that's what this is here. So, it says, "Join if you are any of the following: mentally ill, fatherless, daddy issues, schizo, borderline personality disorder, or femcel, which means you act a little feminine as a guy." Um and then this is a direct invitation to you know, just these groups where you're going to be lured and and then eventually extorted. Um and then here turns into the grooming stage, which you know, there's an entire checklist here. They There's so many of these like 220-page documents on how like and I'll skip through this, but it's saying, you know, that uh that you can find victims on games like Roblox or on social media platforms like X, formerly known as Twitter, Reddit, and Instagram. Once you found your victim, you have to spend a lot of time on her, make her think you can relate to a lot of stuff, and play games with her, call her cute nicknames when uh when you've talked for a little while like princess, darling, honey, etc. This will make her more attached to you because females love being called nicknames. Once you've talked for a while, you're going to ask her to be your girlfriend, which she most likely's going to say yes to. Now that she's under your control, you may start asking her for stuff like nudes, personal information. Um she doesn't do self If she doesn't do self-harm already, then you must extort your victim. But if she does, she will almost guaranteed cut for needs when you've done all of this. So, there's like, you know, guide after guide after guide uh and then them literally grooming children in these chat logs here, which I'll skip over cuz there's just so much to read. Um you know, pretending to be nice and how much they love them, "Please call me back. I love you. I'll do anything." Um And then this is where things get a little more graphic. Uh so, the extortion steps uh are they also skip through this as well. Um, just to start off for you to be able to extort, you must also have the ability to groom. Without grooming, you won't get any information or any news, and if you groomed your victim, you pretty much have control of her. To extort a female properly, you must have the following: personal information, addresses, name, phone numbers, and nudes. And once you have this stuff, you may start threatening your victim with, for example, sending her nudes to her parents, swatting, which I'm sure you're familiar with swatting, and leaking personal information, etc. She doesn't do as you say, if she doesn't do as you say, examples, make a blood sign, which means like cut yourself and write on the walls, which I'll show you in a second here. Uh, make a cut sign, which is cutting usernames into their body. Um, kill your cat, kill yourself, and at the end, if you've done everything correctly, you should have gotten exactly what you want to. Remember, never say content is content because no one wants to see some S-word cat scratches, which means like not cutting yourself deep enough. To be honest with you, that is nothing. That is that is not even 10% of how bad this gets. And, uh, you know, I just I know that people that are watching this are not going to see these videos and pictures. >> I hope not. >> Yeah. Because that's so upsetting that and and this whole conversation came about because I was down, uh, at Shawn Ryan's place in Tennessee, and uh, he was overwhelmed. And really wounded for real. This, man, was an ABC, seen a lot. And this just undid him for a time, and I can see why. Um, I just feel like the only way that that's ever going to get fixed is not through law enforcement, uh, federal law enforcement, um, but through like Christian religious revival. I mean, only only an atheist country could have stuff like that. >> It's unbelievable. It's sad, and I agree with you and and I I believe in God. I I I think that you know, that the these people are the definition of evil. I can't find any other any other justification of why this stuff even happens outside of evil. It does make you reassess the satanic uh sacrifice panic of the 1980s. We were told Dorothy Rabinowitz of the of the Wall Street Journal told us it was a panic and I believed her. There were a bunch of arrests in the '80s of these satanic cult rings that were abusing children and there was a lot of evidence it was real. But then there was some evidence that it wasn't real and like I didn't know what to think and then I remember thinking at the time, this is in the early '90s like there's no way that could actually happen. They're not organized satanic groups sacrificing animals, harming children, killing children, holding black masses. Like this is America, man. It's weird. It's very But it's clearly true. It's clearly true and and I and Tucker, I haven't like you don't want to see it, but you know, I I can show you these people in the masses masses. There are these groups are not like five people in them. There's mass quantities of people in these groups that are doing this this you know, that are participating in this behavior as well as as well as trying to join these groups. They require proof of crime is what they call. So like if you want to be a part of a specific group, you have to prove that you have victims, whether that be digital victims that were sex torted or maybe you went out and and murdered a homeless person which is I have a couple videos of homeless people being murdered and you know, one that that will never leave my brain is that is I just brought up the old woman. He's on a call with with somebody from the group. He he he kicks her down the steps and you know, and he starts just beating on her and then he he slits her throat, you know, and and you watch this and he's doing this live with somebody on a phone call laughing. And um and then you see him running through a field with a knife that has blood all over it and and it was just a senseless act of violence for for evil. I mean, it's just evil. And it infuriates me so much to the point and and upsets me, of course, and that's why I talked about in the beginning the compartmentalization. If I wasn't able to turn this off, I won't be able to function. I I can't, you know, I and I'm not heartless. I don't I do have a soul and and I go to church twice a week and and and I pray to God that this stuff go, you know, not just this, but any type of child crime um just disappears. I know it's not realistic. I know that evil powers this country and I I know that that Satan is a prince of the air as was said in the Bible. I know these things, but but you know, I I have to understand that my spot is to use my voice, use my experience, use my time to educate as many people as I possibly can about these problems because unfortunately, you know, one in four girls are are hurt, you know, sexually as children. One in 20 boys are and that number, what does that number end up being in the future? Especially if these victims, you know, not not all of them, but a large number of them reoffend in their lifetime. What what happens in the next generation? Is it going to be one in two girls and one in 10 boys and where does this end? So so I pray that that this that this ends and and that parents actually open up and they realize that these devices, like you hand your kid a phone, an iPad, a computer, a gaming console because, you know, it's it's almost like a babysitter to them. Um when I was a child, which was only between 20 something years ago, my mom gave me a prepaid phone that I had to top up with minutes, you know, and I'm sure people can relate to that. If she said, "Give me that phone." I wouldn't have cared. But these kids, that's their connection to the world. That's like trying to That's like cutting off one of their hands, you know, that these phones are their connection to people and if they're scared to come to you about something like what I just showed you uh or somebody that's extorting them or grooming them or they don't know what grooming is and they can't they can't determine that they're being groomed having these conversations with your kids and knowing that they're going to come to you if something like this happens even if it is embarrassing to them could potentially save their life you know and uh and that that that's why I'm doing what I'm doing I'm not doing it because I enjoy looking at children cutting their wrists >> it's so bad it's so bad for anyone to see those images and I feel sorry for you and I know a you know a lot of people have I've seen some ugly things not that you know nothing by comparison to an afternoon on the internet though Yeah yeah the internet's wild and and what the reason why I >> any effort at all to there's a lot of effort to police my political speech any criticism of Benjamin Netanyahu is instantly policed but is there any effort real effort to police this like So one thing going back to Roblox is they they banned vigilantes on their platform Schlep being one of them So explain what that means So so a vigilante is somebody that's taking the law into their own hands and Schlep he got I think it was six of them arrested with mug shots from the Roblox platform so he pretended to be a child on the platform waited for people to message him you know but even as a civilian entrapment doesn't exist you have to be law enforcement for it to be entrapment but he pretended to be you know just a like a law enforcement officer grown adults messaged him he he got six arrests in a short period of time and then Roblox banned him from the platform and sent him a cease and desist in the mail Why because he's a vigilante on the platform and they believe that that causes more danger and they put this ridiculous press release out that you know people can look into um from there Schlep started to go public he got >> Roblox Um this guy I I forget the guy's name I can bring it up if you want Um it's a it's it's a publicly traded company um but the CEO's name is escaping me at the moment. Um, I think I think it's whatever. Um, Sleightly though, is a younger kid and he's been working with Chris Hansen on, you know, doing some awesome stuff and he documentary and unfortunately he was groomed on the platform as a child, which is what motivated him to be a vigilante on the platform. And um, you know, I I think that you know, I I just can't comprehend why a platform would uh, you know, why why a platform would ban the people that are helping make it cleaner, you know, even if it is in a >> Why do you think? What's the motivation there? >> I have no idea. Did they reach out to him and say thank you for what you've done? No, they did the opposite. They sent a cease and desist in the mail. So to his house, which is, you know, he posted it on Twitter and >> Did he Did they allege he did something wrong? They I I don't believe that I think they just were saying that it was a it was dangerous or like I'd have to look at the press release for the exact words. I don't want sue their Roblox. So got to be careful with what I say here. Um, but uh, but you know, this is all factual. I mean, he was they put out a a press release that said it and they he did get a cease and desist and they're all of that stuff happened. Um, and from what I was told, they don't allow law enforcement to conduct investigations on their platform either. That doesn't mean the law enforcement doesn't, but they don't they don't allow for it supposedly. So I don't understand what they're they're what they're angling or what they're trying to do, posturing to do for other words, but uh, it's weird. It's just a strange thing. Well, if they're punishing the guy who is trying to punish the criminals, it's kind of like the defund the police. Like, okay, then whose side are you on? >> Yeah, well, let me show you what their stock looks like now after you just, you know, talking about that exact thing. Uh, I think that a lot of people are in agreement agreement with us. Like, why would you Why would you do that? And here's the 6 months. You can You can look at this over you know it's split in half. So I know that I mean I'm looking at the top article here uh understand understanding Roblox grooming problem, you know? So for being the largest children's game if the headline article is their grooming problem then maybe you should do something about it or take bigger actions other than age >> don't want to go to hell for eternity so that's also a good motivator I think. I don't think many people in Silicon Valley are worried about hell and they should be. I agree with that. So it's a it's it is what it is and it's very sad for me and and I don't want people to be you know the people that don't know me at all and they're watching me for the first time to think that I'm just consuming myself with evil for fun. That I do this and and I and these are acting investigations as well. I'm showing you the stuff that's publicly out there but like I'm you know I'm still trying to get them arrested. I'm still actively assisting in the arrest of these individuals and more. Um can't talk about those cases of course but the but this public stuff it's it's not fun for me. I I feel like this is a purpose that was given to me by God and um I I don't know how much you know about my story if you if Shawn told you or I told you. So I get a text message from my friend's wife and um it had three screenshots in it and at this time I had no idea about child I mean obviously knew predators and pedophiles >> you doing for a living then? At that time I owned a medical facility so for substance use and and and mental health. Yeah. They change it from abuse to use so it's a weird thing. Um I get a text message from my friend's wife and um there was three different screenshots of this horrible website that was on the clear web that anyone could visit. This is like not the quote unquote dark web that people talk about um that that's really just that it's called Tor the onion router. Um on the clear web anyone can see this website and one of these three photos was a picture of a child that was sitting in a bathtub. You could see their back like you could tell that they were nude, but you could just see their back. And the title of the forum post said, um they have no idea what's going to happen to them tonight. And underneath of it, all of these people were talk were talking about what they were going to do to this person's child. So, this isn't my first time ever seeing anything like this. And I I'm I you know, I'm like disgusted to on a level that I've never felt before. So, I leave where I'm at. I physically left the location of where I was at because, you know, I I I just had this switch flip in my brain that I didn't know I had. I don't have children. I wasn't abused as a child, like you know, like like I I it's had to have been a god thing for me. So, I go home with the intention on of of trying to probe around this website and and take it down. Which without all the technical details for the nerds that are listening, um like I was going to do a distributed denial of service attack. Just keep the site shut down. Like it would have been impossible to load the site. Which is a very simple, easy attack to do. It sounds crazy, but it's a very easy one. But, I got lucky, uh if you want to say lucky. I got lucky that they used a forum called ZenForo, and they used a they used a theme that happened to be nulled, meaning they didn't pay for access to use this theme. And that theme gave me access to their their entire server, which included their entire database. So, now this website that is absolutely terrible, that's that children are on selling themselves, that people are on looking for that type of material and chatting about it in an on an open forum that anyone can read. Um I now have full access to their entire site to to download anything I want and to try to uncover who who's running it. So, I I I started to have a little bit of common sense that cuz I I got an adrenaline rush at this point when I realized I have access to this. Um that common sense started to kick in. If you download all of this data, you're going to be in possession of CSAM. And and I didn't know what the term CSAM back then. I just used the term child porn. And um you know, I I don't like the word child porn personally. I feel like it implies consent, but the the I knew that if I downloaded this database, I cannot include images, uh, videos, any attachments, because when I go to deliver this to law enforcement, I don't want to get wrapped up in anything like that. The last thing I need is somebody Google searching Ryan Montgomery and then something like that horrible comes up, you know? So, I thought about that even back then, and um, I I wrote a script to extract the database, and the first user that was and and exclude all that stuff. The first user in that database was a politician in Virginia named Nathan Larson. And uh, and he's a little bit of a wack job politician, but he was, you know, running for Congress. Uh, the guy >> He's a libertarian. Uh, I believe so. I believe so. Um, he uh, yeah, so so Nathan Larson was running this website. Never heard of him before at that time. And uh, I start to, you know, export the database. There are 7,000 total people in this database across four different backups that were on the server. It was just a combination of a ton of users. So, this is my this is my beginning. Like my I I go from not knowing anything about this at all to now I got a database of 7,000 pedophiles, and I want to do something with it. So, I reach out to um, the my attorney first actually, I believe it was, but I reached out to him who who reached out to the the task force in the local like the Palm Beach County task force, I think it was, or Broward one or the other. Um, and then IC3.gov, uh, National Center for Missing and uh, Nick Mick, National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, um, and then 11 different media stations, because there was a 6-month gap in between law enforcement not ever showing up at my door like I thought they were going to, and then I was like, okay, well, then I'm just bringing this to the media, because I feel like they may take action if I uh, you know, go to the media. So, I um, I read I I spoke to to all both all sides, left, right, middle, you know, whatever. Um politics really isn't my thing. So, I spoke to all and any reporter that would take the time to talk to me. Every single one of them was interested in running the story. They Not one of them was saying like, you know, we're we don't want to take this story. Um they all came back with almost an identical answer that their legal team was not willing to run it for liability reasons, for legal reasons, how the data was obtained. So, my rebuttal to that was um you know, just run it without my name. Run it without any of the illegally quote-unquote obtained material. Just let people know that this website exists, that there's children on here that are selling their body. All you know, let them let parents know that this is happening. Not one of them run run the story. So, I'm very aggravated at this point that nobody wants to run anything. Six months goes by. Nathan Larson's in my Google alerts, I get a notification Nathan Larson's arrested with a 13-year-old girl in Denver, Colorado that he kidnapped and raped. And um I was so aggravated because every one of those articles, I know that could have been prevented if they listened to me in the first place. There's 7,000 other people in this database that have nothing has happened to it this point. Um and I didn't want to just leak it to the internet because if I leaked it to the internet and there were parent concerned parents on there, which it would have been hard for that to happen cuz the application process to become a user, you have to answer some wild questions. But even undercovers, like I didn't want to leak the database and it potentially do what like Ashley Madison did, you know, right? Like uh people killed themselves over that leak. Um so uh you know, I I I'm waiting all this time. No law enforcement's not helping, media's not helping. Nathan gets arrested with this little girl and they don't include the website at all in any articles. Like they talk about him being a a person that ran for Congress. You've seen like you you know, you've heard the story, but you probably haven't heard about the websites that he was running. And um you you 7,000 people is you know, it's not a crazy number, but it's a lot of pedophiles in one spot. And if I got all of their email addresses and all their usernames and all their private messages and everything you need, I don't know why this wouldn't be a case on a on a golden platter or silver platter for for law enforcement. So, I was very angry at that point and the only thing that I could think to do, cuz I didn't have the network I have now, you know, I I'm just a computer hacker that owns healthcare facilities and I'm kind of saying in the dark. So, I was like, you know, I see these vigilante predator groups on YouTube and at that time it wasn't like they are now. There's a ton of them that exist now, where they go out, they they have decoys, they pretend they're kids, and then they go out and and confront them one by one. And um I saw back then there were there were only like, you know, a few of them on on YouTube, not not a ton. So, I asked them um cuz one I'm sorry, I'm going to skip a little bit ahead here. So, those groups that were there, uh I noticed that in the videos where they're confronting these predators, where they believe they're meeting up with a real child and then they get confronted by an adult, similar to how Chris Hansen was doing it with law enforcement, they were just doing it without law enforcement. They wouldn't know the person's name a lot of these groups or where they worked or what their wife's name was or what kind of car they drove or any details about them. They would just show up. So, I was like, okay, that's where my value could come in. I can I can identify these people and and I you know, there's a better chance of this guy staying if you know where he works, if you know what he does and all of his personal details. He's got a better chance of not just turning around and getting back in his car and driving away. So, I reached out to these channels. I offered, you know, to get to provide them with a full case file on anyone that they send, you know, identifiers to. And uh a few of them accepted and for a couple years I I did that. So, I was I was helping these channels anonymously. I wasn't putting my name out there. I wasn't asking for any money. I just wanted to help and that's what made me feel better about nothing happening in the first place with this one website with the politician. Then skip, you know, skip those 2 years of me doing that. Uh a friend of mine, uh professional MMA fighter, we start a and there's a reason why I say that. He's professional MMA fighter um and we're sitting in a garage. I'm telling him this exact story. I pop open a chat room. I show him, you know, that how bad this problem is. Again, demonstrating that it can happen anywhere, anytime. Unfortunately, zero effort required. Um and he is more than willing to start a group with me uh to catch these guys in our local area and in Delray Beach, Florida. So, it was called and he's still running it. It's called 561 PC. And um once he starts doing that and he's got a little bit of a social media following and people start watching, you know, us catch predators. I'm behind the camera uh and he's, you know, the face of it reading the chat logs to these predators one by one. Um couple of the podcast that focus on MMA wanted to talk to him. And uh and ask him, you know, about catch a predators. He brought me along on these podcasts and one of them asked me the question, how did you get started? So, that question right there is what changed the complete trajectory of my life. Like, we wouldn't be sitting here right now if that question wasn't asked. And, you know, like the butterfly effect type of situation. But, um they asked that question. I explained that there's this case. I still had all that data. Still nothing done with it legally. I just have this database of all these people. Nothing done. And from there I have all kinds of media reaching out the next day cuz the a clip from that podcast got 10 million views in less than 24 hours on a on a smaller podcast. I wake up and my inbox is full. My phone's getting phone calls, getting emails. And everybody wants to hear the story. Nobody wanted to listen to me the day before, but now they want to hear it because it went viral on social media. And one of those people was Shawn Ryan. Shawn Ryan is and I didn't know Shawn at this time. We never even spoke to each other. And but he saw my clip and he was like, "I want to get your message out there." And he took a huge chance on me cuz I could have been lying, I could have been a nut job, a schizophrenic, I might have been making this whole story up. But Shawn took me, you know, took the chance on me of not only that it was truthful, but the chance of releasing that type of content with screenshots and and chat logs and all this stuff on YouTube with the chance that he might lose his channel. So, I go in there in the Shawn Ryan Show and I'm wearing like, you know, a t-shirt. I I I say this a lot, but like I'm wearing an oversized t-shirt, paler than I am now, I'm skinny, I you know, I'm I'm hesitating on my words, I I got lights in my face, I probably drank eight bottles of water, I'm so nervous, you know, and uh not not because of you know, talking about the what I wanted to get out there, I just not used to being on a podcast, you know, what it just wasn't my thing. And I I finished it up after we talked about gadgets, which you know, we'll we'll get into. I want to show you some fun happy stuff in a minute, but um you know, I start doing that and then I get into this stuff and and I walk out of the studio and I ask Shawn, I'm like, "Hey man, how do you think that went? Be honest with me cuz I I really felt like I messed it up." And he was like, "Yeah man, I think it went pretty well." And and him and I both didn't think it was going to make it 5 minutes on YouTube cuz they're they're pretty strict sometimes when it comes to when you show especially when you show with that type of content. Um so we didn't think it was going to make it more than 5 minutes and I was okay with that. I was really like, "Okay, fine. At least I tried, I did everything I possibly could." Shawn sends me a text as soon as it's released, pretty close to as soon as it was released and and I'm sure you've seen this, one of 10, meaning your video is doing well. And I didn't know what it meant. I just Shawn said that it was doing well. It became his biggest podcast that he's ever done, still current day on Apple, Spotify, YouTube combined, it's got hundreds of millions of views, a total of with the shorts billions of views. And uh and not saying this because I'm some no-noteworthy individual that at the time that had like a you know that would have brought that type of traffic in. I think what happened is people could resonate and understand that this is not this is not something that is uh an uncommon problem. It's something that it's a taboo topic that people don't talk about until it happens or you know or happens to someone around them or happens in their family. And I'm showing the significance of the problem, not just with my words, but with factual evidence, you know, and especially with a live live demonstration of it happening on the podcast. Um And uh you know, Shawn and I got very close and uh and now I mean this is kind of a my first time announcing this, but like I'm I'm the godfather of Shawn's child, you know, like him and I are very close and and uh and that means a lot to me. I mean that's a that's his firstborn child and I uh you know, I'm and I don't want to go into detail about his personal stuff, but that Shawn gave me the okay to to say that and I uh you know, I I love the guy very much and he he took a chance telling me that nobody else would, you know? And um there's a whole other story with that you might be interested in with Project Veritas getting involved and them fumbling it and you know, their interim CEO telling me the story wasn't a tidal wave and they threw it out, but the journalist at Project Veritas tried very hard. They They They did expose a few people in that original database. Um they tried to partner up with Shawn on the release of it, but completely failed. >> Why do you think that Project Veritas wouldn't run it? I think they're just were extremely incompetent after James O'Keefe either left or was fired, whatever actually happened there. No one really knows except for him. Um and I I genuinely don't I don't even know him personally, but they reached out. They said they want to do it. The journalist spent a ton of time uncovering these people and showing up where they were at, recording them undercover and and asking them, "Hey, what were you doing on this site?" And uh and why you know, "Did you say this? Did you say that?" And they had all this evidence, but since it didn't make it into the New York Post or the New York Times, they weren't willing willing continue with the story and then I looked into the you know I looked into the circulation on those whatever one it was press or the times or post or the times and the circulation was like a tenth of what social you know a small influencer on social media would be getting in you know that year. So it made no sense to see the interim CEO her name is Hannah Giles. I don't know if you're familiar with her but she okay so Hannah got gets on the phone with me and says that this story is not a tidal wave and it got completely shut down. Their journalists on the other hand were very upset about it they cuz they they really cared it was a passion project for them. The the the management team they they just threw it out but Shawn Ryan was the one that pushed the story so far that allowed me to get involved with federal law enforcement to work with Saturna Foundation to to deal you know now I've been I've worked with every agency under the sun you name the acronym it's I've worked with them and uh it's you know it's a blessing that I never thought would ever happen for me. It's a very dark path that I chose to take but but I believe that I did it for the right reasons and I I I I told you I I pray I pray to to God every single night that if you don't want this in my life to take it away from me you know and and it just you know unfortunately keeps getting worse. So you made reference earlier to organized groups that are behind this almost inconceivable effort to make children harm themselves. Um Satanist groups what are those groups? So there's a few of them that that I'm familiar with or that I've seen I guess is a better way to put it and it just actually reminded me of a conversation I want to show you because a lot of it's senseless. So like the like the it's all senseless but you know even if they believe that what they're doing is right. So the Order of Nine Angles is one that I believe has been around a long time. >> The Order of Nine Angles. >> O9A they go by. Um they they believe in a thing called culling, which is like, you know, they believe that they get power by harming other people. >> They do. Um, That's a real spiritual principle. That's what human sacrifice That's what abortion is. That's what human sacrifice is. Understood. >> That's what, you know, every ancient religion was about that. Um, from the Canaanites till present. Uh, yeah, that's like that is literally devil worship. You get power from from hurting others. >> they believe that. I mean, they they openly talk about it. >> Mhm. And and use the words culling as >> Culling? Culling, yeah. 09A 09A and then I saw a reference recently to NLM, no lives matter. Mhm. And um, and if you don't mind, I can pull it up. I want to show you this conversation because the guy is, you know, one of them is selling tickets to his suicide. And another one is he wanted to be murdered by, you know, suicide by cop, but instead of just letting it happen that way, he was talking to one of these these cultists and and he was deciding, you know, should he, you know, murder a bunch of people on the way out and what group is he going to do it for, you know, like like just, you know, >> Right, you don't need to I mean, what we're watching is like, you know, a country that needs an exorcism. It seriously does. And and that that conversation, if you don't want to see it, that's okay. It's a It's It's a guy that is just he he's ready to end his life. Like and I don't support hurting yourself in any way, shape or form. But if you're going to do that, don't bring other people out with you. The whole point of it is, I mean, suicide is an act of hostility. Anyone who's been around it can affirm that. Um, so yeah. By the way, Jesus cast the demons, the legion of demons, out of the man into the herd of pigs. What's the first thing they do? Kill themselves. Oh, yeah. So like I I That's a good point. >> Yeah, no, it's it's so obviously, um, the product of of [snorts] possession. Uh, Order of Nine Angles, what does that mean? Nine Angles? I I I genuinely don't know. >> But it's been around a while. >> a while, yeah. Yeah, I do know that part. >> And these are groups that are just like internet groups. Yeah, but I I think Order of Nine Angles also has like physical members that are not just internet. There's a combination between them and like let's just say 764 instead of because there's a ton of subgroups that go underneath of it that do exactly the same thing. Um they have connections to these real life groups but like you know that will go out and you know protest something or go burn a burn a building down or Have you Have you ever heard of um like you know I don't want to go off completely off to a different topic here but we we brought up swatting temporarily. Um do you know what swatting is? I do. Okay, so I've been swatted three times just talking about these these things on online um by these these guys. And uh you know telling people that there's there's a you know I got which I don't even have a wife that my wife is tied to a chair. I got bombs in the windows and I'm going to kill any cop that comes in the door. And you know I request these 911 calls cuz I know the cops in the area I could and you could do Freedom of Information Act or just request it from dispatch. And I hear it so I mean like you know it doesn't sound anything like me in any of these calls. Um but SWAT teams are coming to my house and they want and now they got the last one they called my phone in advance and told me hey we got officers around the corner like would you mind just coming out front to make sure everything's all good. And I'm out there with my coffee cup and did a little 360 around and then like you know they're they just are trying to torture me and they they've been harassing my family. They've you know they've threatened my friends they threatened my me with death threats they they you know you name it they've done it. >> What I find baffling is that you and I are talking about these groups you're naming them they've harmed you they clearly harmed or killed other people. What kind of effort is there at the FBI to to find these people and prosecute them? It's just it's it's not it's I don't think that it's a lack of passion. I think that, you know, HSI, for example, all they're focusing on right now is immigration. Like people are literally leaving their jobs because all the like the actual from from what I've been told, they are you know, they're not focusing on investigations, especially in child crimes, you know, they're just focusing on immigration. FBI, on the other hand, I don't think the passion isn't there. I think the problem is the resources and the the skill set and the training that that that doesn't exist. Um Well, if you have an active Satanist groups trying to kill people in your country, it seems like that would be a priority. I mean, I know it's not like January 6th level priority, but like somewhere on the list, you would have to want to address that, right? Totally understand. And they they are addressing it, but not not in the not to the ability that I know that they could. Um so, you know, it kind of segued into me coming up with an idea because we send we set up a foundation, we send people all over the world to train law enforcement on how to use new tools and how to identify people, the same way that I identify you. Like the first way, you know, the first first 10 minutes of our our show. Um it training law enforcement like how to do those things so that they could go off of an identifier like a username or a profile photo or um a phone number or whatever it may be. Let's say it's just a license plate. Or or I I've even had one guy I remember the story, but he had a he was he was like a plumber, you know, and you could see the logo of the plumbing company and a little portion of his face and I was able to locate him just based on where he worked. I didn't even know what city or town that he lived in or name and I went through the simple but effective went through the Facebook comments of that particular business. I did a reverse image search, not face search, reverse image search of the logo for the plumbing company, found their Facebook profile and then was able to locate him based off of, you know, a little a little portion of the picture that I could identify him as. Took a lot of legwork. There was no automation. There was no advanced technology there. But sometimes open source intelligence is is is simple and sometimes it's extremely advanced. And that's why people like myself and other people that are working in this space, you know, that if they if they're good with open source intelligence, cuz it doesn't just apply to child crimes, it applies to any crime. Identifying where somebody is out or what they're doing or what something is or details about a particular thing should be a skill set of all law enforcement, I believe. And we're doing a great job at that with Sentinel, but then with Pen Tester, we made a product called OSINT Pilot that you know, it's instead of training and sending people all over the world and country, they can just conversationally talk This is only for law enforcement, by the way. This is not for consumers. The Pen Tester product itself is for consumers, but OSINT Pilot, if you're law enforcement, reach out to us, we'll help you out. There's no training required. So, you type in a person, let's just say it was that guy that had a a logo of a plumbing company on his shirt and his face wasn't really that visible and there wasn't much to go off of, our tool will take that image, it will take the description, it'll search, you know, search everything you would do by hand. We have over 40 tools implemented into it and about 10 minutes later you'll have a 30 or 40 page report on that individual if it was something it was able to find. Obviously, the more identifiers you add, the more effective it's going to be, but but we made something that's never been done before. And it requires no training. Like you said, you don't have a computer, you've never used a computer, I guarantee you that if I said, "Hey, find, you know, John Doe, here's your identifier that you have, the last four digits of his phone number and you know he lives in this city and his, you know, first name and you know, the last initial." That tool will find him. And and even if you didn't know to put that information in, our tool will tell you, you know, it'll tell you what to provide it. So, it's something that we we built, we're super proud of it, and um it's uh you know, that that's that's what I believe the FBI should be doing, HSI, everybody should be reaching out to not only myself, but anybody that's willing to provide these OSINT resources, or because it can get deeper than that. OSINT, SIGINT, HUMINT, there's all these different types of intelligence that you know, more people out there than myself are doing. But, you know, just my opinion. Yeah, it just seems like an emergency if you have uh you know, Satanist groups working to kill Americans and their children, I don't know, I mean, I know, you know, they're not Iranian, but that would seem like something we should be really working to end. >> be a a computer nerd like myself digging through these chat rooms or or setting up a foundation. We should be working in in a lot of times we're working in tandem with federal law enforcement, like with with all of these cases, but when it comes to the the mask, you're absolutely right. It's not it's not being prioritized in the way that we're prioritizing it. Yeah. I mean, it's everything that will destroy you and your family. What is that box of gadgets right there? I got a lot of gadgets for you, and I think that you're going to like them. So, we let's see how we can skip to some better better happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy happy >> I almost messed with you, and I don't want to give away where we're at right now, but downstairs is a very unique place, right? And um there's a lamp that happened to be sitting there. I don't know, you know, you probably don't even know it's there, but to the left of the couch is a lamp sitting there. And then this right here, my friend, uh his name's Peaks. He took a regular bulb off of Amazon, it's called uh Wyze, like and he made it a bunch of different ones. So, like you could buy this smart bulb on Amazon and make it change colors. Essentially, is all that it does. He he put modified software or firmware onto this bulb. And I can match the colors of your other bulbs. Let's say I was in your bathroom going to you know using it, swapped out a bulb and left your office. Now I have a an implant that I can monitor your your Wi-Fi or or try to pivot from this device to your other devices and take over your computers in you know in your house or your office. Um and you know I could show you if you had a lamp I could show you but you know Well, tell me what it does. So, I leave that in your house and then I get to do what? So, you leave this in in a house for example, the goal would be to access your your your network. So, I would knock your devices offline with it. It has the ability to do that. Um which you know I it's called a deauthentication attack and then from there you capture what's called a handshake. And then I can try to crack your Wi-Fi password from that handshake. Once I have that, now this light bulb is on your network with the rest of your computers. And um you know, from from there I could try to pivot from the bulb onto your computers with your sensitive information and and files and you know anything or I could start to reroute your traffic with it's called DNS to phishing pages and try to steal credentials. I mean this light bulb could could be you know how a router is connected to the internet? >> Yes. >> I could trick your computer into believing that this light bulb is the router. So, I have the way I'm routing the internet through the bulb. It can do a lot more than that. I'm just trying to simplify it a little bit. >> And I can communicate with that light bulb from afar. Um and and this this bulb no, I have to you have to be within Wi-Fi range. Yeah. There are other devices that are implants that you could at a distance with SIM cards or other means. Or if they're plugged directly into the back of a computer you know, like I do have one of those in my bag that you would never know. You would never unplug it cuz it looks So it's it's supposed to be there. That one connects, you know, I could be in Guatemala and I could have complete control over that device from Guatemala. Um Wow. Yeah, so that that's that's the the hacker's nightlight. I thought that was kind of a cool, you know >> That is cool. And you know, think of it like this. Like these are that's this is a real brand. This is not something that he like paid to prototype. He hacked the bulb itself. And um it you know, imagine a company like this either getting hacked like compromised or like a lot of these come from China. So, let's say a Chinese company goes rogue, which I don't think it's too crazy to think about modern day, and um sends out custom firmware for these bulbs that does something malicious on your home network. You know, what if it gains access to your computer or to your Amazon Alexa or whatever it may be, and now they're listening to you in your house or they're they're you know, just trying to steal your passwords and doing whatever they're doing. They're collecting data or intel, um which there's so many examples of that. Here's another one. Uh So, same guy uh just buying smart, you know, I they're called Internet of Things or smart home devices straight off the internet. This is just a smart plug that looks I mean, you can look at it. There's nothing nothing special. Oh, sorry. What what makes it smart? It it connects to Alexa and Wi-Fi, so you can turn something on or off. It's just a simple gadget that you can buy on Amazon. Okay. You know, and and let's say you want >> So, you you plug this in, plug the lamp or whatever into this, and then rather than actually just moving your fingers and turning it off, you tell some chick called Alexa to do it. >> Yeah, you tell Alexa. You say, "Hey, turn the lamp on." And she turns the lamp on. That is essentially the same as the light bulb. So, that will monitor you know, the network and and still work just as as it does out of the factory. >> want to be judgy, but the idea of like having Alexa in my house or anything like this in my house is just bizarre to me. Yeah. Why would you do that? So, I my personal reason uh is I can see the traffic going in and out of my house. I know that the microphone has to be listening at all times to look to listen for the word Alexa. Um I'm aware of that, but I know that my conversations, unless I say the word Alexa, are not being sent to Amazon servers. So, I'm personally not scared of it, but I do know that if somebody really wanted to, they could use those devices to listen or see inside my house. That is a fact. Well, of course. >> Yeah. Even I know that. >> Yeah, of course. But I I'm okay with the risk there personally, which brings me to a topic that is a little bit more scary. Okay. Um so, you know, I don't know what your setup is at home with cameras, with your garage door, with your car, you know, if you if you know, but have you ever seen Have Have you ever seen anything like this before? No. So, what this device would do, and and the usage of it of it is illegal. So, if I press that button, we're both committing a federal crime, you know. Not me, man. Yeah, we're not pressing the button today. >> Okay. Unless you know, unless you want to, but the This is called a jammer. So, what this does is it it it's going to shut down every single cell phone in this entire entire building, 70 m. Um it's going to turn off GPS, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, all all of it. It's going to jam all all signals that are important, which means your wireless cameras are not going to work, your Bluetooth, you know, microphones, your your everything. You can't call 911. You have no way unless you have a landline hidden around here somewhere. The alarm system in this place that likely has a cellular connection can't contact. You might hear the alarm going off, but nobody's nobody's getting a notification that you're being robbed or anything. This device can cause a serious problem in your life, especially with the the video cameras and alarms and phones. Um there is no solution for this problem, you know, and and it brings me How does that work? So, what it does is like imagine um a like a way to put this into an analogy would be okay, we're in a small room, right? And if I screamed at the top of my lungs and then I told you to tell me a story. While I'm screaming, if somebody was sitting over there, I'm I'm you know, they may not be able to hear your story because I'm screaming. That's what this is doing. It's screaming at the top of its lungs 70 m and signals can't they're just so garbled by the time they make it out of that range that it that it you know, the 70 m range, they don't work. So it's just immediately the second I press on that button, everything goes off. >> cancer risk from being near something like that when it's on? I mean, it definitely puts a ton of EMFs out, but I don't think much more than your average radio. I mean, you're you're surrounded. I could show you a pretty wild example of that right now without turning anything on. Uh, this is just Bluetooth alone. Check this out. I always show this to people that talk about EMFs because I you know, you cannot avoid them. Uh, here right here. I don't know if the guy Here, you can just pass it to me cuz I Okay, there you go. That Here's just the You can scroll down. You see the colors there? Scroll down on the colors. They're all the just They're just the Bluetooth devices that are within 30 ft of us. That's just Bluetooth. So, you know, imagine cellular. You got GPS, Wi-Fi, you got radio, you have like you know, from CDMA, GSM, 4G, LTE. Literally all cellular signals, they're all hitting us. So, if we got 50 Bluetooth devices in this building, which you know, or more. It might have been more than 50 there. You're being All these signals are passing through you regardless. The ionizing radiation is the ones you should worry about, like 5G and and being close to a 5G tower. I believe that those are dangerous, you know, especially at long-term exposure. Um, but no matter how protected you are unless you live in the middle of nowhere with you know, no signal to anything where you put your house in what's called a Faraday cage. Like you you're getting penetrated by these signals whether you like it or not. What if you're sitting on an airplane using Wi-Fi? Same exact thing. You're even getting ultra ultraviolet because you know, the higher you go up, the less protection you have in the sky. >> get skin cancer. Yeah. >> Exactly. Exactly. So, yeah, I mean it's something it's almost unavoidable in my opinion. So, that jammer right there is commercially available? Yeah, so they're illegal to buy. They're not illegal to own, but they're illegal to use. So, of course I found this on the highway on my way here. Yeah. >> But uh If you wanted to buy one illegally, where would you buy it? >> China. China is a primary, you know, place selling them and a lot of the websites are scams. So, luckily criminals that want to buy them will likely get ripped off. Um but you know, whoever bought this and left it on the on the side of the road um must have known the right person to buy it from. >> Does it work? Yeah, it does work, yeah. It definitely works and I've used it I'm I've publicly used it. I know that it's a crime, but I've used it in controlled settings. But if I wanted to like stage a home invasion, I'd turn that on first. Yeah, and I've shown examples on the on social media with even smaller versions of this, which I want to show you cuz it relates to um Iran and the drones and and I I want to show you something interesting with that. But I showed a device similar to this that uh that disabled my doorbells and disabled everything um by just you know, clicking a button because it overwhelms that and when the device doesn't have storage on it itself, like a lot of these new cameras, they rely on the cloud. If they can't connect to the cloud, then the storage, I'm sorry, then the then the footage never existed. So, um the the repeat that you know, if you have a cloud-based camera or wireless camera, if it loses connection to the internet or the cloud, the videos are gone. The images are gone. There's no way to ever recover it. So, if somebody gets a hold of a jammer or if you just happen to lose internet, you have no cameras anymore. You have no footage. You have no, you know, you have no way to know somebody's approaching your house or where if you weren't home that somebody entered your house. It's It's just as if it didn't happen. So, using wired cameras is a solution to that problem. Um And that goes for, you know, I've shown some examples on the news uh with the with hacking garage doors and opening cars and being able to duplicate key fobs and, you know, capturing those signals out of the sky. Uh you know, you would never know that that's happening. So, your house and I could go on a whole thing about safety with your house, but one little advice while while it's on my mind is if your house is connected I'm sorry, if your garage door is connected to your house and there's a door that enters your house from your garage, treat that door like it's your front door. Because I could be standing 100 ft, 200 ft away from your garage and when you go and click that button in your car to open the door, I can capture the signal for a very large number of the manufacturers and I can forever gain access to your garage door. Um and I've demonstrated it over and over again in in many different places. Uh you know, one of the largest streamers on the internet, uh Adin Ross, um I I I hacked his gate same way. I I have forever access to Adin Ross's gate where he's got millions of dollars worth of merchandise, cars, and, you know, it's all with a simple gadget. So, uh I I want to show you that real quick. Sorry, I don't want to cut you off. >> No, that's amazing. Thank you. So, just imagine um imagine that you're sitting in a Walmart parking lot as a criminal. You're a criminal and and you're you're sitting in this parking lot. So, uh I could be using a device like which I'll explain what this is in a second, but um this device you could buy. It's not going to do this out of the box. This is custom dark web firmware that's bought from Russians that, you know, it's uh you know, right now $2,900 I believe. We didn't pay for it. We like the people that that gave it to me hacked the hacked firmware. So, it's like a double hack-ception. But, uh I I I got a hold of it that way and um let me just so grab this key fob. I'll show you. If there's battery in this key fob. Okay, three >> Is that how people steal cars? Uh so, you can't steal a car with this, but you can get in the back seat of a car with this. You can So, you know, Okay, here we go. Um you you cannot steal a car with with this. You can but you can completely duplicate this key fob. So, I can pop the trunk. I can and you know, enable the alarm. I can lock and unlock. Uh all it takes is me just pressing any button on here. It doesn't matter which button. So, uh can I show you Can I come over there? Yeah. I still don't know how this car works, so. So, you see how it's it's saying fixed scan. It's listening on this frequency here, which usually key fobs are going to operate in either 315 MHz or 433 MHz. Um if I have that running at all times in a Walmart parking lot, like when I hit the lock button, let's say. This is the lock button. Every time I hit lock, a new one comes up, as you see. So, let's say I save this. And if you look here, it says Kia Hyundai, which is what this is right here. Um and then if I just do let's just say So, button's not working. All right, I'll just do 0 1. There we go. So, when I hit this, So, now I don't the key fob anymore. Imagine I have 10 people that's walking out of Walmart. They all click their key fob. Didn't matter what button they pressed. They could have hit lock, unlock, whatever. So, I hit this. That's lock. Unlock. See how it says open there? Trunk. And if you see here, every single time that I click the button, you see that number at the end is changing. 155, 1 1F7, 16E, 16 So, it's going in sync with the key fob knowing what the next code is going to be. And all I need to do now is walk around the parking lot and start hitting the lock and unlock button and look for what car it was. So, I could, you know, let's say it's Christmas or it's there's a holiday or let's say I'm a a dangerous person. I could sit in the back seat of someone's car, wait for them to get in it, and make someone's worst fear come true. That's amazing. So, you know, luckily, which I'll explain this over here. Luckily, this is not something that's easy to get your hands on right now. Um you can buy one of these devices for 170 bucks, but it's not going to be much more than, you know, like something that could turn a TV on or off or like last night in in the place that that you guys put me in. [clears throat] I I hacked the uh the the light in there. Like where I could turn the light on and off and I could, you know, change the the speed of the fan in the room. Um you know, just just for fun, you know, I I thought as much content as I can get out here, I'm going to do it. So, so, you know, this device can do that type of stuff that it but it isn't going to open a garage door or hack a car like, you know, like I just showed you here. The the same method with a garage door is is identical to what I just showed you with this key fob. So, my advice to everyone, and including you, Tucker, is if your garage connects to your house, deadbolt that thing like it's your front door because it just takes a sophisticated enough criminal to jam signals and uh and then, you know, open your garage door and and enter your house, you know? So, I I'm sure you're a believer in and protecting yourself with firearms. That's the next step. You know, you take technology out and then, you know, then you have the hands-on and and what what your other solutions are, but Yeah, firearms are the only technology I trust. I'm just being honest. >> They work well. They you know, they they're better than 5G. They They make bigger holes in you. >> striker-fire pistols. I'm a revolver guy. That's how Well, you could put a revolver right up against somebody. You don't have to worry about that. >> Well, that's the only distance I I would be effective with a revolver because >> [laughter] >> Well, that's why cops used them, right? Wasn't it? >> Well, they did use them, yeah. Then they were talked into the striker-fire pistols in the early '90s and accidental shootings just went off the chart and you know, whatever. I've got a lot of thoughts on ballistics, but uh yeah, no. But, the point is um you know, you don't ever want to be in a position where you have to harm somebody, of course. I'm opposed to that. But, you can trust a revolver, whereas you can't trust a security system. What is that? So, this is called a Nyan box, and this is a you know, an interesting interesting invention. So, uh friends of mine we there's this this hacking conference in Vegas that happens every year called Def Con, and it's the largest one in the world. And 30,000 or so hackers go there from all over the world. And they they meet with each other. >> scene like at night at the hacker conference? >> Oh my gosh, it's you you you could you can envision it already. It's long hair, neck beards, and and yeah, it's it smells bad, yeah. It's a it's exactly what you think it is. And there's furries there. You know what a furry is? No. Furry? A furry. Yeah, yeah. Furries, you know, I got the Delco accent. But, yeah, there's furries and there you know, there's some normal hackers out there. I like to consider myself a normal one. Maybe I'm not, but there and then there's some real nut jobs. >> Dude, you're at the high end of normal. Thank you. Thank you very much, sucker. Not a furry? No. Okay, good. So, I'm at Def Con and a non-furry comes up to me and and shows me this this thing and he was like, "Hey man, take this. It's 3D printed." I don't know if you you know what a 3D printer is. Of course. It's this entire thing, even the multiple colors, 3D printed. I was like super impressed, especially with these ears cuz they're so, you know, like they feel like Well, I just broke it. But, this side is strong. It was probably already broken. Whatever the case is, it's strong, 3D printed. I was like, "Wow, that's impressive." That's what I said to the guy. Um and then uh you know, I uh I I didn't really know what he was giving me. I just put it around my neck cuz it came on a you know, on a lanyard. And I turn it on later on and I see it's got all these crazy features. Um and I'll show you. So, I'll read some of them so it makes sense to you. There are So, it's Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and other. And I start to go through it and I'm like, "Wow, these guys thought of like everything." Um One second. >> What does it do? So, I'm going to show you. It's It does a lot and uh it's it's jam-packed into this tiny device that they put a couple different devices inside of and then 3D printed around it. Um so, it's got a drone detector, a drone spoofer, Flock camera. You know, are you familiar with Flock? >> No. Flock are these cameras that are it's a you know, the United States, it's a private company that's working with law enforcement. >> Oh, of course. Yeah. >> And they're they're taking people's license plates and they're you know, they're storing this data that that is invading, in my opinion, on everybody's privacy. So, this is detecting Flock cameras uh and Flock devices. Um there's a device scout option on here that means it can track to see what devices could potentially be following or tracking you. So, like if somebody was threw threw a device in your car, this could tell you, you know, that that that's happening. So, you you like without you having to physically find it. Cuz things can only track you in certain ways, whether it be cellular, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, like or some type of EMFs are going to be coming off of that device. In this case, it's going to be looking for Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. Um but what I think you'd be most interested in here is it can jam, so it can do the the video cameras, remote control cars, you know, yeah, you know, any type of signal, Wi-Fi, but not as effective as that giant one I just pulled out. >> Yes. Um the drone detector and drone spoofer is something that I think is kind of interesting because this is a consumer device. You could buy this from them. They're willing to buy it from Sorry, they're willing to sell it to you on their website. And the first thought you probably are having is why would they sell a device that can do these things, you know, why because it can cause damage, you know. It even has a body cam detector for Axion, the the brand police use for body cams. Like why would somebody need something like this? Um and you know, the answer to it is penetration testing goes good and bad, you know, like there's like we have a company that people hire us to pretend like we are the hackers. We find all the vulnerabilities before an actual attacker does so that you can fix them. The point of this device is essentially the same thing. You're treating it you know, you're treating the the the engagement as if it's a real one. So with the drone spoofer for example, which I I want to explain to you about this this stuff cuz it's kind of wild. The drone spoofer a counter UAS company reaches out to them. I don't know the name of the company, but I could find out for you. Um a counter UAS company that is working overseas uh asked for them to use one of these for drone spoofing. So counter UAS just means unmanned aircraft system. Um when a bunch of drones are incoming the goal is to know that that's about to happen. Um if you're using a device even as small as this, it overwhelmed their current system to the point where they couldn't determine whether it was real or fake drones and it would be a you know, not a good thing, but a great way to divert military cuz they're going to think we have a thousand drones coming from the north and here's the statuses of them. One's damaged, one's, you know, landing, one's going this you know, 20 miles an hour, this one's going 5 miles an hour, this one's, you know, you can change the statuses and make it appear like these drones are doing all of these things because of this technology that exist um it's called uh remote ID. And remote ID came into effect in 2024 in consumer drones and it required that every single drone that's purchased um you know, obviously the government drones could could differ, but uh the any any drones purchased at March, I believe, of 2024 has to transmit the position of where the person is standing the position of the drone, the speed, the altitude, um and the serial number of the drone, which then could give you the name of the person that registered the drone in the first place. Um this device can can determine that with any drone that's flying around you. So, if you have some guy flying around in your backyard with a drone you could go show up at his house cuz you know exactly where he's standing and you can get his name if he registered it. Um and then as as I said, for the spoofing side of things, that could get really dangerous, especially >> that mean, spoofing? You just did creates the impression of something that's not actually there? Exactly. So, on their on their UAS on their screen where it would look like uh their counter UAS system where it would look like kind of like a radar, you know, with like dots, just imagine it being overwhelmed with dots. And then they don't know if it's real or not real. They're they get geared up as if it is real and then drones coming from a different angle that are not detectable at all, you know? So, you it's it's very dangerous and and I don't know what the solution to the problem is because, you know, there's companies like Anduril out there that are flying drones in with fiber optic and optic cables that don't even need radio. They have local AI on them um that uh that you know, is is making decisions on what parts of tanks to to hit to weaken them as has already been hit by this one or they work the drones work together. You know, so I don't know exactly what the the solution to this problem is, but but I do believe that knowing that it exists and researching some of this technology especially for for our country is important because drones but it's not like these are a new thing. Like they were they were called quadcopters when I was a kid and they were hobbyist they were fun thing to do. And then as time went on people started to weaponize them and now they're part of war. And and something as simple as a 3D printed box given at a hacking convention can cause a big problem in our in the military. Well, yeah. And they're not just part of war, they are war. We're watching it today. What's that device right there? It looks like a transistor radio. So this is pretty much is it's it's partially what it is. It's a hack RF which is just a it's it does a ton of things radio related only. Which you know, well not just radio. I guess also some some other bands because it's without going into a whole radio nerd conversation it's from 1 MHz to 6 GHz. I don't know if you know how big of a range that is, but it's huge. It's like the only device that I'm aware of that can do anything like that. But if you look in the receive, you'll see I can look for airplanes, boats, I can even access the intercoms in a CVS and Walgreens and like that that thing is pretty pretty wild. I could over some of the older loudspeakers at fast food restaurants I could talk to talk talk through them and listen to them. You know, in the bars touch tunes >> to summarize gives you a read out of all the radio signals around you? Well, yeah. So it's going to receive or transmit. So you could you could either receive everything around you or transmit at a very large range. And that is pre-programmed with some third-party firmware. It's called the H4M or or the Mayhem firmware. It allows you to do some wild things like harmless for example you're at a bar and you see the TouchTunes machine that people pay to play music on. >> Yeah. That thing can take over the TouchTunes, add credits to it, turn it off, change the volume, change the song, you know, just you know, easy simple things or it could be more malicious where like I said hacking a garage door or a car or or so it So I just let me I just want to end on a philosophical question for you. Sure. So you've just spent 2 hours describing like the darkest sides of consumer technology internet garage doors. And I know that all of that technology has brought I guess at least theoretically brought great benefits to humanity whatever you don't have to lift up your own garage door. I have manual garage doors for whatever it's worth. >> Do you really? Yes, I do. >> Wow. You're the first one I've ever met. Really? >> That's great. I'm glad. Yeah, I do. Yeah, lock them. Yeah. Um or just live in a place with no crime. That's my my solution but um all of that, you know, I can see the upsides to all of that stuff but they've all all of those consumer technology products have introduced like massive vulnerabilities and control methods like they made us less free also. >> Yeah, agreed. And why didn't anyone mention that along the way? Like I remember when they were trying to sell us on like you know, the dishwasher you can control with your iPhone. >> And I was like I'm happy to do it by hand. Yeah, yeah, I agree with that for sure. Yeah, the internet of things like in the end are we going to look back on this period and think we were being softened up to like surrender human autonomy to the machine? I think it's going to be worse than that because of the AI. Yeah, I think because AI and And we're we're trying to get artificial general intelligence where AI has consciousness and if we do achieve that state at any point, But my question is like how vulnerable is the average homeowner living as he does surrounded by all these electronic devices >> Yeah. that ultimately he doesn't have any control over but somebody else does like it seems like we put ourselves in quite a spot. So there yeah, we do and and there is some some modern solutions for modern problems, you know, and and the more and the >> I see the jammer and I just want to set that off in my living room just to like stop it all. Yeah, I'll buy one and secretly use it. >> [laughter] >> Against myself? >> Yeah, there you go. It's a it's a good way to to make sure you're not getting anything in or out. Yeah. But um you know, same with these Faraday bags but like it stops it so your phone can't get or receive text but like let's say you're going to a country where you're meeting or something and you don't want anything to go in or out like you could just bring something like this like like without giving their company name. Oh, I have a million of them. Yeah, okay. So you know what they are. use them anymore. Well, because I think it's useless and I think my phone's already controlled so it's like >> Well, you've been hacked, you know, you >> Many times. But to avoid being hacked, there's things you can do and and one thing that in my experience cuz I do it every day for a living is know what's out there on yourself, know what your digital footprint is, check out pentester. Sorry for being that guy, but check out pentester cuz it's worth it. Throw in your email like you know, see what comes back. Um spend spend a couple dollars to make sure that you're you're protected. Remove as much personal data about yourself as possible so you don't have to worry about somebody being able to find your address or find your information online. And uh and then take some of the stuff that I'm showing you that these devices as of right now criminals are not you know, as super sophisticated but they these younger kids that they're growing up around computers and they're going to learn about this technology uh and and this technology is only going to advance. Just continue to keep yourself in the loop and don't don't just be stagnant and think that this is never going to happen to you. Doesn't [clears throat] mean that it will, but don't be naive, you know? >> Is there any device, electronic device you would not bring inside your home? I mean, I would I I would personally, even if I didn't like the device, I would put it on what's called a virtual LAN or similar to like a guest network, how it's like kind of segre- separated. Um, you know, I I'm not super concerned about it. I even have a vacuum in my house right now that I know is sending data to a Chinese cloud server. I made a video about it and it went insane because, you know, it's China cloud server, people like that for whatever reason on the internet. And I still have the thing plugged in. I mean, I'm not worried about it because it's segregated on my network and even if the thing goes rogue, which it may, um, it can't access anything else because it's digitally locked in its little sandbox. So, but so you're not afraid that at one point the CCP is going to order it to vacuum you? Yeah, it might get my little my my baby pinky toe or something, but that's about as bad as it can So, there's no device that you would be personally afraid of having in your home? Maybe your cell phone. Yeah, I don't think you want my cell phone in your house. >> No, I don't want that one in there. [laughter] Literally. Ryan, thank you for all of this. I'm going to be thinking about it for the next week every the second I wake up in the morning. That was really dark. I hope somebody does something about those >> groups. I am sorry and I'm working as hard as I possibly can to do that. And I And I appreciate you letting me share that message on your platform because it means the world to me, more than I can even put in words. >> Thank you. Thank you for doing this. >> Thank you. >> [music]