Power pig hello. We're back. Hello. Go to bed, your little fetus. I wonder, are you? I'm 12. Call me in six years. Call me when you got some pubes. What's your name, Lisa? Lisa, do you go to middle school? Yes. Did your mom and dad still together? No. Good. How would you like to ride in a love-spudge limousine tomorrow to school when I'm your mom tomorrow night? That's some power pig stuff right there. Oh my God. I came in after the power pig days. I came in from the 98. I came in the bone days, the bone. Oh, the bone. You weren't even a 98 rocker? No, it would have been 2006. Yes, I've been the bone. Yeah, we were even crazier. I was in the back of a painting truck, money and painting truck, driving to work every morning at five, six a.m. on the back of a paint truck listening to Bubba every single morning. Now look at you at your superstar. You got more listeners. And I do check up on the gas, getting ready to get a new studio. I mean, just look at you drinking cranium drinks and nicotine patches and couches galore. God. I think you bought the whole building from the, I think you bought this whole building from the AC people, didn't you? No. No, no, no, no. We're moving out of here, bro. We got a new place up in Scientology lane. I know when you guys, when you guys start that, we've been doing construction since March and we're moving, we're trying to move in next month. Really? Yeah, we just got to finish up. What's going to be the difference? Is it going to be kind of like a Pat McAfee like kind of, you know, let me say kind of a, we got a full gym in there. We got the golf simulator going in. We got a full man cave theater with a bar, like a movie theater. Have you ever seen Tim Poole? Pops on pipe. Have you ever seen Tim Poole set up that ass? I did Tim Poole's podcast. Did you? Six months ago. Oh, no shit. In the middle of West Virginia and a big compound and you should see his, he's got like, I've seen him. I've seen him. He's got like a 10-pike. He's got a full skate park in there. Full blown. Yeah. You know, but I mean, I don't know if him and I see you and I can jive a little bit, you know, but I was really nervous there. Really? Well, because it was very political and I'm not that political, you know, and I think my buddy Alex Stein got me booked on there and they had me on. Oh, listen, great dude, great dude, big audience smart. You know what I think? Because I think he's so smart that he like, I felt stupid. You know, I mean, he's so fucking so so smart. Yeah. Yeah. He's a super smart political. He's really into the political stuff. And this month, that's like, sit shows a day. Does he really do that? He has like, Tim Poole, IRL, then Tim Poole and Censored. Oh, yeah. He's got all those different shows. Yeah. Then he's got so many point was compound. He's got just one house that's on the outside of the compound and it's got two studios in it for two different shows. And then he's got this big warehouse where the full pike and the skate park deals and the craziest thing to me about Tim Poole is like, I've always seen his interviews, like his Rogan interviews and his podcast, obviously his podcast, which is incredible. But the first time I ever saw him like not, you know, usually when you're used to seeing people talking on talk shows, you only see him from like here up and you're used to that. Right. When you see him from head to toe, it's kind of like throws you off. Yeah. And I always keep the same. He's got that same cap. Yeah. Same gimmick on the, I saw a video of him on Instagram like a year or so ago of skateboarding and he rips on a skateboard. Oh, dude. He rips like you wouldn't believe. He was, they were just over there. And I was there. They were just kind of like maybe screwing around a little bit and he was going down these rails. Yeah. And I know, you know, and then here's my fat ass who, you know, if I got on a skateboard, I break it. You know, and I'm like, I got all these skinny guys over here. I get it and stuff. I am so out of my element. You know, I'm saying, I mean, where's the buffet? Yeah, dude. Yeah, dude. It's good, though, man. It's a good dude. You know, I've not done a lot. I've not done a lot of podcasts. I know. You have just you, Tim Poole. I don't think I've done anybody else really. I may be a couple little ones. Like I think it is something. Well, the funny thing is is you had the king of podcasts on your radio show years ago, Joe Rogan, which is incredible. Oh, what a good dude. It was such a good interview too. He's talking about like doing DMT. Yeah, they can frog. Listen, frogs. He's like, what did he say? He described himself as the conduit between the stoners and the juice heads or something like that. I didn't even really, you know, I knew, you know, new of Joe from from, was it survivor or no fear, fear factor. And then I knew a stand up, you know, this is in 2008. Little did I know that, you know, he would come on to be one, you know, the, the largest in the space. Did you ever think that would even when you had him on? He told me. So when we were done, we, and at that time I was doing two shows a day, I was doing mornings on the bone, which was syndicated on like 19 or 20 stations dressed really. And then we would take a four hour break and then we would do afternoons on Sirius XM. So as I'm walking, as I'm walking, Joe out, Joe's like, Hey man, what you should do is after this show, this, this uncensored serious XM show, you should sit down for like 45 minutes you and the boys and just bullshit about anything. You know, any, anything that you didn't get to on this show, just bullshit and put it up as a podcast, make it a look kind of exclusive for people to, to get, but make it different from what you're doing. And I'm like, Joe, man, I'm so tired now. And you know, I, I, I, I got a family and everything. I don't even know anything about this podcasting or whatever. He's like, just, just think about it. Man was I stupid for not listening. You know, I should, I should jump right on it. But he's caught what, what a, what a brilliant mind and what a, what a great career. The crazy thing about him to me is that he's like, not only is he at the top, not, not just podcasting. I mean, he did the half of a media. And he gets more downloads and views than all media combined. But he also is the number one, like he does out of all the podcasts. I think he puts out more than any other podcast or he'd literally record four or five days of what he's, he has got. He's, he's, he's, he's pop culture now. Meaning like if you want your message delivered or you are one and a what's going on in the world or one to be able to think outside the media box, the, you know, the standard, then you go to Joe and everybody, I mean, the numbers are a stunt astronomical and he has become, you know, I worked for Howard, you know, I, I, and I don't ever speak ill, ill, I only have Howard, but he is the king of media. I mean, Joe Rogan is the new, I don't know if he's the new, I think it's been, it's been that way for a while. But he also still is still like just an absolute rock star on, on UFC, you know, I mean, he doesn't really need that. If, you know, if he, if he, but he must, he just absolutely loves it. And I mean, you know, he, he's, he sells out, you know, arenas for his comedy. Yeah. So, and then, and he made the best decision of all is getting the kind of California and going to Texas. So God bless him. Man, what a good dude. Yeah, man. He is, he is absolutely on fire. But like for you, what has it been like, because you were the, you were the equivalent of, I mean, you weren't like Howard Stern level, but you were like, actually during my, when we were at, if you, when I know that you've watched the documentary, yeah, and there was a time where my call volume was larger than Howard's when I worked with him. Now, at that time, they didn't have a way to gauge, they didn't have Nielsen or arbitron or anything. And they still don't, but they didn't have a way, the only way they would gauge how good a show was doing was how many attempted callers. Now, I don't know if that's the right way to gauge or not, but at one time, I had more people attempting to call my show than Howard. Now, you can attribute that a little bit to maybe mornings, first afternoons. People in afternoon might be more likely to call than in the morning when they're first waking up. You know, my one of the reasons why SiriusXM got rid of me is because I posed a threat to Howard. Oh, really? And if you watch the documentary, you know, my agent says, you know, why would Howard want me on his channel, went for pennies on the dollar? Because Howard Howard's manager, Don Buckwald, who's now dead, told Tim Sabian who was the president of Howard's channels when they were getting rid of me. They're like, listen, management at SiriusXM's going to use Bubba against us in negotiation. Why do we, why can, why do we have to pay Howard a hundred million when we can pay Bubba five million and get nearly the same audience? So that's why I got off from SiriusXM. That's a lot of people don't know that. And I've not told that story anywhere. But you know, I have validation through the guy Tim Sabian who ran the channels who was the program director of Howard 10101 and was part of getting me fired. And that was one of the reasons why they fired me. That's such a crazy thing how that media landscaped, the, the, the, just like the talk media landscape has shifted so much because it, that, that sounds like such a petty way of doing business, like a such a, a weird sort of, you're talking about, you know, hundreds of millions of dollars now. So you're talking about like they're paying me a million five. Yeah. And they're paying Howard a hundred million. So, I mean, you know, there's a, there's a lot at stake there. So Howard, right. People, Howard's agent needs to protect that hundred million. And he's got a guy in here, some white trash motherfucker from Florida that's doing it for a million five. And he's afraid management's going to come to him and say, listen, Buckwald, we got numb nuts Bubba doing it for a million five. Why do we want to pay Howard a hundred million? Right. So such a, it's the numbers are, the reason why it's so cutthroat is because the numbers are astronomical. Mm hmm. As far as what Howard was making. Right. And that all of the viewers are on this one specific platform during this one specific time. And it's a subscription thing. It's not, it's, it's the complete opposite of YouTube basically. And it, and it's not nearly as sexy now as it was then, you know, and I know, right. In 0 7 0 8, you know, Sirius XM was about the sexiest person on the dashboard. You know, as far as dashboard real estate, I mean, you know, you, it wasn't as easy to pipe your Google play or, you know, your Apple I2 is through your dashboard as it is now. I mean, every car now is it, you know, you Bluetooth in and there you are. I can listen to you guys. I can listen to Rogan. I can listen to any, you know, Adam Corole. I can listen to anybody. I don't have to listen. I don't have to be hooked up to a signal per se. I just have to have cell service. And so now what Sirius XM was in 0 7 0 8, super sexy on the dashboard has now become right here. You got to have, you got to deliver your content to to this device in order to be relevant. Right. I mean, you know, whether it's YouTube, you know, whether it's podcasting, most of it's aggregated through a cell phone. And then when you have to do, when you have to publish all of your stuff on social media and your show has to live on social media and be in competition with millions of other shows that are doing the same exact thing. And there's so much shit out. I'm looking for the member back in the 90s where they had the dot com bubble burst. So they had the dot com craze and everybody had a dot com. They had white by ass dot com. They had every dot com you can think of. And, and these dot coms were making, you know, lots of money within the, then it burst. Then the dot com bubble burst and only the good punched through. Only the relevant stuff on the dot com world punch through. I'm, I don't know if I'll be around, but I think that that's going to happen with podcasting. I think podcasting is becoming so watered down. And so much shit out there that I think eventually all these people that are producing shit are going to quit because they don't realize that making money and podcasting is not as easy as just two people bull. It's, it's a slow burn. It's the right guest. It's the right host. It's the right, you know, it's aggregating through the right channels. It's the right algorithm. It's the right hashtag. It's the right everything. And the average person who gets fired from radio or whatever thinks that they can just star or any or anybody that has a hundred dollars can go rent a podcast studio. And they think instantaneously they're going to have a huge audience. And so I, podcasting I still thinks needs the kind of cleanse the shit moment because there's just so much shit out there. Yes. It does also when you are good and you have a following, it makes it, you know, it makes it that much more special when you do have the numbers to back up a good podcast. Right. And the other way so much different than radio is that like it's not like if I get a million views and I, there's another guy who has a podcast next door to me who gets a million million views. Like it's not like, hey man, I want to come promote you or talk about your show. it's like I have to give up any of my listeners for you to get my listeners. Right. Right. There's high castings more genuinely than terrestrial cutthroat radio. Exactly. So it's like, you know, it's more like, you know, it's more like, it's more like the way it used to be back in the old times when you try to help out your neighbor rather than to, you know, be in at war with your neighbor. You want to help your guy. And if you think he's cool or, you know, because you've established your crowd and they're going to come, they're not leaving your brand, you know, but if you can help a buddy out, who's cool and can bring something to the table? Podcasting tends to be more like that than any other forum of media. You know, like terrestrial radio, it's all about cutthroat man. If I'm losing, if my listeners not listening to me, ex amount of listeners, you're not sharing them. There's only 17, 18, 19 radio stations and I got to have that guy on my channel. Yeah. You know, whereas podcasting seems to be the buddy system a little bit, a little bit. You know, now there's people that have huge numbers that aren't going to help the guy that's got, you know, 314 followers, you know, but, but, but you have to the standout people like Joe Rogan, who's like the number one in the world who has nobody's on his show. Right. Literally nobody's just because he wants to help them and because he thinks that they have some sort of interesting. And they're interesting. Right. I think that's what Joe really cares the most about. You know, I don't think Joe looks at numbers as much as he looks at the message. You know, what, what, you know, because he'll get into some deep shit and it's really interesting. And the guy is not really even, you know, promoting his channel or promoting what he's got going. He's just very interesting. And I think Joe is probably one of the best at sniffing through what's good and what's not right. Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video back to the show. So about, I don't know, was it three months ago? You said me the video, the first video I think you ever published about Hogan being in the sick or being in the hospital. I was the first and only guy to go on on on out on a limb and say that he was going to die June 18th June 18th. I remember right today, and he sent it to me the day he posted it. I'm like, Bubba is losing his shit. And like Bubba is doing anything. Everybody was out. Everybody thought I was trying to get some trash. I heard it all got clout, chaser, clickbader, irrelevant, you know, desperate, the whole nine yards. They don't realize that I had some very good insources. Now I've befriended Brooke recently, but Brooke wasn't my resource. I had, I had, I had people within the hospital. You know, you know when you're on to something. And a lot of times then you kind of have the, the, the Johnny come lately effect. So if you're on to something and you're first on a particular topic, then a lot of times that will lead to other people jumping on and giving you intel as well. Yes. So I actually even had the valet guy at Morton Plant that was calling me and letting me know the comings and goings as to who's going to a regular order. Yeah. Wow. That's where Hogan was the, his last stint was at Morton Plant prior to that. He was a Tampa general. But so how did this start? It started with a email to the show on my show. And it just said, Hey, I work at Tampa general. Please do not say my name, but Hogan, Hulk Hogan, your friend is not doing well. And that's all it was. And at that point, the guy, I should have probably said the person. So I mean, but I mean at this point, Hogan's dead, but the guy gave me his information to call him. So I did my show the next day. This is like June 16th. And I did my show the next day. And I called the dude. And he's like, listen, Hogan is on air. No, no, off air. Okay. Completely off air. Okay. I mean, I didn't go on air till June 18th. That was the first day. I called this dude up. I tried to vet him. Where do you work? What do you do at Tampa general? Like why would you be privy to this? I was more skeptical than anything. I'm just, I just wasn't there. I just wasn't there. Just tell me some information for me to go to air with because. Yeah, that's dangerous, right? Yeah, I mean, Hogan's look to trust me. I know Hogan's looketages and his family's looketages as I'm going through a federal gag order right now with the deal. And so I knew I just couldn't come out with the information that guys given me is like bull in my mind. He's like, you don't understand. They're calling family members telling them to get their ass to the hospital because you may not see Hogan again. I mean, he is on all these, you know, all these machines and he's having problems with complications from heart valves and the guys go, the guys all over the place. So I sat on it for a day. This was like on the, this would be the, I came out on the 18th. So this would have been like maybe like the 15th or 16th. And I sat on it on a day. I sat on it and I tried to get another source to verify and I couldn't. I couldn't. And so I start looking at Hogan's friends and what they're saying and Jimmy Hart's like saying, Oh, Hogan's great and this kind of stuff. Yeah. I had one of my, one of my producers called Hogan's, um, uh, his restaurant, Hogan's hang on, whatever the hell is going and asked if he was going to be at that karaoke that Monday night. And they're like, no, he's not going to be here. Uh, he's, you know, out of town or something. Why knew he wasn't out of town? I knew he was in the hospital. I did know that. So I just kind of took a leap of faith with what the guy told me and I got on the air and I think the actual verbiage was if you do some sniffing around at a local hospital here and I tried to use everything in radio that I've been taught for 40 years on how to cover your ass in my opinion and cover my sources. So I said, if you do some sniffing around in a local hospital, it's my opinion. I don't know it to be true, but it's on my opinion and I think and I've been told, and again, I don't know it to be true that Hogan's in a hospital here locally in Tampa. And he's not doing well. And I think family sources have family, have been called to come in and say, good, they're good boys. So with that, I got more and more brazen and I continue to get more and more information from this one particular source, but then I got another source. And my other source is like, hey, I heard you say in this about Hogan. Here's what I know because I'm close to the source as well. And it just kind of bred itself. So I got more and more brazen. So where I started, I was like in broadcasting, if you say something wrong, malicious, slanderous, liable about somebody, the first thing that goes down is you get a 770 notice. And so like if I said something about Danny Jones, and it was just completely untrue, like Danny Jones is natural. Danny Jones is on only Fred Flintstone vitamins. And that's it. What the f***ing blatant lie? I'm suing. Exactly. No, but if I said something like really bad, like Danny Jones is a kid-toucher. I mean, I'm talking about something really bad. Like I went to the island. Right. You're hanging out with Epstein. You know, so, but if I said something completely, this 100% false defamatory slanderous liable, then your attorney would be sending me a 770 notice, which means what I said was untrue. And you're putting me on notice to retract that. And it's, you know, or I'm going to be, you know, I have one shot, because he's an assist. It's worse. It's more than that because it's not only do I have to stop, but I have to retract what I said and correct what I said. So that's what a 770 notice is. That's just from being in the business so long. So I knew at that point I get on the air and I'm like, listen, Hogan's people out there. If Hogan isn't in a hospital bed and he's doing okay and he's not gravely sick, then send me a 770, shut me up, make me be quiet. Because what I'm hearing is he's not doing well at all. here's this and this and this and this and every day I would say send me a 770. If I'm wrong, well, a lawyer can't send you a 770 if you're not wrong. If you're not wrong, they can't make you shut up. They can't say it being your being slanderous or liable or anything like that. They just got to take it and they're and they get real mad that they got a leak within their little world. And so I just kept going on and on and then I got in tell that they transported him in the middle of the night. He was at Morton plant from at that point. They transferred him in the middle of the night over the weekend. How long was he at Morton plant for him? I don't know. I don't know. I think about a week. I don't know exactly how long he was at Morton plant, but I do know when they transported him. They took him home like on a Friday via ambulance and he was doing well through the weekend. Eric Bischoff saw them on Monday. Jimmy Hart saw them on Wednesday and he died on Thursday. And you know, I had reports that he was home resting. They didn't send any machines home with them. They just sent a hospital bed home with him so he could be more comfortable. So at that point they I think the hospital assumed one or two things either they assumed. Either one, he's too far gone and we can't help him. And I'm only assuming this. I don't know what to be true. But two, he's getting better and he might maybe pull through this because they didn't have any ventilation. They didn't have a breathing machine. They didn't have him traked. They didn't have him on any any extravagant machines. He just had this little like he had a respiratory therapist come in once a day, once a day and do respiratory exercises with him. And that's all he had. So he was like fully conscious and awake and 100% 100% you know, eating, you know, and then Wednesday night he went to bed. He was sleeping in a recliner and he was sleeping in a recliner in the in the living room. That's where he was most comfortable. And you know, Skye his wife found him dead in the morning. I think there was a respiratory therapist and another male nurse there reporting for their duty that morning. And I think when they got there at 9, 11 or whatever time they had found Terry dead. And he was supposedly dead dead like when he's sleeping up like when they they gave him two shots in Narcan in case there was an opiate over it. I thought I speculated on the air that it was that he had taken too many pain pills and we've lost 38 wrestlers in the last 10 years over people to opioids and alcohol. So I thought maybe that was and I was on the air heavy with that. But then, you know, Brooke came down to Clearwater and met with the medical examiners. And later, you know, pretty much was satisfied with their investigation. So that's when I kind of laid off, you know, I thought maybe she was satisfied with it. Brooke was. Yeah. So at that point, I kind of laid off and just let him rest in peace and knowing my documentaries coming out and, you know, and like your best, I go, you timed your documentary to coincide with Hogan's death. I've been trying to get this documentary out since the last time I was, I mean, what was that two years ago when I saw you? Yeah. We were talking about it two years ago and I had the wrong filmmaker at the time. I had a guy who I had a group of people that were putting it together. It's not my documentary. It's theirs. And so I just felt two years ago we weren't just, I just didn't have the glue to tell the story. And we got a local guy who has had some stuff published on Netflix and he named Ian Laanjan and he was kind of the difference maker. He really, really knew the story. And he put, he was the glue to kind of put this very convoluted story and very long and kind of hard to understand story together. And, you know, we premiered last Friday and we're dropping today on Amazon, Google Play, and then of course Apple TV. It's a great documentary. I want you to be. I want you to be a long one too, freaking it. Almost three hours. No, two, two, two, two, 29. Two, 29. Two, 29. I wish I watched it, you know, at the premiere and I think we could have cut out 15 or 20 minutes. I think we could have. I think we were redundant and maybe repetitive on some things. But, you know, it's such a long story. Initially they wanted us to do, we wanted to do three episodes of like 48 minutes. And then when we started submitting it to the aggregators, the documentary game is such a dirty game. It's not just you make a doc and send it. You know, you have to get it. You have to send it to pop, you have to send it to copyright and fair use attorneys. You got to get insurance on it. Then you have to get an aggregator that's going to publish it to these different platforms. And so it's a, it's a pretty quite, quite a long process. So when we were given it to the aggregators, they're like, listen, we're not going to, you're not going to be able to have a trailer for three episodes. The only way you can have a trailer is if you, if you would combine them. And we're like, oh, it's going to make for a pretty long, long, you know, deal. So that's why it would be. He's been like a trailer for the whole series. I, I don't know. Maybe you have to be a bigger slinger dick, sling and dick than me in order to get a trailer for a three part series, but they wouldn't, they wouldn't give us a trailer. And I'm like, listen, the trailer is everything. You've got, I mean, I, I determine whether I'm going to watch something based on the trailer. Yeah. I mean, right. That are the thumbnail. Yeah. I mean, I mean, even when I'm looking at porn, I look at the thumbnail and if it's, you know, if it's, if it's granny, no, and if it's some hot milk, yes, you know, I mean, it's thumbnail and trailers was what determined everything. Mm hmm. Yeah, that's true. So going back to the, going back to the, the hooking things. What was the actual like catalyst that sent him in there in the first place? Well, he, he had a heart valve replacement. And he didn't have problems with that, but he had what they call, he had a neck and neck and cervical operation. And that requires them to put a plate behind your, in the back of your neck with eight screws that go into this plate that, that stabilizes the back of your neck. And he was, was supposed to be bedridden four to six weeks. So after you have this cervical neck fusion, you're supposed to be in a, what they call a Vegas brace. And that's just this basic, the middle of those, those, those foam rubber kind of gimmicks. You're supposed to be in one of the, You're supposed to be in a what they call a Vegas brace and that's just this basically the middle of those Those foam rubber Kind of gimmicks you're supposed to be in one of those for two months and you're supposed to be taken it easy and Hogan goes and gets this surgery. There's eight screws in the back of his neck They have bone cement and everything in there and it's a very fragile equation and what does he do? He's being pushed by his beer companies being pushed by his new wrestling Federation and instead has been in four to six weeks bed rest He spends 46 hours at home and there's already out in Milwaukee and Green Bay and But Michigan doing these three and four hour personal appearances for his beer and he starts his His neck operation doesn't really have an opportunity to fuse and to heal itself because you know You're sleeping in hotel bedrooms and you're standing up for hoe guns one big thing is when he would do an autograph session He would never sit he always prided himself on standing because it made him bigger than life You know you you know he's you know So it made it makes you bigger than life right rather than just sitting so he you know That was his gimmick and so he's standing for three and four hours at a time whole and he had a and Terry had a Huge head. Yeah, I mean his head probably weighed 40 pounds. Yeah, he had a big ass head big head big star Yeah, and so had he listened to his his doctors and not been on the road You know 46 hours after a major operation He probably would have been in better situation So I wonder why he knew that operation the first place is not like he was like very active You know and as in his family I've been told by pretty good sources that his family actually argued with him and said Terry just live with the pain because they knew They knew the complication rate of this particular aggressive procedure They knew and he had already had a ton of neck surgeries. Oh, he had ton of back Never really with this neck. Okay, so but his neck and they go through the front. Yeah, they go through the front And he had neck surgery and he had like he had numbness in his hands Yeah, and stuff like that and and yeah, and are you tell me all the times like I can't even feel my fingers right and so most of his family from Nick to Brooke to Skye They were telling him Terry just live you've lived you know, you're you're 71 years old You've lived with having numbness in your fingers, you know, don't get this neck surgery. Don't get it. Yeah, it's it's We've talked to doctors. It's very risky and you're not gonna stay you're not gonna sit still The way you're supposed to so don't do it So he instantaneously now gets off the road and he has Complications with this with this procedure because he didn't do what they told him to and that was kind of the downward spiral And how is that connected with the valve replacement? I don't know that it was oh, okay I don't know that it was I They had to go back in and do a revision on the next surgery and you have to understand now you're under again You know and anytime you go in or under anesthesia They you know they make you sign those forms that you could die. I mean if you just go in for up You know colonoscopy, you know and if they put you under they're gonna make you sign a form because you're at risk of Dying you used to be the guy that had to go in with them during your surgeries I actually when we were really rolling hard One of the procedures I went into was in Buffalo Dr. Ripeishi did a half knee on him and Hogan was so worried about Because he was such a star and he was so worried about taking pictures of his dick when he's taking pictures of his dick that That I would screw up in and so you got to understand you know in order for a Hospital or a doctor to even allow this is mind boggling because you know most hospitals and doctors You're gonna say hey, I'm gonna bring my buddy in with me. They're like No, you're not but he was all cogan people made exceptions for him So I would scrub in and have to do the do the five minute nails Can me want I'm just in the corner making sure they're not taking pictures of his dick I'm not touching the body. I'm not yeah, I'm from here to the door from him But I'm just making sure that you know I did that three different times but I don't know that the neck surgery necessarily caused his death You know they say you died of a of a heart attack with the complications of the heart valve It also was disclosed that he had leukemia. Oh, yeah at the time out of love, you know, which is what is blood cancer and I'd you know Brooke I've talked to Brooke extensively and that was news to her News to news to everybody nobody nobody knew that that he was dealing with that and and people don't even know that he knew it at the time I mean it was certainly Obvious that he didn't look well in the last few Yeah, he did that's a friend. Yeah. It really gone real. Yeah. Yeah, and he You know it he did and now see at the RNC though He looked pretty good and then from the RNC to where we ended up He just had a downward spiral and I think that that's At the RNC. I don't know if the head is neck hardware done at that time or not But it seems like the neck hardware complication is what spiraled him down to looking like the way he did on Fox and Friends And the other thing is I think they were working in literally the expression Working him to death. I think they were working him to death. I mean that he was he was working He was not you have enough money though. Like why why you're that you're how old was he 80? You know he's 71 because he's other than I hate to talk bad about my former friend But because he's a he's the one of the biggest narcissists that you'll ever meet in your entire life He always had to be on the go He always had to be the center of attention There was his family and other good people telling him Terry you got you've won 60 some million dollars from this sex tape, right? You know you you got 25 million dollars in properties you got every Plymouth and mopar and collector car you could ever want you got three memorabilia shops You got a restaurant and a bar you got everything you could ever want more money than you could so much Sleep in go to the gym jack your dick. I don't give a All right, so but take care of your body. You don't need to be in Shaboy again Wisconsin at 430 meet in 300 Congese heads so they'll buy 10 cases of beer right? Like stop the beer was already in publics like what more do you need to do? Well, he had great distribution with his beer. I never actually had it. I would like to try it Yeah, I haven't I haven't had I heard it's very I heard it's kind of a little thicker Miller light is what I heard My arms pretty good. Um, I don't know what this I know that right after he died There was a run on you know people trying to get it. I don't know if if they've restock That's a story in itself He originally had a deal with anhizer bush and Which is owned by what they think in bev now? Well, I'm by like a Danish company and he had a deal with with one of the original bushes You know are they the bush family still has a lot to do with it And he had a deal to do of you know a beer a Hogan type beer with with one of the bushes and two of the store I've been told two of the highest ranking people underneath the bush guy Stole Terry away with a better deal Quit anhizer bush and started the Terry beer the hogan good. Yeah, that's that's what I was told Wow, and I think if you research it you'll find that such a such a crazy world And he was just like constantly either you know since I since I met him which would have been I mean I I mean since I started working with him Which would have been I don't remember what year that would have been it was during the the The host of mania stuff when you were in the hosting company right right Shootin all those commercials. It was this like how did that do did that do anything? I? I think it ended up dying right or I don't know what I don't know why they stopped doing it but I think the hosting the whole web hosting like industry consolidated and It just wasn't I don't know it wasn't financially viable anymore. So they're just kind of right. That's not a sexy space anyway. No Hasting you know Hogan needs to be in space a bunch of like a Vegas Even with flair. I was on under a bunch of I I'd all these like crazy like little web conventions out in in Las Vegas we went to and he would sit there and he would sit there all day signing on a garage people and like and You know, I think that I think that just general industry kind of like well Hold it needs to be in a public space and hosting is not a public space You know, I mean you got stream guys now and you got some major players. You know a One cares about websites nobody gives a fuck about who's hosting your website exactly no means you know you go ask 90% of the Go daddy, but that's what they're gonna go daddy. I mean, you know, they're they're the Walmart hosting right And I don't even know that they host they'll just build it for you and get your domain But like Hogan needs to be in and sexy Hogan needs to be in a space that a white trash dude from Indiana is gonna be in Yes, my shirt says the finest straight of Indiana white trash so beautiful, but that's his P1 meaning his number one target audience is probably a 55-year-old male That's so if a 55-year-old white male Likes whatever product you have then maybe maybe Terry was good for your product, right other than that You know Terry Terry doesn't need to be in the hosting business. Well, I heard that his uh His biggest regret as far as like promoting products go was the the grill Because George for my god is there for that. Oh, were you oh, yeah, he was taking his kids to St. Cecilia school and this guy this guy who brokers Products call calls him and says listen I need an answer now I got a blender and I got a grill and Hogan goes, you know, what do you mean? Like what kind of grill? It's just grill where it's slanted And you put your hamburger or you're chicken on it and it slides the grease slides down into this tray And Hogan goes give me the blender I do I do protein shakes and and shit like that So the blender will give me the blender so they did the Hulk Hogan blender, which was this piece of shit blender that The Hulk Hogan blender and and then he he actually it was his choice before they went to George for George Foreman got the grill by default He got the full because Hogan picked the fucking blender. Oh and Hogan told he's told the story I've heard him tell yeah, he's told the story if he just would have paid attention Yeah under mixer. Look that's what the fuck he got and and and George I think George made what 300 million dollars. I mean it pull up what George Foreman's made on Yeah, I mean it's something like just more than he ever could have found them right. What year was that? Oh, God? That would have been like 96 97 Yeah, yeah, you know, but I was so I saw him that day This was in the morning. I saw him that day. He's like hey, man. I got a new blender coming out I go really he goes yes, I'm this dude, you know, Danny McGillicuddy who represents Rep. C's products Here we go George Foreman grill was used to cook A lot of blah blah blah. He didn't invent the grill. He was famous for the Well, he received 40% share of the profits which at its peak meant he was earning millions of dollars a month over 200 million in total 200 million I see Hogan he goes I got a blizzender coming out Hey, what they want me to do some stupid grill bullshit, but I got some blizzender. So we'll be mixing up our shit really good I'm like We didn't even know what the grill was yeah I mean, so we didn't even know if the grill was stupid or not We just know we had a blender coming, you know, and this blender was cheap bullshit It couldn't even get through an ice cube. You know, okay, look at it. Look at a three little whipping on there Yeah, it was just completely bullshit. Oh my god, bro. That's not small. Yeah, it was teeny tiny What's like a can't even put two eggs in there? So yeah, I was with him during that deal. We in And that's always been that's always been a rib that we've ribbed him for yeah, I mean it was bullshit Blown away Look at those three little wires down there. Hogan Hogan got the first one they sent him like 10 Right and he used the first one he couldn't even whip up his comprotein like it wouldn't even whip it up like efficiently Do I remember the grill too? I had Everything on every single household Every one beef hash on the fucking everybody matters on it like it was a Not only do we all have them. We've probably had multiple one. Yeah. Oh, yeah, because they more thin Better things, you know, yeah Yeah, they had two for no it didn't just target people who were George for my friend my mom Bob George Jordan had nothing My mom was a frickin I'm a bad one. My grandma is for fine art. She was a fine artist George Congrillshing keep in her door Up a bunch of you know, you know, you want to do exactly Yeah, it's just like these super celebrities just being you know just Prostolatizing all of these products non-stop was this always such a weird thing to me, you know sales It's just like and even now, you know, there's a few guy like Logan Paul's one of the guy now. It's all meme coins all bit coin It's all Crypto shit crypto scams and and now you got you know Logan Paul but hasn't the NFT didn't I hit the wall? I'm mad, I mean, they're still doing coins Remember from I got two up in all his kids doing their own coins remember for while they were doing those Metarverse and you could buy a Health and meta verse in meta verse in a nightclub and all this kind of bullshit Was gonna be where people go and live their life in the medley And I'm like if my life is so bad in real life that I got to go live digitally It's time to eat a bullet Listen, I'm a nobody here in Tampa, but motherfucker. I'm the king of meta world I'm a meta world 10. I'm the fair mayor. I mean like what the fuck you loser Yeah, it might be cool, Bubba. I mean what if you could go in there? You could be you know, you could be six foot six Jack 20 inch dicks I mean I mean gods until last time I saw you I bet you went curl from curling 50 pounds to 150. I mean look at I'm Look you got a save in your arms. I've looked the same not a shave your own. What am I gay? No, you can striations motherf- What striations with the sistriations like I don't have any too fat, but a ripple Oh, no, I'm not gonna hold on look at your fucking gorilla arm. It's not a gorilla No, but first of all arm it was what happened to be that you are light-haired so that does help that you're light-haired Yeah, it's a little light-haired. It's so much it's such a cleaner look when you don't have all that fucking hair there And I'm not even unlike three days stubble right now, but like that's like your wife would appreciate it's like that Yeah, we don't do that anymore, Bubba. I think you're fisting her, but I'm just saying like I mean, you know like It's just a better presentation. No, I want to keep the hair the girl my wife likes hair for the show Started I gave you a little a little little little tidbit You need it you really need to just listen. What's the worst? It'll grow back shave your arms? one time and see if your girl likes it. How about your chest? I have chest hair. I have chest hair Yeah, you don't shave no hell no. I like the hair. I like the way it looks. How much do you got? Oh, no, not enough See you're a little blonde twink I'm not like super covered in hair. I'm not like an Italian meal, but if you would shave your arms your wife would really like No, I'm not doing that. Why why get your heart headed about I don't like the way it feels I've shaved him when I was in high school. I tried shaving my legs in my own Not not is that your fucking legs. I mean gee, I see you get up. You have to good thing up You went so far my step if you want to stuck to your arms. You've been go my brother I don't shave my legs. I mean all right, right. Yeah, but my brother went high school It was like huge and elliptic still is and he would always shave his legs at his arms and So my arms look good as I tried it once and I and I hear the way it felt it feels so weird I can't explain the way it feels but I'm not I don't it's uncomfortable Plus you like you know hard headed you gotta have a little wonder your successful I mean I'm just telling you The the hair is the women like the hair better. Oh, they don't yes, they do no. Okay. Let me ask you a question What about your bush any woman who's under your bush? My shit's completely down to the side keep it trimmed No, no down to zero right down to zero like a hardwood. No, no, no back in high school You have it on your what you know? What do you mean back in high school? But not anymore? I think that was that was in back in high school back in like the tooth that when we were in high school in the 2000s Yeah, yeah, I mean what would change what has changed? Your wife I got older you think she wants that yeah, she likes the hair have you asked her yeah She tells me she tells me she says I know she says I don't like it when you shave it down to the skin I like some I like a little bit of hair down there. She's like stubble. Yeah, your blossomer. She gets that razor Yes No, she doesn't like the razor burn. That's why she likes a little bit a little bit hairy not the stubble. She likes it longer than stubble like astro turf Kind of like astro turf. Yeah, get her on a long Bermuda grass. She's like me to braid it but hey She likes it like the golf course they got a moi Yeah, and all the years like a nice fair way A guest ever got you to talk about your pubic air never your the First of all your your what you're one of one a rare one of one It's hottest Bubba likes a cold can we can we can we take it down? Oh, you skinny guys in here. I mean You told me that's why Happy I can't wait for Danny to try my my new cocktail my Content host cocktail Because that's you know you got to try it then you got a text me and be like Yes or no like you know give me a bearing as War just the level of the quarter milligrams of out of all and I want to be necessarily be talking about this shit on the air Oh, okay, we'll cut it out. I mean yeah fuck. I want to give everybody we don't want to get everybody in secret Okay, all right, we won't tell everybody be as cool. Okay, 15 milligrams or something and then a half of another Fuck off He doesn't listen when he's supposed to But arm shaving and shit like look at you though your sashwatch too. We have he is You's food bar bro tell the story without me or that you can't shame the other day concrete clam was at a barbecue their day with his girlfriend and Some dude walks by so white trash concrete clam was at a barbecue with his girlfriend And we're talking to him with an arm sling right now and a ochallis Speedway race track t-shirt I mean it doesn't get any fucking largette. Oh, then that So concrete clam is at a barbecue with his girlfriend He said a barbecue on the trade wins and St. Pete Beach with his girlfriend. Oh, that's piffy up a little bit It gets it gets so much better. Okay, so his girlfriend's sister Something to some family member of his girlfriend is having a their four-year-old's birthday party Okay, simultaneously, they're there in a family gimmick. Yeah, yeah, really good after the backs. I do You know, no for you can throw that back in old girl's face. Listen. I went to motherfucking four-year-old birthday party for you How about some head all weekend and it was there maybe two and it was their announcement of their that their pregnant They're having a new baby, right? So they're now the him or the other other other part of coming So they're celebrating a four-year-old in their announcing their pregnant. Yep, exactly It's a big deal and and a random friend of them There's dude who's been like a lifelong friend walks by and grabs his girlfriend's ass in front of him grab concrete concrete Clem's yeah, no his girlfriend's ass No, his girlfriend. Yes. Yeah, this dude grabbed her ass Just big old handful gave her like a smack and then they're at the top of the water slide trying to pull Quick one yeah, yeah, yeah, she's on this side He's over here. They're getting ready to go down the slide little divider He gives her a boom and jumps down the slide. That's it. It's a little boom. That's I mean concrete You made it sound like worse than that Worst is it got to get come. I mean, let me show you how bad it can get watch well No, I know how bad it can get but how bad does it let him grab your ass I think he was doing like that and then I mean Just if he just give you my little maybe he's love of slip the finger in there There's no finger slipping, but I mean you barely grab my ass. Yeah, I mean, let's a big deal He's just like hey buddy. Come on. Well look I confront him. I asked him about it He instantly swelled up on me ready to fight would you say hey buddy? Why'd you back girl? My girl said yo just touched my girl. What's going on? Yeah, it's all in that Adicley started with a bad job to f bomb shows you how old are you concrete clim 37 see here a young gun You got way too much testosterone. I mean hey almost as much as any he's on he's on twice I don't look You might want to change brands yeah, I'm gonna get on the day and get on the day Jones, I'm behind the crutch fitness. I'm a I'm gonna go I might need the Bubba cocktail You got you don't I get my test public's what do you mean? Pollock's pharmacy public My god, I'm gonna pass over the counter my doctor. Oh, you get a prescription you get a prescription Okay, that's a lot of money. That's what no it doesn't it to $38.00. Can cope a gone. Dany piece like three grand a month or some TRT special fob six million your doctor, you know, but so anyway He grabbed so you why didn't you do this approach? Hey buddy. Did you grab my girls ass? Yeah, I didn't call the pet I said hey. Yo, he was walking away. I said did you touch my girl? And then I wasn't happy about it was eight meals de instantly turn to eight about eight. Okay He turns around he gets ready to fight it's ready to fight. Thank you I like that guys approach So what happens? You got the arms ling and what's how he rolled it? He already had I got a bad shoulder I go to he swells up on me. It's a little bigger than me too So I can't let him hem me up. I got injuries. I can't really fight. I got bad shoulder You got your girl looking at you His shoulders been known to pop out. Yeah, my shoulders popped out a lot So I want that concrete stuff he comes charging at me and I go to throw punch in my shoulder pops out So I grab my shoulder paper time Once he notices I'm injured he starts charging me good. So I give him a kick round I left as a kick I got to keep him away from me because if he grabs me up him So I give him a couple of kids so cops I give him a couple of kicks once it ahead One to the head up to the head to the body. I'm tall man So once he realizes I'm not letting him get close enough to get me a kind of ghost from Mary's You and your and your pink bathing suit shorts and you Did you have pink yeah, I think they suit on man You're overpaying for your task and you win I mean concrete clean my just what I thought I could maybe say I'm out here pouring yards I don't got the podcast like style man. I mean you should You know, I mean he's assistant. I mean you should be Danny calls me pick me up to white rabbits from the gas station bubbles on the way I was there's a $40 a piece. Yeah, he said get me a case. I second only for two Concrete claim you need to you need to infuse yourself into the any Jones world. That's what you need He's corn me concrete countertops for the new warehouse My guys I built that same thing Well, let's get you something no I The mood for anything you're swinging by you can't even buy the right test by the Get through a guy a bone over here. So hold on so now The guy the guy can Doesn't whip your ass, but he grabs your girls ass tells you about it. Yeah, gives you a couple Let alone you as yeah, and then she out on your shorts. Yeah Exactly and then I weren't ended no That's the one end of that he's his kids there too His kids sees me give him a couple kicks his kids gets frantic says I'm calling the cops He runs back to the family there at the Cabana at the pool. We're on the beach right here Nobody's even there seeing it go down right So I'm like you know what he's leaving he's going back. I'm like put him out of here I'm just gonna give my car keys I'm getting a fatter away because you're scared. You're scared I got nobody with me man, and your scared The cops are coming cops are coming. You know now. It's gonna play out on the bad guy right now So I'm out of you got eight whatever's in yeah, yeah, I got a drink My scallomie or is in me peanut colada. What about a girl? No, no, oh girl's black down drunk black down. She even know her ass grab She doesn't understand even what's going. What's happening? What's happening? Which is even worse? Why you shouldn't I? Nobody to back up for me. So anyway, I'm like put a belief to everybody the family everybody I'm out of here I know the room to get my car keys. They're not there I realized they're at the cabana where everybody's at and you're probably borderline frantic at this. Oh, France I'm sweating bullets. I'm fucking I'm so burnt up. You know why he's got more witnesses. Yeah, yeah, something bad shot. So I Realize my keys are at the cabana where they're all at So I'm like this is gonna be a tough one. Can I sneak my keys out of there in front of everybody and get the fuck out of here? So I put a hoodie on and change my clothes. I go down You fucking you in a bomber now. I'm looking and I see him over there huddled up by the cabana I see my bag. Oh, they're getting destroyed together. They're over there. He's over there Cored this is how it's all gonna go down everything happens. That's drunk. He's no back. I got no back up The twig shoulder just popped down So I go over there. I snaked the bag. I put over my shoulder I get out I got my hoodie on I walk all the way from the pool which is on the beach side I don't know where she's at right now. You know you fuck. No, I'm out here You're leaving her too everybody. Okay. Go on. She's no help to me right now. Right. You got a chance to tell you a lot Billy to me right exactly so I gotta even know that I gotta get the hell out of there So I go sneak the bag throw in my short I walk out I get past the pool through the lobby to the parking lot Out of nowhere. I just get mail-aid in the back of the head boom All my shit go spilling every room my phone. I get like knocked out I'm concussed I get up the families in my face grabbing me by the shoulders. Why would you do this? Fuck you You're this you're that he's trying to fucking fight me still to brother-in-law is ready to fight me the mother-in-law is ready to fight me to sister I leave my phone. I leave everything I got my keys in my hand. I run no shirt on nothing No shoes no shirt. This is straight kiddos city shit. Oh, yeah, right? I run to the car again the car I leave but they got your phone they got everything Yeah, did you get you didn't get arrested though no no, he's got are you still with your girl? We're not talking right now. Well, you want me to call her up? You know get better. What's what's her first thing Alicia? I like less than Alicia concrete clam was just you know You grab your ass was defending your honor. Yeah things went south on them So that night I mean, she'll be sucking you by seven o'clock tonight So they gaslight me all night. I was never even on the slide. Nobody was on the slide You're fucking crazy. What are you doing? You're drunk the family the family's got a item and the family Oh, so now the family's hooked up with your girl the sir family. Yeah, and they got everybody's like on an alliance I get it's called you know friends. It's called friends and families against concrete clam Near fucked you got like one verse 60. Yeah, ever so now it looks like things are still fucked More the story of the next day she wakes up and comes to She starts remembering everything. Yeah, it did happen. She's right This guy is notoriously been known for this. He's done shit like this before he's a problem He's fucked with other people's girl his wife and kid are there also which is crazy She they've gotten in fight You're gonna find a pretty nice ass and did I just felt compelled to grab it? Sure She does man, but I can't just let it fucking slide whatever girl Every guy out there public claims grabbing my girls ass on the water. So I'm actually on the other side of my wife usually I mean, I just I can't let that's I mean you should go on the other side of it guys. Yeah Yeah, I love the money man. I could we're having this podcast based on my wife I'm just the loser. Let's guys grab our ass and don't say nothing about I gotta say Look at you though, I mean fuck right. I'm fucked. He's gotta shoulder-spicks. We need to find him good surgeon He needs I mean I don't think there's any way he's gonna fix it, but they don't be told I've been told the shoulder surgery if unless We need to find him good surgeon. He needs, I mean, I don't think there's any way he's going to fix it. But then you know what I've been told? I've been told the shoulder surgery. If unless it's in, unless you, if you can still take your arm and walk it up. Okay. Then you need it. Other than other than that, both of them live with it because it is the most yesterday. I was in the car and I reached with this arm to close the passenger window and it popped down. Can you take a gallon of milk and hold it like not right now, not with this arm? No. I mean, excruciating pain. At least if I fought you, I'm going right for that fucking show. That's why I've thrown kicks. My fatness can absorb your kicks. But one of my little T-Rex fucking fighter teeth ain't absorbing this size 13 shoe. I'll tell you that. If I came right there, just now you'll never get that close with those chicken arms. Man, never you get that close to me. There's T-Rex. It's not a proper moment. T-Rex, T-Rex, and never get that close. Come absorb that 13 and I'm gonna get it. If you got weight over my weight, I can't let you get close enough to me. Yeah, because I get, I get, you wrap me up. I'm done. Well, here, if I put my knee, I'm on my shoulder. You wrap me up. You're right. I'm over. So you can't, I can't let you touch. You got to stay, you got to stay nimble. Crack nimble. Yeah, I'm fast and uh, you gotta stay away. I'll fuck it fast, you're faster than you. I know. Well, it didn't take much to be faster than me. My shoulders are fucked too. Yeah. I mean, they're, my shit's fucked. I'm bad. Look at steroid boy over there. He's fucking Jack. No problems. No, no problems. Yeah. My joints are good. Are you even 30? Yeah. If you call me, I want R38. I just turned 38. Are you serious? I'm getting old. Yeah, but you're killing it. Did you ever think that some stupid fuck that was Peyton lines, you know, for 11, uh, eliciting to me on the radio. I was hanging out with crackhead painters at six a.m. in the back of a band, and painters and painters are straight crackheads. Oh, it's straight crackheads. Great crackheads. Yeah. They only pain enough to make enough money for crack and then they'll take a couple days off and then they'll come back and paint again. Exactly. Exactly. I know. Yep. I was, I was, I was fucking, I was, you were pies a leopard in paint buckets to the 10 stories, paint and highest or so. I don't see it because you're, you're, you're the young boy. Hey, young boy, go get that five fucking gallon. Listen to the fuck. All that every morning I wouldn't look forward to sitting there. How look how you sleep half conscious. Listen about where I'm talking about. You know, you think they gave me life dying for a net. I'm in there. Just, yeah. Look at you. I'm so proud of you. Go at you become. It's a pretty wild. I mean, just the growth that you've had since I've been here last. Yeah, it's crazy. You've tripled what you've had, I think. That's crazy. I don't know why. I don't know why. I don't know. I'm not good. I do suck. I look at something like, what the fuck's he doing? So, it's because I bring people like you in. Well, it's all about the guests. Yeah. I mean, okay, I guess. Yeah, we got Bobba and Matt Cox. We're doing good. Yeah, Bobba and Matt Cox. What's wrong with Matt? What are you like Matt? Oh, I forgot he pissed off your buddy. He pissed off the third. I would do job guy. I love you. I'd love to do stuff with him. He's brilliant. He's a, listen, I just like you're a good host and I know how good you are. I look at your shit and Matt's brilliant. He's got a great look. He's got a great stories and good communicator. But Matt doesn't have a fucking filter. And so there's just, what do you mean? Well, so I had him on the show and I think we were driving pretty good. I think maybe I was hogging up. Maybe I, I might have been stepping over him a little bit. I might have been, but I had Deoco's in there. Dr. Deoco and, um, or actually had J. Deoco in there. And I, Matt just always has to get the last word in like Matt can never, I can be the brunt of a joke. I can. You can be the brunt of a joke. We fuck with you about your arm hair. Like a concrete clim can be the brunt of the joke. You've got to be self deprecating. Let's your grab this trick's ass. Right. Right. And in the right circumstances, you might let a guy grab a girl's ass. It was you bubba to been different story. But let me ask you a question. If the dude would have said if you rolled up on him and he said, and he said, dude, what, you know what, dude, I did and I, I don't, you know, it's, I mean, I've been drinking and I'm sorry. I didn't mean anything. Exactly. That's fine. No, no, no. Like if a guy was, you know, I mean, you're gonna, you're not gonna look, I'm not there to blow to whole family event. You know what I mean? If he's something I said, hey, dude, you know what, I'm drunk and I fucked up drunk. And I think he could have said that I was hoping it went that way. When I was going to walk to him to ask him in my head, I'm hoping this is going to be a Sunday Sunday. I'm hoping, oh, it wasn't that it was, I'm sorry, whatever. And if you even went as soon as I asked him, he turned around and he squared up. Right. He said, what the fuck are you going to do? There's a punch the point that returns with agent wisdom. That's I know what I saw. So if I grabbed your girl's ass, I would have said, you know what, bro, I've been having way too much time during the world, bro. I'm I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm fucking here's the perfect test to I strung. I got a hard dick. I saw that. I saw that ass. And I fucking and I did. And you know what I said, you know what I deserve? You're girl has nice titties. Let me get a feel over there. Yeah, my girl's got nice titties and your girl got a nice little wall. Maybe we can get them to Scissor and we can watch in the corner. I don't fucking know it could have went different. You're gonna say that. I got an ass kicking coming. If you want to lay one in on me, man, go, you would have said, now I am. I got your brother. But you know, the guy, the guy determined what the fuck happened. Well, with Matt, yeah, Matt is so I don't want to say so much of a con, but he's led such a con like life and that he doesn't know when to be cooth or have any cooth. And so him and Diaco got into a little bit of a of an argument or a disagreement or maybe it was about the subject matter we were talking about. I don't know. It wasn't anything that I thought was that I needed to step in on. They were, you know, when you got to like me and concrete clim going out. If we were if we were really mad at each other, you would step in and say, hey, you two settle down. You know what I'm saying? It wasn't like that. Oh, I thought it was just he was asking him about his case, right? Something about his case. Something like that. Well, Matt and Matt had had a girl that he knew that supposedly got a boob job from Dr. Diaco that I don't think I think there was complications and I think the woman maybe sued Dan, you know, for replacement boobs or something like that. And it was it was something like that. But to a doctor, you just don't say that. Oh, he said that on the air. Yes. Oh, yeah. So on on the air. So like Dan, Dr. Diaco, who's a doctor and a lawyer, you know, that's a that's a pretty big swing and dick in life. He's got a hell of a combo. That your a doctor and a lawyer. I mean, you're, you know, you're, you know, so you're you're kind of a slinging dick and you're not going to have some fucking con. Say that to you on the air, disclosing a mess up that you made. And it just was like, and you know, out of loyalty to the Diaco's who are on my air, he wasn't having it. I would love to have Matt back. Um, I think he's got a fascinating story. I think he's a great interviewer and some of his guests. His podcast is blowing up. Oh, as it should, he's good. You know, if I remember earlier, I talked about how the shits going to fall away and the good stuff's going to stick. Yeah. That's a prime example of that, you know, started with zero followers and now has what 250,000? He has almost 800,000. Yeah. Um, yeah. I mean, you too. Yeah. So God bless him. And I could tell that the guy had the hit factor when I had him on the show. He just, he tells fascinating stories. He gets always a great story. He has a fascinating story in himself. Good looking guy talented, great painter. I loved the dude. I knocked to the gills. Jack to the fucking gills. Triple whatever you are. I guarantee you that motherfucker shaves his arms. He does. He does. He's also very talented painter. Yeah. I mean, he's, he's a, he's a, I wish I wouldn't have had that conflict with him because I'm loved to do business with him or, you know, you know, have him back on or him have me back on or or something like that. And maybe you can help me bridge that gap because it wasn't between me and met with dude again. It wasn't between me and Matt. It was between, you know, my guy and I think Matt thinks that you won't talk to him anymore because you don't want to piss off your, your friend. Oh, no. That's not the case. Oh, okay. I mean, I wouldn't have Matt on my show with them in there. Right. But I would have, they're only in there twice a week. I would have Matt and vice versa. Um, and I listen, I have, I admire his work. I mean, I could tell you three or four guests that he's had. He had a guy that was making counter fit money out of Bibles. Was that you? That was, yeah. He had him on first, but he gave, he came on my show after he went on. Right. You know, and so Matt, Matt has some great guy and the motherfucker has the it fact. He's, he's a workhorse too. He, he does. He records like five to six podcasts a week every fucking day back to back. Sometimes he does two or three a day. I'm like, Matt, how do you do it? I'm like, because when I have people on, I usually like take some time, like research them, watch their documentaries, read parts of their, I can't read a whole book every fucking week, but I, I'll, I'll skim the book, read a lot of the book, watch other podcasts. They've done some like somewhat coherent. What they're talking about, because I don't just cover a true crime, a cover of a wide variety of topics. Matt goes, bro, he's like, I don't do anything. He's like, I basically read like a paragraph of what their story is. And then I go in and do it. And I do like two a day, six days a week. And guess what? He does it well. He does do it well. That's, that's a talent man. That's something that he's a very talented dude. I mean, just how he got himself involved in being in trouble was really fucking brilliant and cool in the pocket. You know, some of the stories, when he's in the bank and he's cool as a fucking cucumber. And he knows that it might not go through and that the fucking cops would become like, I would be a fucking nervous wreck. Right. Not Matt, Matt, you know, and I got a lot of, I mean, I got a lot of respect for his ability. He's got to, you know, he's a prime example of what I said, the shit will fall away and the good stuff will come through. And I think that that's happening more and more with podcasting. Are you people shutting their shit down? Does a suck? Are you having guests in on your shirt? Your, your shows daily, right? Yeah, daily. Yeah. Are you do you don't do guests? Um, I'd love to, but doing six to 10, you know, I do six to 10. It's so hard to get a guest. Why can't you change the time? Well, because I'm still, I'm still on five terrestrial radio stations. You know, I'm still on five terrestrial radio stations, but you know, realistically, um, digital pays the bills, even in my world, digital pays the bills. And so I'm getting ready to, if this documentary doesn't somewhat reinvent me to rest really where I would get some large, large affiliates that would want to have me on as their morning guy, I'll probably change the time and go like 11 to two digitally and just stay all digital. Do you like having guests or do you like just just talking and just going? Well, I love having guests because yours, your ability is just to like go crazy and frickin' let go. I don't need a guest. You don't need a guest. I don't need myself, but I can, I can, you know, I can, I've interviewed Joe Rogan. I've interviewed. Yeah, I mean, I've interviewed everybody. So I, I pride myself on being a really good interviewer. Um, I just need to, you know, we're, I was at my lowest point in 18. So I didn't have a, have an opportunity to have a big staff. And I quite frankly need to get back into the guest booking arena. It's just hard. I'm not, I'm not part. I was, I was late to the podcasting game. I was late to the YouTube game. You know, so, you know, my, my numbers aren't nearly as impressive as what they should be to probably book big guests. But I do have, you know, the name value, the, you know, time served, so to speak. And, you know, it, still have probably within the shock, shock world, probably one of the premier radio people that are still around, you know, how do you, I was, I was asking Rogan about this when I was talking to him. Cause I, cause I, when I went and met with him in Austin the night before he did a comedy show, like at like seven o'clock at night or something like that. And he was like on stage, you can tell this was like, he was working out material that he obviously had been working out for a while, that he hasn't come out public with you. It's like, cause it, when you go into club, you have to lock your phone in a little case, you can't record it. Cause they're just trying to like figure out what works, what doesn't work. And he was also just like riffing. He like, he finished his set and he goes, I got like 30 more minutes to go. So if you guys want to ask me questions, he got all due, he didn't have the correct, he did that for like an hour. And people were asking him questions about like relevant current event topics. And he would come out like high octane, he would have fucking funny opinions on everything that had just happened in the news that week or that day. So that's kind of what we did. And it was like, I don't fucking like, I wasn't even aware of some of the stuff that he was talking about, but he was like super quick, super funny. And like roasting people while he was doing it, it was just like another level. I've never seen that on any of his podcasts. He was like, he shifted like three gears above how he is on this podcast during that comedy. And I was like, dude, I was like, how do you like an art form in it? So being able to be on your toes, talk about current events, have an opinion about it, make it funny. And all while potentially turning it around on the person that asked the question, right. So you know, that's what you did. That's what you do. That's what I do. Yeah. That's what I do. So I would love to have guests, but a lot of guests are afraid of me because of my reputation. But yeah, I need to start, I need to start having guests. And if I switch my time, which looks like I'm probably going to do maybe mid probably first quarter of next year, do more of like a 11 to two digital kind of deal. I think I'd be more, more, more guest friendly than seven AM. You know, so you would, you wake up at like four AM, three, three, four news and then 40. And then how does that, how does that work? How's does that process? Well, wake up at 340, eat breakfast, take a shower, leave the house at 415, get to the studios at 545. And then all my, then I have two, two of my guys, Lummy and Seth, my co-host that the night before will go through all the stories, stories that I like, you know, like an half. So in my email, I'll have 20 stories, and I'll go through those and pick sometimes all 20 of them, sometimes, you know, 13 of them. And we, we, we talk about that, that in conjunction with just, you know, stuff that happens in our personal life. Like with concrete claim, if he was in there, we would have told the, you know, him, him and his, his pink short story, you know, yeah. So, but I need to do more guests. I mean, I had Mark Cuban on not too long ago, and he sent me a note says, you know, God, dang, you're a good interviewer, you know, so I need to do that more. I probably need to take a page from how do you, how do you book your guests? We get usually they're just, well, you're now at a point where people are begging, suck in your dick to come on your show. We get a lot of requests to come on the show. People that it's mainly people that want to promote their books like authors, it's like that or, but like also one of the biggest ways we get guests is from guests, just recommending their friends. Right. Oh, I know a guy would be great. Right. Like you and Matt Cox, like, like, you know, when he had that dollar, that counterfeit guy, he's like, hey, Danny, I got this counterfeit guy. He's a dude. Yeah. So that's the difference between podcasting and regular radio, the regular radio guy won't give you that up. The podcasting guy will, you know, so that's kind of the difference. The debates are fun too. Like having people in, because I have a lot of people in here who have like pretty controversial opinions on things, like on crazy topics and then like getting other people in the podcast to like debate them or like go back and forth. That can be really fun. I'm a good friend. I'm good friends with Alex Stein and he does that a lot. Alex Stein, I don't know if you've heard of him or not. I've heard of him. He's a big debate kind of guy. You know, I want to debating to get a Peter Thiel in here. Talk about the anti-Christ. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you could get, he's the one that finance tokens. I know. Legal gay Christian billionaire. Yeah. I mean, that's a combination. I don't know if he would come. I mean, he's pretty pretty. I don't know. I have a friend who works for him. Oh, well, that's see there's your end. Yeah. There's your end. Talk about ends. You know, you know, what do you think about him going on this tour to promote the anti-Christ and Silicon Valley? He's doing a four part lecture that sold out all about the anti-Christ. Have you seen these clips? No. Oh, boy. I said, I saw you the one of Tim Dylan talking about it on a road. I saw that. Oh, yeah. I did get that. I didn't get that. I watched that. Yeah. Yeah. This guy who sent in drones all over the world to all these war zones to kill all these people simultaneously putting together this AI that he's selling to the CIA to surveil us on our neighbors society. And, uh, and his pet project seems to be a keen interest in Satan. And this is Peter Thale. Peter Thale. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's like, he's behind this big, I mean, you know, all about Peter Thale. Most people know, you know, his history. He's like, the biggest in fact, he was one of the early investors in Facebook. They know. Oh, and PayPal as well. Palantir. Um, and, uh, and his, and his number one goal was to Barry Gocker because at Nick Denton was the one that, that, that outed him as being gay. So that was his big hard on with Gocker. So when Hogan started to sue Gocker, Hogan didn't have the resources locally to step up to the big boy league. And Gocker did at, at one point, Gocker had way better representation than Hogan did. And once Peter Thale, tail, whatever the fucking, once he found out that Hogan had a long ongoing legal battle with Gocker, he called up his lawyer Charles Harder out of Beverly Hills and said, I don't care what it takes. I will pay for every fucking dollar of that, of that litigation. And it changed everything. Hogan was able to do research. He was able to do mock trials. He was able to. Oh, yeah. It changed. I mean, rumor has it is that his legal bill is upwards of $8 million. You know, and at that point, you know, they had determined they'd mock tried it. You know, they had, they had all the research that they needed. And you know, they, they already deposed me. They knew what my testimony was going to be. And uh, that's one of the reasons why I think, well, Hogan prevailed because Gocker invaded his privacy. Let's be honest. I mean, you know, they had no business on publishing that tape. You know, they got, they obtained it illegally. They knew it was stolen. They didn't have consensual forms from Heather or him. So they should have never published it. It wasn't a newsworthy event. Hogan, fucking my wife is not a newsworthy event. If it's not on the beach, but it's in my, it's in my house with closed curtains. So right. Why Gocker even published that, you know, as beyond me? Yeah, that was a, that was a crazy thing. And, uh, and the consent, the general consensus, like for people that aren't paying attention was that you released it. I took that footage to my work. I then strategized with whomever to try to broker it. Um, I tried to extort Hogan. I then, when none of that worked, leaked it to Gocker so that I could get myself fired. I mean, it doesn't even make sense. You know, I got fired. Is that the peak of your career right there? Like that, at that point? 2012. Yeah. Well, no, I just left serious because they had low dog me right on the money. But I was still on Cox on the bone and had, you know, 14 14 affiliates, you know, probably doing two and a half million a year, you know, something like that. So, you know, we were, we were doing, we were doing well. And so, and how much would of this tape have met, uh, a bank to you if you would have been behind it to promote it to sell it to. I would have met me. There's no value in it at all. There's no, there's no, that's what people don't realize that dude who tried extorting him wanted like 300 grand or the guy who extorted him, Matt Lloyd, Spice Boy, um, wanted $300,000 because he'd already shopped it to Hollywood with digital underground and wicked. And they said, well, you know, yeah, we'll be interested. We'd be very interested in that. But do you have 2, 257 consent forms on the people that appear on camera? And he's like, well, no, I'm not going, it's not worth the fucking nothing. It's not worth nothing. So, Spice Boy, Matt Lloyd switched gears and said, okay, I can't sell it in the marketplace, but I can extort Hogan with it because it's, you know, why would, you know, Hogan will pay any, he wanted a million dollars and they settled for 300,000 at the same, when they met at the San Pearl. And so, and the reason why Hogan was willing to pay 300,000 dollars for us because he didn't, it was very damning. You know, nobody wants that out. Nobody wants, you know, he was caught saying the N word and why would he want that out? Why would, why would he want, why would I want that? I mean, if you really take a look at it and be like, oh, Bubba did it all, why would I want any of all that? Why would I want to tape? Burn the bridge with your best friend? Hogan fucking my wife and, and, and I'm going to lose my job. I'm going to look like a fucking cock-folded asshole. Like, I mean, there's no upside for me. I'm making a couple million dollars in radio. Why do I want to? So, so Cox comes to me. I'm still doing mornings and Cox comes to me and says, you got to make this go away. Like, you got to make this go away. So, Hogan at that time was suing me too because he didn't know that I wasn't part of the deal. So, he settles with me. I have to write him a check for $5,000 to get out of the lawsuit. So, I write him a check for $5,000 and give him all the rights to the tape. You have here. You own this tape. These tapes that are out there floating around that's causing all this havoc, you, they're yours. I don't want them. Now, if I'm the guy that's trying to extort him or sell hit, sell it or broker it, why would I pay the guy $5,000 and sign over the rights to the tape? The only way he could sue gocker is if he owned those tapes. So, when they go to the Sam Pro Restaurant Hotel, the FBI arrests the person that Spice Boy sent to represent them and arrests Keith Davidson, the guy who broke her the tape and Hogan is the one that alerted the FBI that he was being extorted and they arrest these people and then once it goes through the state attorney or the U.S. attorney, they figure out they find out that Bubba and Hogan are your victims and they're like, listen, you got that's a pro wrestler and a shop job. This could be a fucking clown show. And the feds only go to trial when they know they're going to win and they decided to no file. So, nobody was held accountable for the leak. Nobody was held accountable. So, once Spice Boy got arrested but then didn't get prosecuted, the tape is dead. There's no value to that tape. There's nothing. And less, you can get it published somewhere. So, Spice Boy gives it to Mike Calta and Mike Calta leaks it to AJ Delario of Gocker and I get fired and Mike Calta of all people because Cox doesn't know who leaked it. They promote Mike Calta to do my job who's still there today doing my job. And oh, he does mornings now the morning show. He did my morning show. The morning show that you used to listen to him. Is him has been for well over a decade. Wow. I'm not listening to him once. And so, here's the deal. Hogan is brilliant. He's like, once he got Peter Thiel involved, they're like, we can take two bites of this apple. We can take a bite of the apple for the people that published it, which is gocker and their worth at that time, their worth was 135 million. And then when that lawsuit goes down, we don't know what the outcome is going to be yet. But however, that fares, then we're going to take a bite at who distributed it, who leaked it. And that was Cox media. And it's I've been told that they wrote a $52 million check to Hogan. And so, Hogan sued Gocker and they navigated through that lawsuit and they knew that were that, were that ended up, and that ended up with a $141 million verdict that that Gocker only could pay $35 million of because they filed bankruptcy in Hogan was their largest creditor. So, but they had already tried this case. And they knew what what a jury would do. So they went and they, so they started to pose my calta and Cox settles the next day for 52 million because they didn't want any of that information because at one time that sex tape was hosted on Cox Management servers. And they, I mean, they were afraid Hogan was suing them for 110 million and they were afraid that they were going to lose. Gocker lost. Why wouldn't they? Right. The details of the dissemination and the leakage didn't change from the gocker deal. They'd already tried it once and won. The second trial was going to go the same way. Right. Cox fired me, put Caltech in there. Didn't know Caltech Caltech was part of this until they start doing investigation and phone records and things like that. And he's still there to this day. But there's a bigger piece in my documentary, video, Kill the Radio Star, that a lot of people don't know about. And that's who they were after as well as which is which I'm sure that you know now, you know, they wanted Trump. This is the Keith Davidson. This is the Keith Davidson tie in. So Keith brokered the tape and also brokered all the negotiations between Karen McDougall and Stormy Daniels with with Michael Cohen, which was Trump's personal, um, fixer slash attorney. And he was negotiating exclusively with Keith Davidson, who is the broker of the Hogan tape. And they went to Keith Davidson and said, if you don't give us all correspondence that you've had with Michael Cohen, we still have four years of factual limitations left in the Tampa sex tape that we didn't prosecute. We're going to go for you on that deal. So he laid down what was government's witness and gave them all the correspondence that he had with Michael Cohen. And they got Michael Cohen to testify against the president. Wow. All from my little old sex tape that I that at the end of the day, come, I mean, I'm not quite as jealous. I am, you know, like, that you are of your girl. I just let my girl fuck Hogan. That's it. He was living with me to do down on his love. Yeah. How long you it was the, the, the, the with me for three or four months. Living at your house because that was the middle of his divorce. And I'm like, listen, I'm not a jealous motherfucker. We were kind of in the lifestyle a little bit. And so I was just like, if I want you fuck Hogan, I'll cheer him up a little bit. My home surveillance caught it. I have some skin in this game. Like I've said, home story. You had the, I mean, you had the camera pointed at the bed though. When I know that's what some of the people say. Well, that, that was a, a peripheral view of my whole bedroom. Oh, was it? Oh, I mean, yeah, it was so, and let me just clarify why that you were in the other room watching the feed, Boba, don't give me wrong. Don't try to swindle me or you can't. Can I, with your hairy arms and I'll try to pull McGillicout on me. Can I tell you what I was really doing? Yes. This is pathetic. I, I was buying go cart parts for my son. Where are you? Yes. My son was in the quarter midgets at that time. And I was buying titanium axles, which are like 800 bucks. I was trying to find the best price on titanium axles. The reason why I had surveillance in my bedroom, my whole house was surveilled except for other bedrooms. But my bedroom was, was, was under surveillance because I had a situation back in 99 where I was with a girl. And I was a bachelor back then. I was a bachelor big ass house. You know, making a lot of money. This is power pig days. This is 98 rock days. Okay. You know, can you know, go have an a stripper every night, whole nine yards. And I had a woman, a girl that I fucked. And she about a week later calls me up and wants to come over again. And I can, I can tell you her just her first name, first name was her name is Kathy. And, I mean, there's a, there's a million cathees out there. So not more. You can tell it was the 90s. Yeah, exactly. There's no girls. There's after 2010. And there's a million catheys out there, so not more. You can tell it was the 90s. Yeah, exactly. There's no girls going after 2010 named Kathy. So on the second time she came over, she got too drunk. She liked wine. I had a big wine cellar. I'm not a wine drinker, but in order to be a pimp, you have to have a wine cellar. I had a wine cellar, so she's out picking. I think she drank like a bottle and a half of wine. And we flocked. We flocked. And she the next day goes home, does the walk of shame, wakes up, hung over, drunk, goes back to her apartment and her girlfriend says, where have you been on my long? And she says, I've been with Bubba the Love Sponge and her girlfriend's like, well, what happened? And she was like, well, you know, we flocked I got drunk and the girl starts putting in her head, what did you, you know, did he fuck you when you were drunk and were you of sound mine and did you really wanna do it and all this kind of shit? So I get a call from Kathy and she's like, you know what, I don't know if I feel real good about what happened two nights ago. You know, I think maybe you took advantage of me or you know, stuff like that. I'm like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, hold the fuck on. Yeah. I've been with you before. And you know, and I didn't have any surveillance at that time. And so I get a hold of my agent. I tell them that this Kathy bitches saying I may have been inappropriate, which I've never had that allegation against me ever. A lot of things I've done, that's not one of them. So he goes, listen, we're gonna camera up your bedroom and if you ever get in that situation, you'll be able to prove. You can tell consensual sex from non-consensual sex. Yeah. I mean, from a videotape. And he goes, bottom line is if it would ever come into play, it's a misdemeanor for recording somebody against their will. Right. And we would be able to prove that it was in it. That it was, that was consensual. So here I'm a bachelor, you know, fucking dollhouse bitches, you know, just being the man, being being 30 some year old multi-millionaire. And I put surveillance in my bedroom. And that's why I did it. I wasn't in their next room looking. I wasn't in the corner jacket off. Yeah. It just, it just, it just, so then at that point, at what point do you have to start getting girls to sign like NDAs? I think, I think, I mean, I think now, I think so. I think if you're a person of wealth, there's probably two athletes out there who go to parties. Oh, I bring a stack of NDAs. I know of athletes that make girls sign NDAs. I'm not going to do that. Yeah. I've, and with a driver's license, like a, like take a picture of your driver's license and make you sign an NDA before they'll fuck you. You know, so that's the world we live in. But like what would happen even if the girl did sign the NDA and she went out and just like told the world about it? Like what would, I mean, if they had nothing to lose, what would they, what would, much kind of like to Shannon Sharp deal? Like how did that shit go down? Like I mean, like that girl kind of extorted him a little bit. Yeah. It was that story. It was only fans girl or something. Yeah. It was only fans girl. And you know, you know, you, and he had been like been with her many times. They were boyfriend or girlfriend. Right. And you know, they were into some kink shit. They were doing, you know, like to each, like what, what people, what consenting adults do and their bedroom to each are own. Yeah. I mean, as long as it's not involved in animals and fucking kids. Exactly. Shit, not somebody's chest and just some crazy shit. You know, if you're, if you're a swinger or you fucking, whatever, whatever. Whatever. It gets weird when you start to add the power dynamic to it. You know, like with the Harvey Weinstein stuff. And with the Diddy stuff. Yeah. When you're in a position of power and you're brokering, you're brokering sex for something else. Yeah. Now that's a problem. Right. It doesn't even necessarily have to be over the top brokering. It doesn't, it could be unsaid. Un-taughtly, unsaid. Right. If you're a young girl, 17, even 16, whatever it is. And you're going to a Diddy party or a Harvey Weinstein party, whatever it is. And you're going there and sleeping with these guys. You're not just going there because you think these guys are attractive. You're going there because these guys are powerful. And you got a shot of getting in on whatever they're a part of. Right. So I'm not putting the blame on them. No, no. But they're not innocent. They're putting themselves in a situation where some shit could go down. And you know, the man, the guy is never going to get the favorable ruling on them. No. No. Never. No. I mean, even if a girl, 17, 16, and her and her and her and her and her and her two little buddy girls were talking about it on the limo ride over and the limo driver was able to testify, hey, they were strategizing the guy would still go down. Of course. As he probably should. You know, I mean, today's world is a different world than when I was running livestock bitches and 12 boobs of Christmas. So here's my problem with it. My problem with it is when you when all these celebrity parties with these girls going over there, claiming, you know, they were getting taken advantage of or a month did or whatever. But these girls are they're going there on their own will. It's not like they're dragged and handcuffed and put in a cage. And they're not going to church. They're going home at the end of the night and going back to the next party the next weekend. Yeah. And you start and you make this these. This is what takes all the attention and everyone freaks out about it. But nobody talks about the fucking children who are trafficked to the tune of like hundreds of thousands all over the United States every single day by super powerful people and put into like they're taken from foster homes or traffic across the border and put into the or trafficking very influential, very powerful, untouchable people that are no one talks that are so powerful and so influential that nobody even fucking talks about it. And if you do talk about it, watch the fuck out. I mean, like nobody talks about that. But you know, it's just it's a different world that we live in. And it's so easy to set up an influential guy nowadays that, you know, these athletes and other people they have to have in the A's. I mean, I here's what I hate is I hate when girl A of age, 21, 22, fucks influential guy 15 years ago. And like the like the Danny Matherson guy from from that intelligence from that from that 70s show. Now, I don't know all of what happened. But I know it was like 10 years later. 10 years later, these girls came by or whoever came by and said, Danny Matherson fucked this dirty and whatever the fuck happened. Maybe they were underage. Man, I think that it's so anti-s, it's skewed so anti men that I think that there needs to be some type of time. If certain amount of years have gone by and it wasn't a crime 10 years ago, because you weren't worried about it. But this guy's now become popular or become famous or become rich. Now all of a sudden it's a problem. I got a I got a problem with that. And I don't know specifically what the Danny send us to 30 years to life. So let's say you're Danny Matherson and you're out. You know, you're living the Hollywood lifestyle of being on a hit show called that 70 show and you're fucking you know, you're fucking you're fucking you're fucking hot. You know, little groupy bitches that are hopefully of age. I don't think his was anything to do with underage. I don't think so. I think it was just he fucked him. Yeah. And they didn't want to be fucked. I guess 15 years like right. Which is bullshit. I mean, how can you say I don't want to be fucked 15 years ago. But 15 years ago it was okay. Right. But I didn't say anything then. I didn't go and get a meat. Now listen, I don't want that to underscore women who get and didn't want it. And I hope that the people women or something like that, you immediately go and get it reported and get it and get it and go to the cops and get that motherfucker. That sick fuck that did it to you busted him. Yeah. But for these people that wait 10 years, 15 years, I think that's bullshit. Yeah. Yeah. Cause it's hard to decipher whether they're telling the truth at that point. Right. Cause it's sometimes it seems like a money grab. It's like, oh, hey, I fucked this guy. Fun and 15 years ago. And I didn't really want to. But I did. So I was never going to get caught in that trick bag. So people often say you kind of back to your original question. Well, why did you have surveillance? That's why I had it. I had one, I had one little brush up and I was ever so then I'm getting ready to go through a divorce. So I rip out my whole fucking system. I take it to work. Okay. And I saved that file. I saved that file and burn it to disk. My bad. I did it. I've owned it that I did it. I've never said that I didn't do that. And that was one of the, that's the biggest mistake that I've made in my life. I'm here today. I lost it all. I became public enemy number one because I didn't destroy that tape when I should have, which allowed it to be stolen, which allowed it to be shopped, which allowed it to end up doing what it did. And it ruined my life. It made Hogan rich. It ruined my life. And it caused my Cal to take my job. Who's the person who shopped it by the way in Senate to Walker? It's just so fucking unfair to the day they put me in this. He had missed this now. No, I never knew that part actually. No. But it's in it's in all the core records. Oh, it's it's in refuted. It's in it's in what I'm in your documentary is the first time that this evidence has like actually been shown to the public. Yes. Phone phone records, emails, addresses, you know, an email from Mike Cal to to his agent Tony Burton saying, where do I send the video tape, an address given, you know, I know, I know the UPS store office state road 41 that he shipped it from. I mean, that's how much that's how much due diligence we've done. And, you know, again, I probably deserve what I got, but he certainly shouldn't still be, you know, doing radio and Tampa Florida for fucking 12 years thereafter. And at the tune of where his company had to write a $52 million check to save his ass, I couldn't survive a $755,000 fine from the FCC. How does he how does he survive that? I have no idea. Oh, my other than if they fire him, then they admit that they did it. Mm. So that's the only thing that I could ever come up with. And my in my in my documentary, which comes out today on on Google play, Amazon and Apple TV video, kill the radio star really takes you. You've seen it and it takes you. I mean, when you watched it, did you what did you know any of that shit? No. No, no, none of it. Because you know why that lawsuit settled Cox versus Hogan settled and never on channel 30 live lead story tonight on channel 13, the lawsuit that got settled. No, settled lawsuits just go away. Right. So that's what happened in my situation. Had caught had Cox, verse Hogan went to trial. All of the information, basically in this documentary would have come out. That's so crazy. And and during that FBI sting when Hogan was getting wired up to go to the sand pearl to meet with the people, the extortionists, uh, Brooke was on your show. She said that, um, Hulk told her, Hogan came back. He came back after the sting and said to Jennifer his wife and Brooke is daughter, Bubba didn't have anything to do with, with, with the distributing or leaking of this tape, Bubba didn't do it. So why didn't he try to like at least repair the friendship with you or I think that you ever try to reach out to him? Yeah, absolutely. I think public perception was, you know, he didn't want people to think that if he acknowledged me or we became friendly again, or I wasn't, you know, public enemy number one that people may have thought it was a work or it was a wrestling inside job. And we did it, we did it together. And that's not the case. Uh, but he didn't want that chance of people saying or thinking that. So selfishly he let me sit here and just fucking absolutely get my life destroyed and didn't give a fuck. That's crazy. I mean, and we were best friends. I mean, we were best friends. You had the in the documentary. There's the footage of your wedding where he's like doing the speech and he's the best man saying that you're the only person that he would trust with his kids. Yes. He's a, he's the Godfather of my son. He was the best man on my wedding. Um, it's, it's sad. It's sad because I wish I could have been there for him when he died. I wish I wasn't public enemy number one in his world. But I hope that my documentary video, kill the radio star will give people that watch it. The true perspective on what I did do and what I didn't do. And I forever get judged for what I didn't do. If you go and ask and I said this last time, you go and ask anybody in Tampa. Hey, tell me about the Hogan sex tape. Well, his best friend, Boba taped it, tried to fucking extort him, tried to sell it. And, uh, you know, uh, as he's a bit shit. Hmm. Well, I did some of that, but not all of it. And probably I'm not the piece of shit that you think I am. Definitely didn't get anything out of it. I mean, room of life. It fucking, it was actually got a ton of money out of it. 62 million all in. I mean, you know, in his, in his entire career, he never made more than 10, million in one, in one fiscal year. Really? And his, in his, in his career, the most he ever made was between 10 and 12 million in one year in one year. So, and this was what was the peak? Do you think when he was with WCW? What year? What year were that? I've been 99, 2000, 2001. It was probably making about eight to 10 million. Right. I know that a couple of times when we were working out, couple of his paper view checks would come in and they'd be like 1.2 million. And I never seen a check that big before he'd be like, how many zeros were on there? Brother. And I'd be like, I don't know about a lot. I got, I got the best story ever. Well, I found a check under a candy bar. So listen to this best story ever. He used to go in for these back injections called first set injections. And the only place that he really thought did him well was this place in Beverly Hills. So I would, we were best friends. So we would take the six o'clock in the morning Delta direct flight to LA. And he would be, we'd land like at 10 in the morning. He would go right to the hotel. I'm sorry, he go right to the doctor. I go scrub in and be with him. And it was, it was an out, it wasn't, they didn't put them under, but they, they would put these injections in his back. Okay. These for these, these for set injections. And if they basically lasting him about three or four months where he had some relief, you know, his back didn't hurt so bad. It was kind of like a lubrication. It was just kind of like putting a bandaid on his back problem. He really knew he needed back surgery, but he would do this for a while. So we're sitting in the Delta crown room in Tampa one morning. It's like 505, the plane loads like in 30 minutes. And he has like 300 bucks cash on him. And he goes, I need some, I need some more money. So he gets his wallet out and he finds this beat up ATM card. And it's like scratched all up and stuff. And he goes, Oh man, I forgot about this account. Lended as to even know about this account. And I know his pin number and I'm not going to say it on the air because it's also his house. Like it's, it's the number that he used for everything in life from his, from his pin to his house security number. So this, there's a certain number that was this when he was living at Willodell? Yes. This is when he's living at Willodell. Okay. So he goes, brother, Bob, do me a favor. Go down to the ATM and see if you can get, I don't know, 600, see if it might not be worth, there might not be nothing in there. Yeah. But just get 600 if you can. So I get on there. I stick it in the machine, type in the, the fucking pin code. And it says it's first spinning it out. So I know I'm good for six. And it says, do you want to receive one like, well, fuck yeah, what? I know. Yeah. So I hit the fucking joint of the balance. Yeah. Yeah. That's what it said. So I hit it. And it's the, so I got it out and I looked at it. And I was like, so I went over to the sunglasses place that sold sunglasses. I said, can I borrow a pin? They're like, sure, because I wanted to put them put the commas. There were so many zero. I was wondering, I wanted to take it and do the commas. Everything, but the commas in. Well, no. Wow. They had 0.00 cents, but there was a whole bunch of fucking numbers. So I needed to comment it out. Figure where it says. Yeah, I needed to figure four. 4.325 million. And it's how he forgot about it. That he thought was dead. And I go, he goes, did I have it? Did you get six? And I go, oh yeah. I got six. He goes, great. And I gave it back to my go. Terry, do you have any idea how much of fucking money is in that account? He goes, no, brother. Eight, two G's, four G's, I go. No, 4.2 million. He goes, fuck, don't tell Linda about that account. Linda never knew about it. Four point fucking two million dollars. And I was just like, oh my God. So he hit that one. He kind of tucked that one behind the social security card. And Linda went after him again after the gawker case. Oh, Linda got, I think Linda got 40. I think Linda, for all perpetuity gets like, now, I don't know about death. And for as far as is a state, I don't think she gets shit. But I think she made 40% of all that of everything. No way. How that was so much because that happened during the marriage or during the divorce. Because if you've been married in Florida more than 20 years, then this fucking ultra-organic kicks in where you have to now, I think DeSantis changed the law. But before Hogan, when Hogan obviously got divorced in 2007, it was called like injunctive relief, alimony where you had to provide somewhat the same type of lifestyle. After 20 years, you had to provide for your ex for maintaining that like, maintaining that lifestyle forever. Oh my God. Now that's been changed. But when he got divorced, it was, I think his grandfather then, I just saw something somewhere about this football player, Tyreke Hill. Yeah. We saw it today. It listed all of the sudden kids. I know. She's got more kids than touchdowns. Yes, he does. Yeah. We said that on the air today. Yeah. Yeah. And he's got, and you see like, he had to give like 150,000 down. And then he got like 40,000. And then he won, he has 11 kids and one baby mama. I think all of them get 30. And then there's a bunch of kickers. Like, you know, one, one, one baby mama gets like a hundred grand and one baby mama gets like 40 grand. One of them got like 50 grand a month just for lifestyle maintenance. Yes. Just to maintain her lifestyle that she's accustomed to while 11 with that motherfucker. And that was in Florida because it was not a way my heart and had of a giant. I just be fucking rich dudes. It'd be such a, I'd actually be skinny and in shape. I go to the gym every day, get some tits. It's a great, it's a very concrete. Well, we over here, that's a trial concrete for a living. Look at them. Meanwhile, if he had a fucking hot pussy and I said a tits on him, think about how life easy would be for us. We actually got to work. And you know, but if you're a hot chick, if you're a fucking one of these really, really hot chicks, now you don't even have to go out. Yeah. But now you just go starting only fans. They only even got to be a lot of people. Yeah, but yeah, but there's two sides to everything. at the, at the, on the other side of the coin, they only have a certain amount of time that that's good for. Sure. I mean, you know, there's a lot of money. You know that, but I mean, if you were, if you had your shit together, you're 18, 19, your hottest fuck, you're doing yourself three, four times a week on an only fans making a million a million a million a month. You, you need to, you know, and you, you'll see. You'll see a time about it. 25, but you've made a million a month since you're 18. And you had somebody that was responsible enough to fucking keep you on track, to not living like a fucking idiot. You could really set for life. Set for life. Set for life. Yeah. Retire. Yeah. You play your cards right when you're young. I actually have known, you know, back in the, back in the 90s and early 2000s, these strippers I would hang out with from the dollhouse and stuff that really did have their shit together. Yeah. And they really, it drove Mercedes's and they lived in fucking, you know, three or four thousand dollar a month fucking cribs. But they were making 20 grand a month stripping. Yeah. And they were actually, you know, three houses. But they actually were getting buy in rental properties and, you know, making investments and stuff like that. And these women are 50, 55 now and they're set. Yeah. They're fucking, they stripped for 10 years. They didn't get caught up in the cocaine and all the fucking stripper drama. They actually had a mission. Most of them went through school and, and they made a lot of money. Now, I mean, you don't even have to be a stripper anymore. You don't even have to leave the privacy of your own home. You can just kick it out wide at home. Yeah. The shit, you know, why? Kick it out wide and the shit out of your other. Just fucking in your crazy. God, dude, Tyler's going to have to censor the living shit out of this episode so we don't get nuked off YouTube. Oh, really? Sorry. Sorry. I'm sorry. I'm so sorry. It's okay. It's fine. It's fine. This is the above a special again. We can't be, we can't be holding back. You might not even have this thing get it in time for the release. No, we'll, we'll have it fine. So fast, yeah, Tyler's, yeah. Tyler's, you should tell me it was PG. I can go PG. No, it's not PG. It's just like certain things, you know, you do. YouTube is like the FCC. Pressing. I played the YouTube game, the YouTube games tough. Oh, and you know, you pay, you play seven seconds or something. You don't think you'll get a copyright strike and you can copyright strike. Well, not only the copyright stuff, the copyright stuff's easy to navigate. Just don't play videos because then you'll be fine or music, but like the speech censorship is crazy with like the, they'll find any excuse to demonetize or shut down a video for different reasons for like saying the f bomb, too many times talking about sexual stuff, saying the C word, the four letter C word. That would get you nuked. I talked about, I got nuked with Dr. Deoco talking about the vaccines. I'll get you nuked. Oh, so Dr. Deoco is a doctor. He's a doctor. And he was very aggressive on the Ivermectin, he was a deoxycycline zinc. Kind of like with Joe, Joe, Joe was pushing Joe Roman right on that same deal. And we're early on in COVID. Now this isn't Joe Rogan. This isn't an expert. This this is a doctor who is talking about the prescribing of medication to his patients and how it's working or not. Two week band, I was banned for two weeks for going against WHO guidelines, because they were all about, they were all about, you know, the shot and the vaccine happening and you couldn't, but I was like, listen, this is a doctor. Doesn't matter. And this is his remedy to fight this disease. And he took a, the doctor oath to do good by your patients and try to make them better. They didn't care. Nope. They did not care. And there's nothing there's nobody you can talk to. There's no jury you can go in front of. Nope. Just with some late some frickin chick with pink hair sitting in her house, getting paid to work remotely to set to like, like the idea of. Yep. Exactly. And probably men. Yep. And you can send emails and tell your blue in the face, no one's going to respond to them. No, they're not going to do anything. They don't care. And it's not like it's, it's it's God. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know how you compare it to the FCC because at the end of the day, it's in the FCC because the FCC, you have clear guidelines. Right. You know that you can't say tits. You know that you can't say shit. You know that you can, you know, it's community guidelines. But you know, you know, the, the words you can't say, but even on regular radio, they weren't regulating talking about the vaccine or Iver Meckden. They weren't, they weren't regulating any of that. The FCC. So if it's goodbye, broadcasting, even during COVID, they weren't. No, really. No. Now some companies were, but I'm an independent when I, when I went on the terrestrial stations that I'm heard on, I'm an independent contractor. I don't work for that company. I just license my show to them. So I don't work for Cox. I don't work for I hard. I work for the bubble radio network. I. So some companies had like I heart and they had policies, but nobody could tell me what I could say. Yeah. The crazy thing about YouTube and Google, which owns YouTube is that they're, they make a lot of their money from the pharmaceutical companies and the pharmaceutical companies are the ones that control all this. Everything. Did you know this that the CBS, the pharmaceutical companies during the, during the COVID deal got so creative. That they didn't want to during the CBS evening news and during things like that. They didn't want to actually run the go get the shot commercial. Although they, although they did, you know, Pfizer, whatever, go get the shot. Moderna vaccine vaccine vaccine. So they went to CBS and said, we don't want to advertise in between when you do news and then you go to your three minute commercial break and then you come back. We don't want to be in that three minute commercial break as a shot. We want the news story about it to be about us. And so they would show this file footage of completely jam packed operating rooms that weren't really jam packed out. They were B roll footage from some other disaster. And they would show ventilators and all this stuff and make the COVID way more than it really was. And so instead of buying advertisers, they would buy story placements. So CBS would make the story about COVID. Right. And it was always, you know, pro vaccine. There's this ventilator, this and this. And so they got creative and they actually spent 30% more money that way than just the regular advertising. Yeah. It's so crazy. Yes. It's it's it's sickening and the crazy thing about it is, is Google and YouTube. They don't need to do the bidding of these companies. They own a monopoly on advertising across the globe. Right. They like, even if you told those companies, no, get effed. Like we're not going to follow your rules that you want to impose. I don't think those pharmaceutical companies would have any leg to stand on. They would say, okay, like, where else are you going to go? There's nowhere else to go to advertise, but Google and YouTube. Well, but but here's the deal. It's all California based. It's all woke. It's all highly blue, liberal. You know, it's like it's like it's it's I think the majority of the Google and the YouTube and the meta and all that, the majority of the problem you have is where they're based out of where their management comes from, where they live, how the lifestyles that they live. I mean, you know, people in California are way different than us here, us guys here in Florida. I mean, go to go to Grady Judd in Polk County and Rob, uh, $940 worth of stuff at Walgreens and watch how fast you're eating cement. Right. And then go to San Francisco and do it. And you probably won't get charged. Right. That's the difference. It's crazy. It's like I said about Joe Rogan. The best thing he ever did was get to fuck out of California. And he was one of the very first. So I mean, California is a shit show. Well, Gavin Newsom's trying to, uh, he's trying hard right now to like revive his image and he's trying to, like he's trying to, like slowly tip toe out of that woke camp and trying to like be more middle of the road, be more of like a guy's guy and have you just been noticing what he's been doing with his interviews? Yeah. Doing all these big podcasts and stuff like this. Right. I mean, he might be the only chance they have. I don't know. I mean, I mean, you know, here's the problem. You could see when the Democratic Party was grooming Barack Obama, you could see it. When they brought him out at the Democratic National Convention during, I think it was during the Bush, the Bush second term. And he was his fresh face senator out of out of Chicago and Barack Obama, when that bad, I mean, Barack Obama did some good stuff. You know, he wasn't so far woke and so far left. You know, he was still a bonafide Democrat. He was a, you know, he was a Democrat right here, Democrat. Well, the problem is they were grooming him to be somebody. The Democratic Party's in such shape. You know, he was a Democrat right here Democrat. Well, the problem is they were grooming him to be somebody The Democratic parties in such shambles now Who's their Barack Obama who's who who are they grooming? Can't soans? I mean Are they she could be the next one, bro? The problem is here's a Democratic party Just like Elon Musk said, Elon, Elon Musk just like Eelion Musk said is he used to be Here with the with the Democratic party right here. Yeah. Well now the Democratic party is here. Yeah, and you know It could it could survive here But it's it's it's way over here Whereas the Republicans and they're they're just as guilty with their evangelical anti-abortion bullshit I mean like you know, I mean it's just they both have gone to they both have gone so far one way that that guy that stuck there in the middle You know, we're the ones that make the most sense, but we Aren't necessarily the ones that are people that are in making any decisions or you know I mean we're just fucking stupid streamers and podcasters. Yeah, not politicians so you got to be one way or the other and you know, I Don't know I Put we could sit here and talk politics all night, but I would rather not because it's not fun and it's so fucking polarizing You know, yeah, it really is It really is and it's like the whole like what you're describing is it's like the horseshoe theory where the When you get to the extreme right and the extreme left you come together right, you know It's like the bootlegger and the baptists like here's the deal. You know what like okay I believe in guns I believe that you should be able to take your 18-year-old girlfriend to the abortion clinic smoking a joint with your handgun Yeah Yep, and that covers all that covers at all. Mm-hmm. That's pro that's that's pro gun. That's right That's pro abortion, which is left Right I don't know where marijuana want I don't know where marijuana stands and and that's I don't know who's more Probably the left is probably more pro marijuana. They're right. So you know, I believe in abortion weed and handguns and and I think that's the way most of Americans are Definitely but we're the minority, but we're really not we're really the majority Yeah, and it's just these fringe we don't realize it because it's only the only lives on the internet right right And you get these fringe like trans. Let's talk about trans. Yeah, it doesn't affect anybody in this room It doesn't affect anybody that I know it doesn't affect anybody that I associate with and If a person wants to do that great let them go ahead and do that let them train But there should only be one rule They should have to be an adult mm-hmm when you're 18 and you want to cut off your wiener go ahead if you're 18 and you want to get a set of boobs Go ahead if you're 18 and you want to Attach a wiener go ahead But you got to be 18. Yeah, you can't be like in California where their law is if you're a kid You can hide it from your parents of what you want to become and tell your teacher and your teacher will hide it from the teacher can hide it from your parents Fundamentally, man. That's just not cool no matter how you slice it no matter what political party you are in Yeah, I think that's the symptom of like the entire into class. You know how badass of a softball player I would have been on the on the worst-saw girls off ball team. I mean, I was a pretty badass football player But I would have been hit in Dangers. I would have been I would have been Bubba bonds Yeah, I was playing against bitches back in 1984. I would just been fucking driving them out I mean, so that's what you can do now in some states. Hey, I'm I'm back up Jones When I play with the boys, but I'm fucking all star will I? I'm Mark the Maguire I'm like in Mark Maguire with a wig on that's what some of these states allow the crazy thing too is How like a lot of the crazy trans activist people are now really into Violence and guns and stuff like this have you seen that them wearing the shirts with like the machine guns on them? And you know you look at the school shooters. Yeah And there's a percentage of them that are that are either have Transition were transitioning were into it You know had books on it. You know. Yeah, so it's just like at that recent the recent one the guy who shot up the kids He was trans the the Chris or the Catholic church or whatever. And had that whole man I never read it. He regretted it. He regretted it. He wanted to go back to he was like we've never knew wish he never did it right right and just like you know I don't know it just These these fringe topics that we talk about that make the news Really don't affect any of us. No, it's the wall. It's what divides us all my friend Julian has this great Theory called he calls it the he lives in New Jersey calls it the Wawa theory He's like you go on you live on Twitter all day and you you think that the world's going up in flames You know everyone wants to kill the trans people are shooting up everyone You know the the Nazis are pro or marching down the street on this street and Everything's going up and smoke but you step up from the computer drive your car to Wawa And you see the fat chick with green hair holding the door for the Vietnam veteran. Yeah, you know the problem is most people are Reclusive and they they're living remember how we were talking about earlier about the atmosphere and how we could be the mayor of Yeah, right. That's that's the problem of the world that you know when we were kids We had our bikes and we we were out out late until the street lights came on and we were out there just you know Making florts and trying to find our dad playboy's books and shit like that But we I was gonna I would ride over to Danny's house or Danny would come over to my place and I didn't have to talk to him through a Headset or anything like that. Yeah, you know, that's why that's why the younger generation can't date Officially because they don't know how to talk to don't they don't Some of our homeschooled so you don't even go to school with girls more boys girls boys boys girls You you don't really know how to talk or interact because everything you do is electronically Now let's add on the other fuck with factor and that is AI I mean where we headed there I mean I asked AI to tell me about Bubba the love sponge and it wrote something better than any publicist I could have ever paid written It wrote Everything I mean from my hog deal to the Hogan scandal to everything. I mean it wrote everything and I was like I couldn't have accurately accurately in fucking 10 seconds in 14 seconds, yeah, and it was better I've had publicists before and they're usually about 2,500 a month when you're really rolling hard and there's no publicist that could have written something that accurate about me It's like People lazy you don't do the work anymore You don't think and make it so you don't have to use your brain anymore. We don't know yet, but what where does it come? Where do we start? Have you guys seen it was on Netflix called companion? Have you seen that no, oh, it's about this guy? And it he orders a artificial intelligent girlfriend name Ivy and She's like This is a real documentary is this fiction. Oh, it's fiction. Oh, it's fiction. Oh, it's fiction But to movie yeah, but it's fiction, okay, but it's it's I don't think we're that far off from it and this and so Well, we've seen her spike Jones's movie her no with walking Phoenix. No, that's the one I was thinking of Ridgley does the exact same favorite movies he falls in love with an air Yeah, this was that this week I think her came out in like the early 2000s Steve Also way ahead of this. Yeah, so companion. This guy has this hot-ass bitch And he even went in and set up how they met where they met at he set it up. He set it up up to 13 He set it up that they met at the grocery store and they started flirting with each other and then they fell in love and Then they start then they went to this weekend get away and It from there it just turns and then there's this gay guy and he orders a gay a gay a AI robot and you can have you can on your phone determine you can fix every you can she turmaned and so Ivy the guy who owned Ivy now she fucks and she a McInno she does it all I mean She's high she looks but you can put her her intelligent level You know from dumbed or smart so he had there she is right there. Oh wow and That looks pretty somehow she turns against him and she grabs his phone and she and he has her As dumb at 40% and she jacks herself up to 100% so she can outsmart them on the fucker and she outsmart them and ends up killing them No, yeah, it's so great. Wow. It's so great. Oh, yeah. There's so many good movies based on the exact premise But how I mean I don't think we're that far from now. I don't think so either. No, we're getting closer We're gonna close our it's ramping up. I think maybe in our life. I'll probably die before you Danny because you're on Roy's But I'm just saying Roy's your own Roy's Fat Roy's You're on bodybuilding Roy's I'm the same probably in my lifetime I but I think in your lifetime and your lifetime you're going to have to deal with Am I talking to a real person or am I talking to a fucking robot? Mm-hmm. I really do I think I think that I mean who would who would have thought The advancements we've made in the last 10 years You know just think of the advancement we've made in electronic cars and space travel and and and just these AI now that you know The the AI that they have out now that are getting pretty damn You know pretty pretty pretty damn fluid. Yeah, well. I mean for sure on Instagram I get tricked every day with videos that I think are real that are a absolutely it looks insanely It's like this you're 38. I'm 59. I'm old as Fama Boomer Compute you right I get tricked double the amount of time right right I mean there's so many times I'll come up with a story and my producers will be like Bubba that's AI. I'm like oh shit I feel real stupid, you know because I thought it was for real. You know, I mean Yeah, it happens every day man. It's crazy. It's everywhere next thing I gotta take a leak real quick. Yeah, we'll be right back We're back from words. We're back from words. What are we talking about AI? Aye It's talking about your new studios. You've been telling your fans about that at all. No, we haven't talked about it at all really really But we're moving in soon. We're trying well the big what you move in date My move in date is hopefully March 1 of next year for my new studio. Oh, you got oh, you got your new place Yes, yes, I got a new place and you're building it out right now building it out right now And see you got to understand my studio was made for terrestrial radio right? You've been in there you've been so you've been in that building for how long since 10 Prior to that. I was in another building not too far down the road Which is much smaller much kind of like this. Okay, and then I bought that big place that out upstairs down where I am now And I have goats out back and all that but um So I'm I'm in the process of kind of downsizing And you're in the process of up sizing But you know today's world is the amount of equipment that you don't need Compared to what you did need right when I was rolling hard back in 2011 when I bought that place. I mean you needed I mean It just the amount of equipment our rack room is the size of this whole room You know with for equipment and mic processing and you know Everything has everything has become more simpler and easier to do now that we don't need we don't need a stage We don't need a shower. We don't need a bar. We don't need a stripper pole You know we don't need any of that anymore because I don't got strippers in there pissing and coffee cans and and and doing The stuff that I used to do that not because I don't want to do you keep you couldn't do what I used to do Anywhere unless it was only fans Back when I used to have the strippers in there and we would do Drag racing and we would do you know You know like you know what's Drag racing well now that you ask is you take two girls and you put them on a couch and you put towels underneath them and some girls can some girls cannot and You have time and distance So you say ready go and they start to care themselves taking care of themselves and the one that's the first is The winner for the speed and then you have a distance one and there's a girl that we had that could from here to that screen And I'm not kidding you she won the distance This was all on film. Yeah, I got it on film I have all this on film and this was allowed to be on radio that's he didn't care. Oh no, no, that was on Sirius XM Oh Sirius XM when We had a sibby in a monkey rocker You know we had I mean we had Literally we would have girls with strap on Wow having sex with each other. Oh my god Well while giving oral to 25 cent the black guy And you wonder why I can't get guess I said No, that was like at 4 p.m. We were actually We were waking people up with that You know we my most you know my most famous my most famous contest in Tampa ever And I'm thinking about bringing it back Was the 12 boobs of Christmas where I gave 12 sets of tits away to flat chested women every Christmas Right, I remember that we couldn't do that anymore because Dr Deoco's competition called and The board of health the board of medicine the board of doctors or whatever and made it illegal to have a contest on the radio And so we couldn't do it anymore because they're because Dan would get We get a thousand women that would sign up for a pair of boobs and then Dan would only 12 would win But the other 980 would get no no they would get coupons for 25 percent off like so they're getting them anyway so that so we would do like 50 finalists and 12 won and then the other 38 would get like get a bogo. No like Like literally 50 percent off So that's like Dan's cost. That's about his cost right and then the other 925 would get 25 percent off so a $5,000 boob job back in the day now all of a sudden 3500 and He couldn't book them fat. I mean he would literally be doing 25 boob jobs a week and the next doctor in Tampa would be doing six How many could you possibly do in a day he can do one in 52 minutes? One pair. How much the most he's done in a day? You know I think the most he's ever done in the days eight whoa It sets eight sets You gotta get her But but you understand he he would when we were when we would do this contest He would you know you can look at a girl and if she's a little bit older and you have to do a little lipo here to get that one to do He would pick the best candidates right That that he could do the quickest and have zero complications. Right. So you know he was the doctor that was picking out the winners because he would As part of the entrance you would have to take a picture of your and it was private But you'd have to take a submit a picture to the doctor with your shirt off So he knew what you it was a it was a medical file right? Sure. So HIPAA. Yeah So you would take a picture of your shirt off So he could get an idea what you had stock and he would be able to like you know if a girl Had him just drooping down and you know he would stay away from that expensive lift kid right you need to lift kid on that So he get that 20-year-old who hasn't had a kid who's just got a really good Nice set of natural boob boobs. You know like a 32b natural They wanted to jack him up to a 34c You know and he would pick those so He could get him done and he could do a boob job at an hour You know whereas if you get him you know you know mom who's had a couple kids and she has to have a little little nip Tug you know she has to he has to kind of navigate him differently when you got you know there's different levels of Of what you have to do You know like sometimes you have to take a little liposuction here to make it set right and stuff Right so he wouldn't take any of those cases at all. Yeah, you don't want to put a bra have to worry about putting a brand new suspension So like a 95 day right right you just want to put new wheels on it and let it roll right right So I mean but he but then we would one of the things about the 12 boobs of Christmas was After you got your your titties you would have to come to the studio and show us So that was part of the deal so we you know six months later after these girls I could go south But then I also owned I had 22 57's Consent forms and all these chicks and where I kicked myself in the ass is I was gonna come up with a year a yearly Calendar with the 12 girls each month and sell the like a Hooters calendar But it was gonna be a bubble army calendar with all these topless bitches, but I never I never I Missed I missed a lot of money there I think I think they're you probably could have gotten a lot of trouble too They probably would they probably would have come after no they could they could not my 22 57 And they were rock solid rock solid wow to the point where it said I can even sell your image I own your image the image that you're submitting to me I own and I can sell and In any way I won chicks will sign anything for new tips right just be honest. That's true What and then what what happened with the story that you haven't told which I think is a Interesting story is about the hog the slaughtered hog What was this what year would that was when you were that was when you were now? It was perfect Yeah, I'm on trial they put me on trial for yeah And that was a space in five years in prison for that was your first big The lawsuit no, I had one from from a state trooper that I called you know some guy I was with the power pig back in the day and we were going down to Kentucky fried chicken and braiding tin to hand out free Chicken boxes to the homeless mmm. We were doing something good and I'm on the inner. I'm on the power pig man going about 90 On the sky make it funny. You got a beauty k s Well, no that they were our sponsor oh, okay, they were they were you know It was in conjunction with it was in conjunction with funny Yeah, it was and it was like you know it was a it was it was with Kentucky fried chicken and we'd already done it like in Largo and Lakeland then she sponsored by yayas. I was sponsored by yayas Whatever happened to them. We were talking about that the other day. There's there's still much potatoes and gravy and No, the ranch dressing the buttermilk ranch dressing I'd probably have 50 pounds just because of now I'm salivating right just thinking Is there still one on fourth or they close it down? I don't know close them all down And I think there's one up in Deneed in that we found but that was yeah But that used to be an old long john silvers and it was kind of shitty But oh yeah, yas. Oh my god. So anyway, I was driving the power big fan And I was speeding on the skyway and they had the aircraft up and they were timing you that way So I got pulled over and this cut this old cop came up and started fucking with me And of course I got a ticket and of course I just didn't get on the air that night and say I got stopped by a lovely police officer I just drug him through the mud like you wouldn't believe that was my first lawsuit called him an old grandpa He had a Gerald tall drip and all that kind of stuff He took me to court And I won that was my first one Then my second one was hog deal and we had a thing Called road kill barbecue and it was for Maryland manson or metallic a tickets and we wanted people to go get road kill Like possum and raccoon and squirrel Things that had been hitting by cars And we were gonna barbecue him and make listeners eat them for concert tickets So it was going great We we had a plan for a Friday and all of a sudden at five in the morning this hunter calls in His professional hunter and trapper. He's got a floor license and people paid this guy 500 to take wild feral Hogs off of their property because those wild feral hogs are just I mean They will root up your entire lawn So they would have call him as a professional hunter to come and kill these hogs and take them off for property So he calls us up at 530 30 minutes before the show starts and says hey I know you guys are doing road kill barbecue today But what if I bring a hog I got a real live hog I just trapped and I'll kill them right there in the parking lot the humane way to kill them There's three ways you can kill a hog with a bow and arrow with a gun or you can slice its neck Well, we couldn't use a bow and arrow or a gun because we're in city limits So the hogs the hunter slice he brought you the hog live brought us the hog life and so that was mistake one So we call the Florida Fish and Wildlife Emergency hotline and we get a hold of a real Real game warden and we tell them where it located at 4,002 Gandhi and we want to do we have a professional hunter That wants to kill a hog and we want to eat it. We want to barbecue it. He said well You need to cut it to throat and if you'd like for it to be less gamey The for the meat to be less test less gamey. Yeah, then you right before you kill it you cut off its testicles Hmm, and then you cut slitted throat. Okay. That way if you don't with you slid its throat And it still has its testicles it gets a testosterone surge and taints the meat and so they they The hunter did it we're live on the air, you know raising hell Yeah so couple couple of sales women call the cops and The cops show up they look at the state statue book We did it according to the state statue now it was Distaceful and I would never do that ever again if I was it makes me cringe today because I love animals I'm not a hunter or anything like that But we didn't do anything wrong. It wasn't what you would do even if you weren't rolling the camera They're on air right that's the way you would do it. Yeah. That's how you do it. Yeah, and so we did it we Didn't waste any of the meat the the hog didn't die for entertainment purposes and we threw the carcass in the back We they they actually we ate it we had barbecue that day for all the the 150 fans that were there and They organized with the state attorney and said it wasn't felony animal cruelty for entertainment purposes There is no state statue about that and they arrested me and put me on trial and I was in front of a jury trial They deliberated for a week We were able to present four or five expert witnesses veterinarians and hunters that said that we did it the correct way The state wasn't able to produce any Witnesses because they couldn't find anybody said it was distasteful and I and it was crude and it was shocking That's the shit that I do But it wasn't illegal and in a jury deliberated for 52 minutes While the state served them ham sandwiches for lunch needlessly say and I was clear I was cleared you know cleared of that otherwise. I was facing five years in prison and and so that was probably one of the most scarier things that I've did and you know what thinking about it now and it's it was Really not cool. I'm now a member of PETA. I have I'm a member of PETA and you're a vegetarian vegan. What's the comment about I eat right? I mean I was trying to find a McDonald's in the way here Stop it the subway down the street, but you know, I was not late. I was one minute before before I was here you were and But I thought I ate it so I ate subway on the way here But no amount of vegetarian, but I am by I'm a member of PETA because I I don't believe in being cruel to animals or anything like that and So yeah such a crazy fucking story you and Howard were like the most persecuted radio personalities And that was part of what made you guys so fun Because you guys were always getting in trouble with the law and you guys were always talking about it Talking shit about the politicians. They were doing corrupt shit in your towns The big one of the biggest troubles I ever got was Mark Gober there was a guy. I forget what the kid's name was He was he was 15 years old and there was Jesse Hargrove and another kid were 17 were 16 and 17 they lived in Gibsonton and they took this 15-year-old boy out They lived in a trailer park imagine that From Gibsonton and they took this boy out of his house took him down to the creek They had a X with him and shot him in the back of the head and killed him execution style These two this a 16 and a 17-year-old with the bad guys in the 15-year-old was the victim. Oh Mark Gober gets on and Start saying that he's going to try these two kids as juveniles And there's a law in Florida that if a crime is so heinous if you're 16 or 17 The judge can bump or the state attorney can bump it up to a to an adult crime. It was a difference between them doing like five years in prison or life in prison so Mark Gober chose to choose to chose to to prosecute them as jovis and I Filled out full lipped out on 98 rock. I had everybody sin at that time member faxes when you had a fat half-action I had I burned up two or three fax machines within the state attorney's office and Mark Ober made it his personal vendetta to fuck with me for the rest of my and to this day to the rest of my career In Tampa. I always had that Mark Ober shadow over me. I just had an employee extort I just had I just had an employee in bezel $200,000 of my business and I fired him and This state attorney because it was me refused to prosecute because I allowed him to say goodbye on the air and I didn't make an example out of him I let him go and because he was a friend But I still wanted him arrested and I allowed him to say goodbye Just I didn't tell the fans necessarily long ago was this um a year or two years ago. Oh, wow two years ago and It went through the state attorney's office and because I didn't get on the air and say hey this piece of shit stole $200,000 from me instead. I let him get on the air and say You know, I'm moving on You know because I didn't want to you know I tried to be a good guy for one. I tried to actually be a good guy and The state attorney used me being nice against me and said well It looks like you didn't really care or that you you kind of knew about it and they chose not to press charges because it's me Jesus me just like the no file on the Hogan sex tape You know they didn't they didn't file they never they never never filed charges on the people that stole that They never filed charges on the people that extorted Hogan They never filed charges on the people that distributed it none of that because it was me you my calta Punched my girlfriend in my fiance in the face at a public event two years ago What? Punch her in the face took her phone from her Punch her in the face and because she's my fiance They didn't press charges and they told her that she's lucky She didn't go to jail because she was the aggressor. She's five foot one a hundred and five pounds Other's video of it. I wish you could see it really. Yeah. I wish you could see on YouTube. Yeah There's video of it. How does he search for it type in um Go to my channel Which is the bubble army and then just type in my calta and wait? You see what he did to her she walked up she walked up to him at a personal appearance He was at a personal appearance at a gun at a shark coast tactical and she walked up because nobody's ever asked this question And she had her phone and she said my calta mike Calta can ask you a few questions and he's like sure come on in welcoming her in a public Keep on going down down down down right up up. Let me see here you go. That's it Two years ago So what you see this And I was joking I said I could have come be my friend. I'm all it's yeah, so she's asking She's she's asking him. He looks drunk. Yeah, so she you can see he's really nice He doesn't know who she is so he thinks he's gonna get some ass. Oh, some groupie So she asked some questions about the sex day. Okay, right? I mean, you know And and you can fast forward it a little bit. I'd said fast forward it questions about the sexting right? I mean, you know, and and you can fast forward it a little bit. I'd said fast forward it maybe. Yeah, but right there, but right there. Where is the line? I understand. But you're my question. Where is the line? Okay, so you're admitting that you did that. I was thinking it's important. Where do you see this? And guess what? I think they were going to arrest her. I did not just watch this. I was not unable to come. I wonder a gag order. So wonder. I would say that. If you show me one time where I said I've told everything, guess it starts getting real really well. You're off your skin. I was not being able to talk about it. Okay. I like that. I'm not that I'm wrong on that. I'm not having time. And put it on your face. So she, she, so he makes her and make it. She's wrong about her certain ass. You're not being true. That's, that's, that's, that's talking about September 27. I'm being truthful. I'm being, I'm, okay. Let's talk about this. This is when it starts getting real. It's about September 27th when you're agent checks in. Why would I waste my time? We're not. Don't try to deter. Don't, don't try to deter the facts. Okay. You're in public. Yeah. I'm a personal parent. Okay. I love it. Okay. I love how I love this too. The next one. When you, when you, this is, this is what makes him flip out. This makes him flip out. The, what's what you ask makes him flip out. Because this is, this is his, his attorney instructing him. You're, this is a turning telling him where to send the sex tape. Okay. So watch your agent sent you gawkers, eat address to send the tape. You asked him nothing yet on September 27th at four, 54. So I said, definitely tell the security. Let her go. Let her go. That's right. You asked me. You asked him nothing yet. And then he replied. Well, it was, well, in his reply, it's a problem. You're getting your assumption. What you think you know, what you're about. And with in your, Danny, you're going to flip out. And you see this. This is the world that I live in. This is the world that I live in. To 10. It was the street New York New York. I'm where to send the tape. So you're telling me two weeks before a doctor got the tape and your agent gives you the address you didn't send the tape. I've never sent it. You never sent it to send the tape. You have no idea what that was about. Okay. Why don't we're going to send it back? You just want to tell them the radio all the time saying he's got. She's got him here. Yeah, she's got him. And you're wrong, but you don't want it admitted. So I don't know what more you already do. Are you admitting that you got, you got the address for Walker from your agent? I don't. I did not admit it. The other email. Yep. Because the other email is true. This is true. You know what that's about. Okay. So your agent gave you gawkers to this trial. I've been telling you your life that you're here fighting this fight. Now watch this. I just boom. He grabs your phone. Stop it. Stop it. Stop it. Stop it. Pause. Then you don't have to stop it. So he grabs her phone, which is grand theft. He grabs her. He makes first contact. He grabs her phone. And now he's videotaping the entire, the entire place. But he took, he took her phone from her. Yeah. Okay. And now continue on. It's almost over. All right. Someone. So shows your, oh, he just takes her phone. Yeah. Strong arm, strong long robbery by sudden snatching. You don't have permission to take my phone. Now watch this. So she tries to get her, she tries to get her phone back. I'm going to what? I'm going to get this shit out. Watch this. He takes and races, he erases her phone. He's going through her phone right now. She reaches over his shoulder to grab her phone. Now watch this. Look at this. Watch his hand right under face. Okay. Just a mushroom right out. That's fucked. Oh, that sucks. Then then center outside, erases two of the videos off of her phone and center phone back out there. The cops come, Marand dies him, get reading his rights. He makes one phone call and the cops leave and the case gets dropped. And the cops tell her you're lucky. He doesn't press charges because you were the aggressor when you went to get your phone. And the Florida state statute states, if something, if I take your phone from you, let's say this is your phone. I take this from you. You have the right to exert a certain amount of energy to get this back. Now you don't have to punch me in a mouth, but you can be like, man, give me my phone back. And that's the world that I live in. He didn't get prosecuted because this is in Sarasota. They found out who her fiance was. That's the bubba factor right there. That's how much they hate you. And that motherfucker is the morning drive guy who shot the tape and has been doing mornings for 12 years right there, right to fuck there. Banana's man with a fucking crazy world. What a bunch of fucking bullshit. And what did I do to be the bad guy? Like you said earlier, I held people accountable. I would bust politicians balls. I would stick up for the guy that was out there fucking painting like you. I was the man's man, the people's hammer. And you do that long enough. Then you become eventually I got canceled. I got canceled before canceled was a thing. Fucking wild man. And the story, the documentary lays it all out perfectly. Oh, yeah. So you watched it other than being a little bit long. Did you like it? Oh, yeah. That was amazing. I mean, and to think that they they used it to try to take a hack at Trump. Yeah, that's crazy. I love it. I just don't come in there. Yeah. I just don't did a great job. I try to get Tucker, but I couldn't coordinate with Tucker because I've had Tucker on my show for you. You used to be on there. Always talker. And you know what I think about Tucker. You used to love Tucker right there. I had Tucker on Tuesday's Tucker Tuesday's. Yeah. Tucker. This was this was for six years. And this really kind of I'm kind of I've not really ever talked about this, but it really upset in the fact that when Tucker got fired from MSNBC and he was just a small contributor on Fox and Friends in the morning twice or three times a week. I used to have Tucker on when he had no platform at all. None. Like none. No more MSNBC. Nothing. And we had Tucker Tuesdays. And we know it was great. And now Tucker won't have me on. He just have you talked to him? Yeah. I've tried. And he just like, ah, you know, no, basically no, that's so weird. Yeah. And like I was just like, what the fuck did I do? What the fuck did I do or have I done to make even Tucker to not like me? Yeah. I don't know. And I know that there was a place called Media Matters. And when he was with Fox, they went and subscribed to my bubble army HQ.com, which has all my archives of everything I've ever done. And this company called Media Matters went and there's a pretty extensive search engine on bubble army HQ where you could type in literally, you know, Matt Cox. And it would show you the show that Matt was on. Well, the media matters paid for a membership. It's like $9.99 a month. And they went and downloaded all 168 shows that Tucker was on. And then they cherry picked it and kind of made a worst of Tucker tape. That's when he was really, really big on Fox when he was huge on Fox. And they caused quite a bit of a shit storm for Tucker with regards to Fox. They got a lot of advertisers to pull based on what he said on my radio show a decade earlier. And that caused, I think, some dissension. But I'm like, Tucker, that's not my fault. That was, you were on my show being yourself talking about like how Iranian women smelled like camels and, you know, like just outrageous shit because at that point, he wasn't beholding to anybody. You know, he didn't have to really watch what he. So he would say, like, you know, I hate Canadian. I live in Maine and I hate Canadians and if all Canadians would be cool, just, you know, crazy shit. And they use that against him and they got like Mercedes and some big companies to pull their advertising based on his appearance on my show. And I think that Tucker still holds that against me. And I didn't have anything to do with that. I mean, so I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't understand some of the drama between some of these OG talk show guys. I mean, some of them fucking figure out, figured out the new media YouTube landscape and just fucking hit it, hit a home run with it, like Tucker, like as soon as he left Fox, he went on YouTube and just blew, he's just killing it. Crossionate, man. But why would you forget about your buddy? I don't know. Why would you forget about your buddy that when you weren't shit, when you weren't even on NBC, you still had Tucker, your buddy still had Tucker Tuesdays? Like, I don't understand. Yeah. I don't understand it either, man. I mean, you know, you're my friend. Why do people hate me, Danny? I don't know why people hate you, Bob. I don't know. I don't know. I wish I knew the answer. I don't think Rogan Hager. I think Rogan loves you. I think Joe likes me too. He loves everybody, man. He's not like that. He's a target guy who likes to share everything. He likes to help boost people a lot. Well, and I've never, oh my God, I've never said an ill word towards him. In fact, borderline worshiped him just based on how well he's done and how he's become the new hit factor. And he's been the hit factor for a long time. Yeah. I mean, and you know what, it's only going to go away when he decides to wrap it up. Right. It is. How long did you hear him? How long do you even want to do it for? Yeah. I think for Joe, I think Joe's going to want to do it for a long time because Joe's so good at it. Yeah. And he's such a conversationalist. And he's got such a great compound that he could do it on his terms. Yeah. And you can hand select, you know, you're not ever hurting for a guess because you are the absolute pinnacle of getting on the Joe Rogan show is the absolute pinnacle of media. So I think Joe does it. Maybe Joe will scale back a little bit. You know, maybe maybe as he gets older, he's like, hey, I want to do twice a week or once a week or, you know, I think he'll scale back before he quits. I think he loves it too much. Yeah. I feel like he treats the podcast. It's like a warm-up for his comedy. Yeah. I think they I think they should intertwine. They definitely do. They definitely intertwine. And he can try new stuff out on the road. And he's right there in Austin. I think he's got his own joint now that need to know. Yeah. He's got his own joint. So he's got kind of his, he's kind of made this Joe Rogan bubble universe, this, this Joe Rogan universe bubble that, you know, he's got everything. He's got a perfect setup. Like, you know, nobody will ever, nobody ever will get to that status. I don't think until he leaves. And at that point, you're just a Joe Rogan ripoff. Well, I think whoever, uh, I don't think even if somebody is able to come up with the same amount of talent that he has, I don't think still anyone will ever be able to achieve what he did in media just because of the timing. No, he had the perfect timing. He had the perfect timing and he's got the perfect setup. And let's not, let's not take the talent away from the fact that anybody can get the setup and, but you got to be talented and you got to be quick on your feet and you've got to have the infrastructure and you got to, I mean, he didn't just just just all come to him. I mean, you know, don't forget it wasn't too far removed from being on fear factor, which I'm sure he cringes at times. Yeah, I got it in fucking fear factor. Oh shit. God, I look like a, well, you know, what I'm sure Joe sometimes cringes get people to drink bull semen. Yeah, exactly. You know, I mean, I'm sure he cringes at some of that early shit, but I mean, nobody, nobody. And I'm not, I'm so thankful for the opportunity Howard gave me, but he is completely surprised, surpassed Howard. Yeah. And I don't Howard, like, does it like, Pong? He like talks shit about Joe and podcasting. And I don't understand why Howard wouldn't give Joe his flowers because Joe has earned him. Yeah. The reason why is because Joe's surpassed him. Right. I mean, that's, that's just the way it is. That's the way it is. And Joe and Howard's gone, like super, like, lefty, whoa. Oh, Joe. I mean, Howard, yeah, he's, and Joe's not Joe's, Joe's still that American dude that's doing kettlebells that's fucking shooting his bow and arrow that's looking for moose meat and all the, I mean, Joe's still a dude that would get, if you knew how to run an excavator, he would. Yeah. Howard is so far removed from the average man and you know, the average dock worker long longshoreman back in the day used to like Howard. Now they like Joe. Yeah. Joe is the new it factor. And I don't see it going away until he quits. And I don't ever see it being emulated to the way Joe's doing it. Right. Well, Bubba, this is amazing. Well, Dan, amazing. Thank you for coming in, dude. And thank you for letting me watch your documentary early with the early release. Thank you for pushing it. And don't forget it comes out today on okay, video, kill the radio star on Apple where else is it available? Apple, Google play, and Amazon. Hell yeah. Man, my wife was hot. What did you smoke? And we sent me the links. I will put the links down below. People could find a, uh, find appreciate the documentary and download it. And anything else to just tell people about your show where to listen to you, where to tune in every day. We're on YouTube like you guys are. Um, you know, we, um, we just hit a hundred and I think 35,000 subscribers, which is a lot for us. Using you, you probably remember those days. Can you remember when you can you remember when you're at 135 and you thought you were all that bitch? Yeah. Yeah. I remember that's where I'm at. And I'm not all that. It starts snowball. It starts picking up speed. Was it really before you know it? You're at a million. No, yeah, please. I couldn't even look at that. I mean, we got, yeah, we, we, we, I got some good, I got some good stuff. And, uh, I mean, but I mean, how fast did it take you to get to a million? Uh, a long time, long time. I think I started. I really started doing, like, when does gasoline start getting poured on it? Like, you know, like when, like, if I'm at 135 now and, you know, the average will for me, the problem with it for me is I started doing different. I was doing documentary stuff first and then I started doing the podcast. I didn't start doing the podcast until like 2019. But we were only doing like one, one or two podcasts a month. Well, that's it. And that's it. And that was one year for a while. Once we started doing one a week, then it started to pick up more. And now that we're doing two weeks, it's fucking going crazy. So I think it's a lot about like the more you do, the faster it grows. Every one of our daily shows up there. And you know, our daily shows are now getting, you know, like, look, you got the good thumbnails. You guys got it. Yeah. I got a got my new, my new guy really. And then he'll take each show and make reels. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. A little, little, little minute 57 second reels. Listen, I did hit it out. I don't laugh at me because I'm way lower. You know, I'm way low on the fucking digital pecking scale than you are. I couldn't be a pimple on your ass. And I'm very, you know, as much as you used to listen to me back in the day, I'm honored and to call you a friend. And I'm very, I was just, I was just telling concrete climm here when you're a pissing. I go, I'm fucking proud of that kid. I did not. Yeah. I mean, I said, I said, I am proud of that kid. He is fucking killing it. But we unfaith, we because of I'm a little bit older. We also aggregate some of our stuff on Facebook too. So, you know, every clip that we make, we figure we might as well put across all, you know, all, you know, we're on rumble. You know, if we make a clip of 57 second clip, it'll go on Insta, it'll go on TikTok, it'll go on Facebook, it'll go on YouTube, it'll go everywhere. And you guys clip them out and put them out like instantly the same day, the same day you record. Oh, yeah. Like by the time the show is over, the first hour clips are done. That's crazy. So we're getting them out. But we hit, we hit and out and don't laugh at me, okay? But we hit on Facebook, we hit a reel that did 91 million views. Holy shit. And I mean, now is that, I mean, in a made like that, that clip made like 12 grand. Hell yeah. What? You know, all was it 57 seconds. Oh my God. And it was about me talking. It was just like, it wasn't, I don't know if it was just hashtag but it obviously got put up on people's recommendation pages, but we did 91.4 million views. Which was that? And it was just a clip about, it was about the cost of Super Bowl commercial ads. And it was just something real. Four or two. I think we get a Super Bowl gimmick or something like that. Four or two. And you know, I think that's pretty good. That's really good. I mean, I think that's, I think I've ever gotten that many views on a clip. So, and we've gotten, you know, we've gotten several clips that, you know, have done, you know, hell, I think that brochogen clip right there did as done on Facebook, 465,000 views. Wow. So I mean, you know, you're on TikTok and all that stuff. We're, everything's at the bubble army. Everything is at the bubble army. But TikTok doesn't pay shit. You do TikTok. Yeah, we do the TikTok, but I don't pay attention to it. But do you make them? I mean, you probably don't make, no. And rumble doesn't really pay that well. You know, you got YouTube. And oddly enough, Danny, you're probably too young for it. But Facebook pays pretty good. Does it really? Yes. Facebook just actually started working with this company that's going to start posting our clips on Facebook because we never touch Facebook. You listen, you could easily be pulling down an extra. This is probably short money for you. But you could probably, with, you could probably pull down an extra five to seven thousand a month on Facebook. If you start clipping. I can note of it. I gotta hit up. You really got to do that. I got to, you know that guy. That's your upper demos. Yeah. And you know, and these, these 45 plus people are looking for good content because there's so much shitty stuff out there. Yeah. So, you know, when you, everything that you do, Danny, you should clip up and distribute across the platforms that are going to pay you the most. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We're going to do it. I mean, I know you, I know you, but all your eggs in the YouTube basket. But there's, there's a couple other baskets out there that could get you some flowers. We've been blowing up on Spotify lately. Like our Spotify numbers have been like equal or more than our neighbors. Go through Songcast. Well, no, my, our Spotify thing goes through megaphone. This company called megaphone. And it's the same company. So we have a, we had this company that sells our advertising like our, our, our read ads that we do. Right. And they also, they also collect all my Spotify money. Right. And they cut me at check. So I'm not sure exactly what the Spotify specific money is. But I mean, you could get a bag from Facebook. You could get a picture of her. Macox is all over the Facebook stuff. And I bet you I'd be willing to say that Matt Cox's Facebook money is fucking good. I call it Matt Cox once a week. I'm like, bro, tell me what you're doing. I need to learn. He teaches me stuff all the time about this stuff. The guys like I said earlier, I know he's got heat with me or he loves you. I love him. He thinks you don't like him. Well, you make sure you wreck. I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll build the bridge back. Macox, I love your brother. Let's do some shit together. All right, brother. Thanks for coming, brother. Thank you, Danny. Thank you, Danny. Hello, video, kill the radio star out now. Go get it. Thank you, Danny. Good night, everybody. Thank you, submit, clim. Concrete clim. I, whoo.