The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Welcome to episode 1666 Oh, there can be only one Wow, I don't know Surrals, that was the rules Terrible rules It's like the worst rule But for episode 1666, there was only one option That was you Oh, thank you, I'm honored by that Thank you so much, Joe It's so nice to be here Dude, it's so nice to see you It's you're such a good friend that every time I see you, I'm transported Like there's no time lost Yeah And I'm saying When you're so tight with someone That when you see them again, you're like Transported Yeah Like you're immediately back to where I last saw you again There's no like, hey, God, haven't seen you in a while Yeah, why are you? What's going on? It's like, ah, yeah, that's real friendship I mean, that's it, if it's not that What is it? I'm super concerned about this Whitckesh and fire, we're surrounded by candles And I believe this wig is fun Yeah, that wig is from China I don't know what it is, that could be some bizarre synthetic That could be anything This is the hair of a billionaire who said the wrong shit No shit, they just They probably made it grow his hair first You probably kept him in a tunnel Somewhere and made him eat rats, whatever rats he could catch Yeah And just give him hair vitamins When his hair was long enough to make a wig out of it, they let him go That's a lot of work to get some hair Yeah, now all he does is coach John Cena His job is to coach John Cena I want to say Dude, that was weird That was really weird That was one of the weirdest things I'm not a fan of or not a fan of John Cena No, John Cena opinion Right But that was just an odd It was scary Because they want, I guess it's just a lot of money, man The Chinese dollar Here's how much money that's ready for this That movie made $160 million to open a weekend I believe $134 million of it was from China Oh God Oh God We gotta get in, let's do our apologies with China I need to learn Mandarin and start talking shit, Chandra Just say it Just say it Start doing my acting, Chandra It sounds cool It sounds great Amazing The most impressive thing about that video Was not just that China got John Cena to cook But also that John Cena speaks perfect Mandarin Yeah, how long did that take? It's a mystery, I don't know man, it was just strange That's like That's some really, really The most, it's again, like you know we're watching that fight Oh my God Reflexes When we're watching that fight last night And you're just watching it and you're trying to make sense of the normal reality You know, cause it's like you got to accept it But he's wearing a Pikachu medallion Fighting like the best boxer Alive today No But you have to watch it from the perspective of like Well this is what is happening now Because otherwise you get this weird spinning vertigo Like what the fuck universe am I in? Same thing when you're like watching John Cena do some weird Apology, and Mandarin It's a sense of like what? Right This is a malfunction, this is a breakdown I don't get this, when in the history of the United States Imagine like some old video of John Wayne doing some Apology and another language It's just weird It is weird, but it's a warning to everybody Right? People that don't they're not taking this sort of cultural shift seriously When you see an enormous alpha male in John Cena John Cena's arms are so big It looks like they're supposed to be a foot longer But someone saw them off and put like a fist Here, it's like if my forearm went down only to here And then the fist was there, his wrists are enormous He's like he's such a gorilla Right? And to see that guy Saying it in Chinese and you read what he actually said It's like it's hard to say Right? Because one thing I try to give him the benefit of the doubt I was like what did he actually say? Because I don't speak Mandarin Right I wish somebody maybe that spoke Mandarin could translate it And tell me whether or not that was accurate I'm assuming it was accurate because I haven't heard anything People speak Mandarin must have gotten a hold of it since that But it was just weird to see an apology for just saying that a country exists That's essentially what it was He said Taiwan is a country And he said that I mean that's all he said wrong Taiwan was going to be the first country to see the movie Yeah, that's right, you can't say that Which is bullshit Also that thing that just popped up They said it was a mistake But being apparently made it So that if you image search the Tiananmen Square Guy holding the suitcase Didn't show up on the day on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre And so everybody's like what the fuck just like are you Are you like owned by China now? You know that's that's that is a really strange form of invasion It's like it's not at the normal kind of invasion We're thinking about invasions from old historical versions of invasions But that's not how it works anymore Now it's you know if you get your technology into another country If you become the supplier of a lot of their pharmaceuticals If you all these things then you don't really need to invade You know what I mean if you've bought up a lot of their property You don't need to fly with jets You don't need because you're buying it and you're like no that's like to me that's the That's where Countries like the United States what makes them so amazing is also this huge Terrible weakness which is they have a permeable membrane Shaking it in there easier than other places You know and like especially now with the ability to like just have a thousand ai Bots running various Twitter accounts expressing It's kind of similar sentiment regarding whatever the fuck it is you want to promote. Yeah, that's crazy You could just warp people's minds any way you want. I mean you know we I have we have no I'm not just talking state agencies either. I mean just cobbles of like anarchist You feel like just fucking around with the zeitgeist Because theoretically just put out a shit ton of bots or phone banks of people Putting weird ideas into the culture that you know you hear it enough times you start thinking like I guess that is true Right that must be true. I don't know if you've ever had the thing happen Where you're just scanning Twitter and you see some completely wrong like deeply wrong Fact and physics but you didn't you were just shitting or something So you're like well, that's interesting and then later you repeat it without looking it up See if it's true and then you go back to see it. I just happened to me and you realize like three tweets above that tweet It's like the guys like I'm the reincarnation of Marilyn Monroe You know I mean I'm like oh fuck I repeated Yeah, some fact I heard from a guy who thinks he's the reincarnation of Marilyn Monroe Literally it dinner. Yeah, you know that's what I'm saying is it leaks out And so it's just trippy, you know, it's just weird to imagine that like what country are are we even the United States anymore? Is it it's confusing right because we're really governed by money and we have no money We have nothing right yeah, we run out of money all bets are off Because we don't have money to fix the roads we don't have money to keep the grid up right So it's we have to have a certain amount of money and one of the things that became abundantly clear during COVID was that we rely on a lot of other countries to make our stuff Yeah, you know like when they were running short of certain supplies and medicine even they're like hey Who how can we don't make this yeah? We don't self-sustain and it made a lot of people think that oh I need to get a garden Yeah, you know I need to have food in my house. I need to be self-sustaining the same way a country needs to be like that But much like the country as soon as we start getting the gears of industry back rolling And moving we forget all the grids back on I forget like out here the grid went out for a whole fucking week man Nobody had power it was wild the streets were covered in ice It was wild and everybody is like dude. That's it I'm gonna start storing food and I'm gonna start but then as soon as the power goes on you got to go back to work Most people forget and I remember when they banned Huawei When you couldn't buy Huawei phones, and this is why because I'm a phone dark Okay, I'm really into phones like I spent a lot of time on YouTube watching like MKBHD and watching Lewis from unbox therapy and watching Flossy Carter I really enjoy watching the technology of phones and Crease in this like really crazy way. I'm fascinated by it Yeah, I don't I don't necessarily understand why because when I look at like the applicable uses in my life like how much do I use my phone? Like all the capabilities are very little I text my friends Yeah, I'm like watching YouTube video take a picture or something. I don't do a lot of shit with my phone but I'm Pinated with these goddamn things I'm fascinated by where they go and I was gonna buy a Huawei I think it was like a Mate 10 Pro Porsche edition. I was trying to figure out how to get it to work in America because they work on like you gotta Make sure that one works on the right CDMA because they have like different systems overseas and other countries So I was trying to find out how to buy this in Porsche design was making like the dopest phone And I was interested in doing this and then all of a sudden they start reading on these forums They're gonna take it down. They're gonna not allow Huawei to sell anything in America because we caught them doing stuff with like Rouders or some shit. I don't remember the whole story, but I remember thinking whoa That's one of you ever heard that before where they said hey a country can't or a company rather can't sell shit in our country Because we're thinking you're compromised by the government of your country you're sneaking in not just like oh They hacked into a router. Yeah, and now they got all the Facebook data not like the no no no no the whole company Can't sell shit here anymore. Yeah, I can't sell their phones anymore. They were about to go I think they're gonna be on 18t and all these other like big providers It's like what happened I can't remember which president it was but remember that president like I think it was the Russians These cute kids came in and presented the president with some kind of like gift from Russia I think he hung it up on a wall or something and it had a bug in it It was just a bug in in the Oval Office that they of course that is well, but that's similar to way But for everyone it's the same thing like you get a little I don't know spec of whatever the fuck this weird technology is mixed in with some Mass-produced stuff that goes all over the planet and now you can listen not just to like government officials But to what people are saying and then get that data Gather it up and then feed it to an AI You can replicate the Personality of the country so that thing, you know like remember the old days like you get a Twitter bot But their English was kind of fucked up like there was something about it that was like Or you know you get a call from one of those One of those like so fake social security people they say they're gonna delete your social security number I don't know if you've gotten any of these or not. Yeah, but like you know, they've got an accent They can't they don't obviously the way they're talking you're not from the fucking social security office not because you can't have an acting Thrassos calling you from that social security office. Yeah, you are in Noncompliance That is the I love those calls by the way, especially when I'm recording intro for the podcast. Do you play them in? Stir record You know what I I I I have because generally I'm late on the record or I just don't because you know that you can trigger them real quick Like they get so mad and then they'll always say something about fucking your mom or like you know Your mom's got the biggest dick and then they'll hang up on you But my my friend Pemberton got one real like he's got a call up where he got one really really good It's just fun to do but anyway, man, my point is you Sifen all this fucking data feed it to an AI Run that through some kind of voice simulator So it sounds like a person and now you've got like a legion of fake Americans Interacting right and and that's good then you could just control the culture and that's a hundred percent happening Yeah, well, I mean, yeah, that's a hundred percent happening right now. I mean not just from China from Russia Russia but not just from Russia from corporations people have done that with those guys and then called another one and Have them talk to each other and they can't figure out for about an hour what the fuck's happening That's totally makes sense I mean what they're doing it with the internet research agency or at least what they were doing prior to 2016 if we assume that they don't get any more sophisticated over the last four or five years We're gonna be so silly like they This lady Renee Doreista I heard her on Sam Harris's podcast and I got her on mine and she was explaining to me all the research She did it looking into how the Russians were Making these Facebook paid not the Russians just one agency I should say in that research agency They were making these memes and she's like hundreds of thousands of memes and a lot of them were really funny She's like I was really laughing while I was doing this and she said she got to study how they created these pages and that's where it was really interesting like They would create these pages and they would use them for a while It's like maybe a Simpsons fan page or something like that and they would get a certain amount of following and then they would switch it over to Occupy Wall Street or they would switch it over to Black Lives Matter or they'd switch it switch it over to LBGTQ page And they would just get a bunch of followers and then just use those follows use a ton of hashtags and connect people through hashtags and And they would just try to figure out what sticks and they would have meme pages and they would organize Arguments so like they organized a Texas Texas Separatist meeting across the street from an Islamic Some Islamic pride of rally so they got the two of them on the caddy corner of streets So they yell at each other like they're like you ever see that video of the the cat and He's on a roof and a crow gets behind them starts fucking with them And then he gets the cat to fight with another cat. Oh, yeah It's an amazing video this crow is so slick like fucks with the cat like hey man Fucks going on with you bro. Yeah, and then there's another cat It's on another another rooftop just like five feet away And that cat he looks at that cat He's like when fuck you and then why you why you staring at me man Why this crow's fuck with me and the crow goes and fucks with him? Yeah, and the crow literally goes back and forth fucking with cat to cat and then they jump on each other and You know a tumble of bodies fall off the roof. Yeah. It's amazing. It's amazing. That's what the internet research agency is Yeah, and not just the internet research agency. I mean this is the thing It's like this is what I've realized I've been doing is any time any kind of crazy shit happens I assign responsibility to some unknown state agency because we think there's no way Any normal group of people could do that. It's got to be a country with a shit ton of money Right, no group of people could do that, but I'm realizing that is just not the case anymore because the technology that everyone has access to is sufficient to at least like in a really degraded way Imitate what you know probably what state agencies are doing meaning that now It's pure anarchy because you know you assume those like whatever the fuck they are the u a Please we are all like oh We know it's not a state agency or if it is one it's like deeply secret That's like mother fucker. You think it's a state agency. Whatever is just a group of geniuses who like secretly crack their own thing in their basement and they're like just fucking around with this thing You know that's the or though you know the the obvious thing coming out now that it the Everyone suspects that the Virus came from the virology lab in the place. It was that Were there just study the exact body not everybody when that it first there like oh fuck it definitely came from there And then they're like well actually there's the wet markets there, but anyway the point is like what if What if you're like an hyper-ego environmentalist group and you know that if you engineer this thing That's got like an extra two weeks or whatever We're asymptomatic like you engineer a thing not to kill people But to fuck up economies right and then you go to the place where there's an institute of virology and you release it there and If course people are gonna be like wow must it come from there? Right, that's a good point. We just assume it's from like this place or that place right? You know what I mean it could be from anywhere well three people that work not lab got sick But we're assuming they got sick from that lab like what a great cover if you like sprayed them in a restaurant Yeah, get them to go in there. I get everyone sick. It seems like it comes from there dude Duck and trussle thinking of 4d chest scale. Yeah. Yeah, man. I like it. Well, it's scary though I mean this is again like to me that's the part that's like a Little daunting and we are you know is that this shit, you know that it's not like it's gonna get better It might get better. I think if anyway Anyway, it's gonna make it better as technology. I think technology is gonna allow ultimate transparency where you could read minds Once you could see clearly see people's intent it's gonna chase all the demons into the shadows like roaches with the lights on They're gonna see but you kind of tell But you kind of allow some of it to exist Like when you see like Schumer and Pelosi kneeling with African garban You know like what are you doing? What is happening here like what is this weirdness? All right when you see someone doing weird shit, you kind of okay politicians for example The best like they'll say a speech, but it's off doesn't sound like anything you would say they're doing weird things to hands Yeah, you like you accept a certain amount of insincerity. We don't like it Well, no, you know what you know it's like you're talking about like the uncanny valley That thing where when you look in a CGI and it's not quite right and it's fucking creepy Yes, right. It's that thing where it's like and This seems to be happening across the fucking board, you know where you're seeing like what does appear to be a kind of clumsy alien attempt to Express solidarity with something, but it doesn't quite understand Humans like it's not like it doesn't just understand whatever the fuck It's like trying to express connectivity to it's like it doesn't understand the way normal people interact And I think like if you get a political class and you put them in a city where they can get on underground Subways that are just for them right around in these little fucking trams through DC to avoid the traffic They live in like the they live in like they live in this weird weird bubble and over time You're gonna get weird like you're gonna get weirder and weirder You're not even are you early interacting with your cuz constituents? Probably a little but also you're getting like you've got advisor upon advisor upon advisor articulating some expression of what's supposed to be The will of the people, but that's been warped a little bit by the Lobbiest you know what I mean? So you're and also you are thinking like fuck. I want to get reelected I need millions of dollars to get reelected and that's not gonna come from anybody but Certain corporations but then those corporations have like kind of loose ties with Countries that are like there's are adversaries as they say meaning that all of a sudden it's not just like some lobbyists Who wants there to be a lack of regulations on oil pipelines getting the ear of some Politician, but it's a corporation. It's a little bit influenced by a completely different country Getting the ear of a politician Now it's like you know what I mean It's like suddenly we're getting like this thing that's some kind of like Hybrid it's not a country anymore. It's a it's it's becoming more of a I don't know like just some hyper connected thing that is like Probably not quite What you would normally call traditionally call a country? Well a country didn't exist in the form of the United States until 1776 and then it's evolved from there Right as they as money starts getting weirder and weirder like because money's all digital now Right it's all flying around and then what it becomes Bitcoin money then that's really digital We get into cryptos of crypto becomes the the general currency of the world. Yeah, right And then what's the stuff that from happening with language? So we have a universal currency that is It doesn't have like a Some backing behind it. It's just this weird Thing where people just agree that a Bitcoin is worth $52 today or whatever the fuck goes You know, it's a weird one, right? Yeah. Yeah. How do you How do you stop that from happening with language? Like what if people come along with a language that's easy to learn you're gonna learn it You know you can learn it's fun. There's games you can play you can learn it where you're playing a game And you get points like what if there's a call of duty language like no bullshit You know like how different video games are thought about creating their own coins People have different people have different coins right they're making their own coins What's the stop you from making a language that goes along with a video game And as you get really good at the video game you learn the language Also, yeah, like Musk's neural mesh works out and so we can expedite the The ability to learn new languages So it's not just like new languages are being formed But then also you can just digest them Like Yeah, yes And then so now you get this like weird hyper-evolving Language that is probably going to be the language that the settlers speak on the moon colonies and the Mars colonies and the asteroid miners Like what are you you're not going to be able to speak? You're gonna have to have some pigeon by the way I watched the Stanford professor that you had on heat like you know I'm talking about you have so many people on what you had a you had a Stanford professor who's like a Cultural biologist or so you showing like how gene expression Effects like the just basically a lot of humanity I wish you remember his name. It's a wonderful lecture if you look it up on YouTube How long ago was this? I don't know man. I just googled him in showtuberman. I think it might be Huberman I don't know how to remember G whoever it was is very genius did he look like a handsome soldier? No, no Huberman is a Huberman looks like a scientist in a Marvel Marvel comics movie Like that's not a fucking scientist, but he's like a legitimate scientist Like an absolutely super well-respected I believe so what is this? What is Huberman's discipline? Officially Neuroscientist this guy looks like an acid chemist. Oh Oh Who the fuck would that be? Look up. It's Stanford. It's like he did a how long ago Man, I'm just late at night. I'm just watching Stanford lectures. I don't know that I'm not looking at times What? Robert Sapolsky. He's a post. Oh, he's one of my favorites. Yeah, it's a pause ski. Yeah. Oh my god He's he's the guy that got me to think first of all the hardest about parasites Because he was his big thing was toxoplasmosis. That's what found out about him He was teaching a lecture on toxoplasmosis And I was like oh my god. Do I have that because like I've had cats like and I had wild cats at one point in time Yeah, and um, it's really common in cats and really common in cat people You know, it's really common in Poor parts of the world where they have a lot of feral cats Some places are like France at one point in time but 50% of the people were infected by this brain parasite That comes from cats and you know the whole story behind the parasite. Oh, yeah, but I love that I mean, it's for some reason it never gets a little it never gets old It's a fascinating parasite and this is what it does it gets into rats and it hijacks the reward systems It hijacks the way the rats brain works and it makes the rats sexually attracted to the smell of cat urine So they're they're they're they're balls swell up their dick gets hard. It's crazy. How embarrassing how embarrassing and It also simultaneously removes their fear It's so strange and it's a strategy Like it's a parasite. I'm so sorry. I forget it Imagine if there was like a grizzly bear parasite Oh my god, that would be hilarious That would be fucking hilarious It's like a last-game park ranger. It's like a new thing. They got it These fucking assholes out there with like Why's your dick hard soldier I got to get to the bears That's hilarious, but that's what it is man and the proportions are pretty similar to like rat to cat versus Person to bear pre-fucking similar crazy to think somehow That happened in this dimension that that is how long we've been here That's how it's just crazy to think that's because that just seems If we're designing the simulator That's a funny thing we do as a joke like let's make it so that like there's a parasite that makes cats Rats horny when they smell cat piss. It's so crazy and it does more than that man It gets some horny it gets them to not be afraid and then It reduces I'm sorry no it reproduces inside the cats gut. That's the only way this parasite reproduces So it tricks the rat and to getting close to the cat there's some sort of weird thing that's going on Like that is a complex deception. That's not a regular deception. You're doing all you're like no I didn't work this way No, it didn't work that way how many thousands of times is a rat have to get eaten by the cat or killed by the cat But for the figure out how to do it right where it's real consistent. Yeah, I mean the mutae I guess it's just mutations. I don't know about that man. I'm I it's definitely mutations But I almost feel like there's a missing element to what makes things work that we're not tuned into You know like we have like these mechanisms like and this is no disrespect to the people that study this and obviously I'm on war on but all these people that are looking at this and looking at these mechanisms I agree with all their work. I'm not saying that I disagree that these mechanisms are in place And then they can show a clear cause and effect to like certain genes and why they express themselves and certain Evolutionary traits that are beneficial to whatever animal, but I think there's also some other weird shit going on man I think there's there's multiple things going on and I think it's almost like there's information out there in experience And that information when animals get jacked or when things go wrong That information still manages the transfer out into the tribe. You know in some sort of a nonverbal communication So I think it does that to like the parasites. I think it works that way with people I think it works that way with a lot of stuff I think ideas and and like tones the way people see things generally spreads Almost like a virus as much as it spreads like information. That's right. There's a weird thing to it And I think if you look at parasites and how the fuck a parasite figured out a rewire like breads like information. That's right. There's a weird thing to it. And I think if you look at parasites and how the fuck a parasite figured out a rewire like, hey, when the rats eat us, we can't, we don't fucking breed. Okay. Because we can't, we can't reproduce inside the rats gut. We need to get in that fucking cat. How do we do this? So they figured out how to get in the cat. Like, and the way to get in the cat is to trick the rat. And then it gets to people because people love cats, right? So they tell pregnant women never touch kitty litter. That stuff can get in you. And if it gets in you, it fucks with the child's development. It's related to decrease in IQ, increase in impulsive behavior, increase in Sapolsky was saying that there was an, I don't know about the IQ thing. Google that, I don't know if that's this, I might be wrong about that. Toxel plasmosis and children leads to a decrease in IQ. That's some, the decrease in IQ thing is like, what the fuck causes IQ, right? You know, like, what are all the little pieces that are moving in place there? But anyway, Sapolsky said that motorcycle victims when he was doing his residency, they would come in and there was a disproportionate amount of motorcycle resident, motorcycle accidents rather that have toxoplasmosis and their system when they would test them. So his, the doctor that he was working with when he was doing his residency told him, it's test him for toxo. And he's like, there's a disproportionate number because it makes him reckless. It makes people reckless. Fuck. Also, here's another thing is while a disparate, like when you look at toxoplasmosis infections, there's some sort of a connection to successful soccer teams. Yeah, countries with successful soccer teams generally have a higher rate of toxo. But it doesn't necessarily mean it's the toxo that's causing them to be successful. It could just be coincidental because those are the countries that like a really obsessed with soccer, because it doesn't require much money to enter. Like poor people can play it. You just need like a ball tape and you can kick that around, right? So like the idea is like there's a lot of games that come out of soccer that aren't soccer. They start playing it and get really good at it. I think the IQ thing is something similar. It's something over represented among people with only elementary education. Right. So that's about who they looked at for. Right. Can you scroll that up so I can see the arms in the way? Just go that way. Oh, sorry. Oh, my God. Analysis of sample of 857 transcripts showed toxoplasmosa. Positive subjects were significantly over represented among people with only elementary education had significantly lower verbal intelligence and significant lower factor of novelty seeking. Huh. Bummer. Well, you got to think again, you're dealing with poverty, right? You're dealing with third world, a lot of third world environments where they have a high incidence of that shit. But that is fucking fascinating that a bug figures out a way to get a rat horny and get him chasing a cat so it gets eaten because it wants to get in that cat stomach. That's wild. So, you know, it's a good implication. This is really creepy, but it is when I'm like looking at people with COVID or afraid to get the vaccine or people are like, like, you know, the, like, we have this fucking thing. It's probably a bioweapon man. And we got this thing. And people gathering together, you know, when it was soaring, just gathering together as sturges, you know. You have to, like, I was thinking like, fuck. Did they not just engineer a bioweapon? But did they figure out a way to make it so that part one of the things it does is it makes people want to get really social and like go against the thing that would slow it down? You know, like, is this some kind of fucking insane new version of toxic plasmosis that makes people, I don't know, just want to get it. There's some people who just wanted to get it. Just to get it over with, but that's like for a virus, Jesus Christ, that's the best thing that could happen to you, man. Right. Like with chicken, but it's pressure. It's just pressure. You know, like some, some people just can't handle the pressure of awaiting something over and over and over again. The anxiety of when is it going to come? Right. Yeah. I mean, look, that was, it was, it was, I remember when we didn't even know what it was. Yeah. And I, that's when I'm like, well, it's pregnant. I just fucking kill me at some point. I was having like, you know, when we didn't know when it's like, this could be a post-apocalyptic movie in three months, because this is a new thing. So we're not positive. Everything that it does. We don't know what the fuck it does. It could make your feet explode. You know what I mean? It could do, who knows? Like what, all of a sudden a few months in, people are having like seizures and the toxic plasma is stuff. I mean, I'm in a fucking robe and I'm wearing a wig. I'm obviously not. But you're a good company. I'm not. Okay. Clearly you're not listening to like some kind of way. Some kind of like, yeah, don't listen to it. You just got a little 90 ring on. This is not a fucking TED Talk. But I was thinking, you know, if toxic, if like over a zillions of years, toxic plasmosis can make rats get horny. And it's in all cap his salt. Couldn't someone whip some shit up in the laboratory that makes people just, I don't know, like a certain kind of sneaker? You know, could it, could a corporation whip up a virus that just, it just, it just imagine if they did, but didn't have any other side effects. You tell me they wouldn't do it. Isn't that what advertising is? They would do it. Isn't that what advertising is? Yeah, man. You know, especially to dullerts, right? Someone who maybe have talk so and they're, they're more susceptible to ads. Yeah. Imagine that. Imagine that's the way to get people to be more susceptible to ads. Let more rats with talk so out in the streets. Imagine if they're just spraying talk so down into the pot, the sewer pipes in New York City, just trying to like get it out there. Let's go. Let's go. Let's go. But you know, man, to get back to your idea of like shit, it feels like there is something that we haven't quite figured out yet when it comes to like gene expression and the way that it gets genes mutate and the way evolution happens. Similarly, with language and with data, we aren't at the place yet where we acknowledge that data is as much of a drug or a virus as anything else. Just you know what I mean? But because you're eating it with your eyes, doesn't make it any less like you're getting infected. So you know what I mean? You're right. When you said that, holy fuck, that's what advertising is. I had to pause for a second because when you really is, right? Yeah, especially if you mind virus. If data is alive and we are as a form of life or kind of like, you know, they say a virus is not quite alive, not quite dead. It's somewhere in between. So are information packets, you know? And the effect that they have is so profound that yeah, I mean, I wonder how laws would change if we start reframing what information is, it's more of a living thing. It's more of a thing that like lives in the mind and jumps from one person to the next but it's actually kind of alive, kind of not, but it's sort of a living thing. I think that of ideas all the time. I think that ideas might be alien, like a different life form. Here's the thought, everything you see, right? Everything from buildings to fucking power lines, cars, everything's, that's man made, came out of the mind. They came out of the human imagination and we just take it for granted that it's a thing. Here's a table. Here's a skyscraper. Yeah. So that come from, it came out of the mind. Like an idea came into the mind and tricked the monkey into building it. And the monkey says, look me big, building, make right here. Look who I've done. Oh, monkey so strong, monkey so smart. You know, we think that we're so awesome because we figured out how to make that Huawei phone that spies on your neighbors. All right, but what is that? What is going on there? Well, we old the communist party is trying to take over. is it or is it the most successful vehicle for getting ideas through? Is it the most successful vehicle for getting technology through ideas that create things, which are the most important ideas to things, not to humans. That's why we moan and we talk about materialism and how fucking shallow the world is because we recognize there's a disconnect between the things that are valuable to humans and the things that just make more things, they're valuable because they allow more things to be created. Well, then you go, what the fuck are these things? What are these things and how they trick us into loving them so much? They don't, I'm talking about how I love watching phone videos. They don't change my fucking life. Right. If I had an iPhone six and I just were good, let's stop right there. I probably wouldn't notice. Right. Probably send me a message. I say hi back. We're cool. Yeah. I see my phone would look a little shittier for the FaceTime, but that's it. Other than that, I wouldn't notice anything. But we're all obsessed with these fucking things and these things have weaseled their way into our lives and then you get the commercials and the commercials show the things and it's usually the girl with long legs and pretty feet. Dude, those Apple commercials lately, I want to fuck the commercial. Whoo! Yeah. You don't talk about the new Apple commercials? I haven't, but definitely someone who used to work at MKL, got a job at Apple and was like, look, why don't you try this thing that we did during Project Stargate and what makes this thing? And then suddenly you get this Apple commercial. It's just some woman say, hey, be a sham and it's like beautiful, beautiful computers that I don't need at all. Why can't I watch it and we're like, we gotta get one. And it's like, whoa, why? I'm not a computer. You have a computer. But the commercial is so potent. You're like, yeah, I want a blue, a blue Mac. Oh, blue. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, new colors. Yeah, so a red foam. But it's, but to me, what's really cool and what may hopefully is it when the future might be looked at as Wild West is that, you look at Apple. This is two multiverses away from this one. This is a tower of wizards. You know what I mean? That's what it is, right? And like every once in a while, today was their big keynote thing. But every once in a while, the wizards show the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the come out of the castle. It's, we've summoned and then, you know, shows it to the villagers and we're all like, oh my God. Look at that glowing cube of an axe and axe. You know what I mean? It's like this cube of an axe and axe will now teleport six feet farther. But yeah, two multiverses away. That's what it is. But you know, we knowing that these are wizards and then realizing these commercials, they're casting spells on us. Two, two multiverses away. Which don't think of it as a spell. It's a spell. What is that, uh, image? Why are you showing me that? Apple.com. As it starts, it's what he's describing all these little emojis are looking at the four miles you rolls with that back. This is a spell of hypnosis, 17. No, I'm not kidding. You get you to accept those as your avatars and you're going to be more comfortable with them than your real skin. Yeah. Then they're going to give you the option three or four phones from now to actually become that avatar permanently. And your old skin, you can always go back to your old skin temporarily, but only as long as you have battery life. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. Sits. You just described one of the stories of how humans incarnate in this dimension as you pick your incarnation may be. That is part of why we're so obsessed with gender and race. Maybe we're going to get to a point, maybe the universe is priming us and we're going to get to a point very soon where you can really swap out your gender and race. You really can change what you are because you're just electricity going through your your fucking brain connected to some machine by some weird interface. And now they've figured that interface out and you will live the life of whoever you want, whether you want to be tall or short, whether you're a person who decides you want to experience life and poverty, whether you want to experience life as a genius, where you want to be a girl or a boy, gay or straight, black or white, Asian, whatever the fuck you want, you could do it all anytime you want and you can go back and forth. Yeah. That's common. Well, that's, you know, like I opened up the singularity is near recently just to look through. It's a great book. Curves as well. It's got this definition of humans in there that's so beautiful. And I'm going to butcher it, but it's essentially like, you know, he's got a lot of definitions of humans. Some of them are really amazing like something like self replicating nano replicator or something, but like the other description is humans or things that, towards the end, in there he's like, people ask like, okay, if we learn to use nanobots to decode us and like, you know, not just transform our bodies, but you know, merge humans with other humans or, you know, theoretically entire collectives of people can merge together as superorganisms with one personality. What are we going to be after that? And he says what humans are or creatures that like to push past all boundaries. And so the market pressure that is going into like people make spinning off of money, they spend a bill these insane fucking phones. That is a thing that's pushing us towards that point that that and that there's no choice. That's the other thing. I didn't realize this until I was reading it recently because somehow when I was reading the singularity shit before, I used to imagine, oh, we have a choice in this. Like humans as a whole just put the brakes on them. You're like, you know what? Let's, let's slow down on the singularity project thing. I don't think we're going to do it. There's no choice. Like we're part of a river that's going over a waterfall and no, no, no particle of water gets to say, hold on everybody, let's not go waterfall. What do you say? We just hang out turning into a lake or something. It's like, no, there's no way out of it. It's happening. And all this stuff that's causing all this fucking turmoil in society is related to humans coming to this weird point of freedom where we might not have to be what we were born as in any way. In any way. In any way. And that for whatever reason is very upsetting to some people. Some people don't like it. They're like, you got to be what you were born as. All things. All things. You know, if it's tomorrow a technology emerges where you could change your ethnicity, think of the, I think of the, some people you matter. You're for doing that. Yeah, that will, yeah, it would be a huge controversy man. And similarly with gender, but not with just with gender. Imagine if tomorrow, you know, anyone who wants to could turn into the most in shape person ever. So now, you know, now when you see someone who's in shape, you're like, wow, they've got a lot of discipline. But that all goes away. There's no more, you know what I mean? There's no currency anymore. And like, oh, wow, you're a, you're a master pianist. Oh, that's amazing. So what app did you learn? Right. You learned it easy. Oh, you're, you're such a tansal. You've become so. Cheers, you've become so much funnier ever since you did that upgrade. Right. You know what I mean? I, you know, I, I, I. Right. Like, isn't this what we're thinking about just ego that like people have gone through this intense laborious process to become the greatest tennis player of all time. But if you could just get there through technology, isn't it? It's, I mean, I get that there's like all these signals of discipline and all these signals of being something special. But it seems like that's just because it's hard to do, right? It's, there's a thing that's going on here where it's like we're praising things that are hard to do because it's an ethic, right? It's like burned into our system. And we think it's definitely positive. The things that are hard to do make you a better person. But we're basing that on the idea that that's the only way to make you a better person. Like that just taking these downloads and all of a sudden learning how to play concert piano or learning how to do Kung Fu or learning how to do calculus. Like instantaneously adds to your database. Maybe just become the same version or even maybe a better version of a better person because you're not constantly bitter about struggle. Because one of the things that sucks about really famous people or really successful people or really exceptionally accomplished people is they want you to know, right? When they want you to know and I think we've all been guilty of it and I don't, I know I've been guilty of it for sure. You know, where I was like happy about certain success and I bragged about it. And, you know, in retrospect, retrospect rather it's probably gross. But in the moment I was being celebratory. Yeah. But that is a thing where when people are trying to do something and it's difficult to do when someone does something like that we admire them because they made it through. But ultimately the benefits are supposed to be that it makes them somehow or another a better version of what they were. Yeah. With everything they do, with a client, a non-ever, a write a novel. Hard things make you a more interesting person. Everybody that I know has gone through some interesting shit and it's one of the things that I love most about comics. Because I know the emotional roller-coaster ride that it takes to become a competent comedian where you're working professional. It's fucking crazy. And then to do what we do, what you and I do, which is even weirder where you're just thinking out loud in front of the world, which is fucking bananas, a ridiculous thing to do and while you're doing it most in time you're higher drunk or a lot of the time it leaves. All these things, they're interesting and we celebrate them because we know they're hard to achieve. To be. Why can't people just become a better person when they're down low? Do we want someone to fucking have to run marathons for 10 years to be a better person? Maybe there's a down low. And all of a sudden you're like a guy who runs marathons every day for 10 years. You're like a stoic person who just appreciates things for what they are. You don't come with any bullshit. You're not emotionally over needy. You don't require additional attention. There's all these things that people are allowed to do. They require additional attention that don't really deserve. That's the same thing on the flip side where the people that get attention for things that they have accomplished and they want it and they just fucking, that's why they're doing it. Like that's not good. And it's also not good that people want attention for things they don't deserve attention for. Or if you didn't do anything like why you want to be so big? You got work to do. You're lazy. You eat too much. What do you do in? Stop saying it's the world's fault. It's not the world's fault. Get up. Stop farting on yourself and go outside. Go. You can fart on yourself. Come outside. But that there's, if you just get all that with a download, why do you have to fucking, you know what I'm saying? Like for sure you got to download. We all got downloads. Right? I got a fairly lucky download where there wasn't a lot of trauma. It wasn't anything insurmountable. Some people get downloads that are horrendous. Yep. And they have to work their way through childhood sexual abuse. They could have been molested at the time there were babies. That's a real thing across the world. So imagine that download. Well, that's okay. Right. Imagine if you can just come along and fix that. Oh, we're going to take that and just fix that issue and then give you a guy who climbed all the mountains, download. And then you're going to learn Kung Fu, like Neo and the Matrix. Give you that download. Sure. Calculus, that download. Why wouldn't you do that? Do you want to work hard? Well, I want to earn it on my own fucking buck. But that would be. So that would be one of the big controversies, which is like, OK, so we've got one league of baseball players that achieve their ability to play baseball through a combination of skill and talent and practice. And then we have this other league. They're all 14. But they didn't download. So that now they're like 50 times better than any living baseball player watching them is like watching some kind of like psychedelic geometry because they're so fucking good and the balls move so fast. It's like the most insane thing you've ever seen. But do you want to watch that? Yes. Or do you want to watch that? Yes. That's what I'm saying. You don't want to go baseball game. Oh, yeah, let's go watch the fucking Dodgers. You know, they haven't had any downloads. They're just the old classic baseball and the balls moved less than 600 miles per hour. When the balls didn't break the sound barrier. You shit, right? But that's the problem is because you're going to have a group of people that rejects becoming whatever this thing is. And those people, they're going to say things like we're being ostracized. We're being pushed to the side. And it's like, well, kind of, but also what's happening is you don't want to adapt and the history of evolution is adaptation for better for worse. It might be better to be a primordial person who hasn't done gene therapy, who hasn't transformed their genetics, which, which is coming the new vaccines are part of that. The thing that's coming because the new, that that shit sped stuff up. What's coming is going to be all again and again, you're going to get this opportunity where it's like, do you want to get rid of your diabetes, maybe? Okay, we're going to give you this thing that's going to reprogram your DNA so that you're not all fuck your insulin is working. So everything's working. Your pancreas is working. Some people who have diabetes are going to be like, no, I think I want to stay like this. I don't want to alter my DNA. And other people are going to be like, yes, do it now. Fucking injected in me. I don't want to have to go through a life like this anymore. I want to see what it's like and not just that aging and not just that cancer, which I'm quite excited about because I had it. And having had it, it's like, it's any advancement in that realm is like exciting because it took my mom too and obviously for not just my own selfish ass, but everybody out there is contending with it. But like, this is going to be every few years. There's going to be a thing where it's like, yeah, you don't want it. Okay, you don't have to get it. But the more you don't get it and then when it gets to intelligence, man, when it gets to just like, you know, or what if you want to give your workers genetic therapy that makes them faster, you know, or smarter or whatever. You know what I mean? It's just quicker. Yeah. Suddenly what happens is the species, isn't that they say this happens in species where they split. Well, especially when you have a thing like CRISPR, we think you have the breakthrough technology where you can actually start manipulating genes. That didn't. That was a thought before. It was a real practice and they've actually done it on human fetuses in China. Right? It's coming. And didn't they have an unintended positive consequence? Ah, yeah. I think they got smarter. Yeah. Like whoops. Whoops. Yeah, it was John Cena apologizing. So sorry. Everybody got smarter. Love the Chinese people. So sorry. Yeah. This guy got smarter. Was an accident we just trying to protect him from HIV. That's what it was. Right. Wasn't it? Yeah. Protection from HIV. I think that's what I think. I think the guy who did that got in trouble too. I think he got arrested. Yeah, he got one in trouble. Come on, man. They told me to do that. I was trying to decode the weak, weak trouble. What was the question? How the phrase that question was? I think the question is like what? Yeah. Something about age genetic therapy. Yeah. The CRISPR's. I think it was twins, twin fetuses. And they tried to give them protection. The exact of being touched. It's not online. We are now this is literally the set. You know, you're online and you're trying to remember what you're going to do. This is part of the problem with my podcast. Man, it's like people for some reason another thing I should stop doing this way. Gene edits to CRISPR babies might have shortened their life expenses. I can't expect to say whoops. Study of almost half a million people links mutation that protects against HIV infection to an earlier death. Okay. Well, that is a weird link that I don't necessarily understand how they could just make that leap. It's like that put that back up. It doesn't necessarily mean that that's what caused their earlier death. It could have mean they just fucked themselves into oblivion and ran out of jizz. That's possible too. No shot of getting HIV ever. You know, how many people would just go ham? You know, I had to do that. The genomes of twin girls and twin girls take an attempt to make them resistant to HIV may have inadvertently shortened the last. But I think there's another thing that they were saying. They think it impaired some sort of a cognitive benefit. He probably that's just what you say after you find out you fucked up some babies. You're like, but they're smarter. Trust me. I gotta go. Where do we here is? They're gonna listen. And in 10 years, they're gonna come up with a cure for their life expectancy being shorter. So relax. Exactly. You're welcome. Why, you know the problem to me, man is like why they have to call it crisper. It's like crisper babies. It's kind of like a KFC fucking naked. Yeah, why do you like it? I love crisper babies in the morning. That's a terrible name. That would have been a good name for like a bacon store. Not like the future of humanity. We owe it all to crisper. Yeah, but you know, I think that that's that's we're just witnessing humanity reckoning with this what's what's coming the technology because here's another thing like you know, if you look at you know what they're saying about not just the Wuhan laboratory but like did I just say a laboratory like I'm trying to say Wuhan. I don't know what I'm saying like but like you're drinking. Oh, thank you. I almost forgot. But like the yeah, but yeah, the like if you look at like that so the big controversy right now is virology gain of function research which is taking out some fucking virus altering a little bit and sometimes you need to do that to study it right like there's a I was looking it up. There's like these small these pop mice a mice pucks I think in Australia because basically like you want to take this virus whatever it may be that might pose a threat to humanity like what we what happened in Galveston. Right. That's what they were looking at the idea being okay here like. Well, which is it we went to a place in Galveston where they study these things. Okay. We said what happened in Galveston like there was an outbreak that people don't know about. Oh, no. Galveston. What happened in Galveston? They're like fuck what happened in Galveston? What's up? Talking about. No, we just went to this creepy you know place where there is a creepy only because like there's like tiny little microscopic demons all around. And I should say that we got so high at the airport that we missed our flight. They left. They took off. They were already gone like we're like where's this flight? We were so baked. We're sitting there talking for so long and then we had to take a flight late that night and we flew all through the night and then landed in the morning and then had an hour to sleep I think. Then the next day you're in like one of the most secure. Bio lab or would you put up to mousepox? Oh wow. Mousepox. But like so okay so the idea is you have essentially like you're planning a virus two multiverses over where apples with a wizard tower of viruses a demon. And so if you're one of the one of the royal demon defenders you got a study like what are the most possible 15 demons that might break out of hell and rampage through earth. And so so in this dimension that's like the coronaviruses but not just the coronaviruses Ebola not just Ebola like all the possible things we might have to worry about the avian bird flu. If you're like in one of these labs you need to study it but you got to study it in a living thing that is easier to study than whatever it came from getting a function make it so that in fact it's mine. In one of these labs, you need to study it, but you got to study it in a living thing that is easier to study than whatever it came from. Gain a function, make it so that it infects mice. Right? Now you can put it in mice and start studying the way it works and living organisms, blah blah blah. Right? So that's gain a function research. Right? So like virologists, so now there's like the amortaurium on it, at least I hope there is very strict. But virologists are kind of like, look, we have to do gain a function if we're going to study the shit that's coming. Because we want to try to, at least, begin the process of making a vaccine, understanding how it's going to affect civilization. So that if it does come, if the demon comes out of hell, we know the spells to cast. That's the reason we got the COVID vaccines. Everyone's like, they started working at six months ago. It's like, no, they didn't. They've been working on versions of it for a while because of this very thing. But anyway, the problem is, the problem with gain a function that double-edged sword is, you're making the thing. It's like instead of waiting for the demon to explode from how you summon it in the sealed chamber of lower knocks. Yeah, they put the Hulk in that clear box. Yes, exactly. Pull that video. You can put that, excuse me, that text up, brother. Because this text isn't saying about mice pox, I'm going to read this to you folks because it's such a fucking... Listen to this. A virus that kills every one of its victims by wiping out part of their immune system has been accidentally created by an Australian research team. Yeah. Just imagine that. A virus that kills every one of its victims was accidental. Whoops, we were trying to make syrup. And we wanted to put it on our pancakes, but we actually had a limited virus that kills every... Wait a minute. It's not an accident if that's what you're working on. Well, no. That was their working on it. But that the reason they're working on it is because you would rather understand it in a laboratory than all of a sudden mouse pox naturally mutates. And suddenly, shit tons of people are just dying and we have no idea how to deal with it. Oh, yeah. Sure. But that's the argument for gain of function research. Oh, I get it. Okay. No, no, no. I get the argument for it. I mean, it's really interesting, right? It's like how do you understand how a virus mutates other than making it mutate yourself and you do it in this like really safe, contained environment. That's what I find the way. Well, that place wasn't safe. That place had been cited for safety violations in 2018. I didn't know that. Find that place. This mouse pox is getting shit on me, Australia. I thought it meant it only killed 100% on mice. It means humans. It does kill 100% of mice because it hasn't jumped to humans. But if it did make the leap to humans with the same efficacy, that's not good. That's 100% death. That's the thing, man. It's like if you go back throughout humanity, we hit a bunch of fucking pit stops where things went real bad and we had to restart the whole race. And I think at times, human beings got down to like because of natural disasters, just a few thousand people. And for sure because of plagues, the human race probably got dropped down to like multiple times like half of what it used to be or a third would it used to be. That happened a bunch of times. So the human race itself as we get real close ones, I think in Indonesia there was a super volcano that blew off like 60,000 years ago. We've talked about this so many times. I really wish I could pull this off at the top of my head. 2018, that's warned of risky coronavirus experiments and it will have lab. No one listened. Yeah. Okay, so 2018 people were like, hey, what the fuck? It'd make a good 80s comedy like a bunch of like like stoners working at a viral laboratory. What was I just talking about just before that? You were talking about the, you said you've talked about it many times. Oh, the fucking super volcano man. Oh, yeah. I think it was an Indonesian, right? I think Toba. Toba and it killed everybody except for I think it was down to 7,000 people. So the whole Earth. Think about the seven billion people. They were down to 7,000. What horrors did those people say? The people that made it. What how many people did they eat? A lot. How many of their friends did they see die? I mean, what did they do? There's 7,000 people. You go from a million people to 7,000. The sky becomes black with soot as this volcano bursts fire into the sky and it drowns out all the sun kills all the plants. You have no food. Animal starve to death. Yeah. They might have just eaten each other. I mean, who the fuck knows? Well, yeah. Right now, anthropologists are going crazy. You don't understand history. You know, what is it? Yeah. Well, but right there, right. I mean, this is, you know, it would be nice if like when you're watching Fox News or whatever the like will left or the right fucking propaganda mechanism is. Every once in a while they were just in there like, we don't know what we're talking about. Yeah, we're like, we're like, we're performing. But then you know what I mean? Like I think it's, I think that would be nice if everyone was more out there like, you know, broke the fourth wall to it to like, they can't. They don't have any freedom. That's part of the problem with that whole format. The difference between what you do and what they do is it's, it's on the opposite side of the matrix. People would believe them more though. Doesn't matter. Then it would be a corporate decision to do that and it wouldn't work. With America settled by just 70 people study includes holy shit. Give me a break. How is that possible? Fucking shit. Seven people. What's grow up, bro? I'm going to read some of this shit. This is nuts. I was looking for genetic bottleneck theory stuff. That's what that Toba catastrophe talks about. Was that what they think? That's what the one of the things that could have created it. It was a core sample thing too though, right? Yeah, there were other animals that have gotten down there too. So I was just like, I stumbled across this. New study of DNA suggests North America was originally populated by just a few dozen people who crossed a land bridge from Asia, Asia during the last ice age, about 14,000 years ago humans crossed the Bering land bridge from Siberia to North America. Most experts agree. You know, I got called racist because I believe that. What? Yeah. Somebody pointed me to something like why somebody sent me a thing saying, why is this people think that some folks like colonists believe that people came here across the Bering land bridge and populated North America where some folks think there was native people just here, period. Like there was native people everywhere. And I got to admit, I never even thought about it until somebody said that because if they were native people in South America, for sure. I mean, do we believe that all the native people in North American South America walked down from Siberia? Is that what we believe? They don't really know, right? Sounds crazy. It sounds crazy, but it's just guessing at this point, maybe that's right. Or maybe there's people already here. Maybe we don't know. Maybe they hopped on rafts. I like the Graham Hancock version of it way better. It's like we're older and older and older. I think so. So yeah, did like a group of people crossing the ice bridge at some point to end up in a place that it recently experienced a meteor or a comet like impact on the planet. Maybe just imagine this shit. 70 people. 70 people. Coming across from Siberia. We'll buy the way. During that time 14,000 years ago, you know it was alive on that Bering land bridge that they think kept people from crossing over sooner. The short face bear. The short face bear makes a grizzly bear look like a koala bear. So you had to fight bears. You couldn't fight bears. You could not fight a short face bear. Short face bear is so big. It's a demon in a movie. Look at that. The biggest of all the bear species. Wasn't that tough? Well, round of Carlson and Graham Hancock believed that that short face bear was a victim of the younger dry sandpack theory. Yeah. They believe that the asteroids slammed into the planet. And there's real proof of that in terms of when they do course samples according to these guys that in that range of like when the ice age ends, there's all this nuclear glass that indicates there were some sort of impacts all over the place all throughout Asian Europe. I love that. So why you'll theory man. It's such a crazy theory when you think about that. But that fucking bear died off and people made it because we we're ingenuity. We have we are ingenuity. We are ingenuity. We're Toyota. We're number one. Yeah. We figured out how to survive and they didn't have enough food. They're so fucking big. They need so much food. Dude. So okay. Okay. Extinction hypothesis. Okay. We always talk about it. But we haven't talked about what wigs on before. Yeah. We can repeat our conversation. I love it. Can I just tell say something before you do it? Yeah. I'm better with you. I'm my best podcast with you. I'm a better. We we know each other so well. We used to be roommates. Yeah. Definitely how long was our year was our sliver your ass. I don't know. Six was it like six? It was so close to that. That was so much fun. I'd love to have him at my house. I thought it was amazing. That was a blast. What I'm out to tell you man to like emerge out of this fucking pandemic having like, you know, been with my wife who was pregnant for a lot of it. You know, having kids. Which is really scary. Oh, but we made a decision. We were like, look, we're not going to let fear determine like our lives. Are you guys taking vitamins? Are you doing the whole vitamin thing? She eats more vitamins than I ever see anyone eat because she breastfeed. So she like, and I've tasted her milk. It's sweet. Whatever she's doing is right because she makes very sweet. You know, I know why the baby's smiling. It's like ice cream basically. Yeah. Anyway, yeah, I forced my wife to keep making breast milk for three years after the baby was born. Just so I could have some for myself. No, of course I didn't. Why did you not do that? Joe, why did you let it go? You should have been like, yes. Are you scared? That's a Twitter trend. Joe Rogan forced wife to make. He had a milking area in the house. Bro, you've been to my house. You can't even fucking decorate. I'm not allowed. You know, I'm not allowed to decorate. No, I'm, I mean, like this is the thing is like, this is the recurring problem I have. We have, which is that my wife will ask me, do you like this? And then all of a sudden I have like weird, intense, aesthetic opinions that I've never had before. You know, I feel like so true. Like she'll show me a catch. I don't think about catch. I'm like, no, I don't think that's going to work in that room. And she's like, you don't like anything I show you. And then I think about it's like, I'm basing this on nothing other than like a, like a light feeling of not liking it. Are you ready to argue to the death? Yeah. Which is like where you're at is the enlightened place to be, which is like surrender to what are you going to do? Well, here's, here's the reality of it. First of all, a, I really don't care. If it looks nice, I don't care. I'm happy. I just want to sit down. I'm not, I'm not interested. I'm really not that interested. But I also don't like one of the one, one person just like makes all the decisions. Like, um, hey, right. You know, but I also know realistically if I was the one to make the decisions, it would be a mess. It would be a hodgepodge of imagery. And here's one thing to me and my wife don't get along. Don't agree with rather. I'm into, I am not just into, I have this weird obsession with ancient Asian art. obsession. Like, um, the Buddha figure, I have a bunch of Buddhas. I have different ganeshes and all these different things from Thailand and China. And I'm obsessed with that shit. I don't know why. I've always been, I've always been obsessed with that. So I see that and it's like part of me goes, I want that near me. I want that close to me. I don't know why. Because you used to be a Buddhist. Stop. You don't ever accept it. But it's like, that doesn't make any sense. It used to be a monkey dude. So you were a monkey at some point. I mean, look, again, that's like my own, obviously. That's my own sense of things. But the concept of reincarnation, I think, is a really beautiful thing and probably pretty true. Because you know, people do have, especially when you look at my favorite reincarnation story is that woman who became an Egyptologist who, their, her parents took her to this Egyptian exhibit when she was a little girl. She started crying and shit because she's like, there used to be gardens here. There's a, or you know what to be like. But anyway, that she was having this past life memory of living in Egypt. And she became a very famous Egyptologist. Jamie, do you mind looking that up? No, look that up. Because it sounds like bullshit, but it's true. She just remembered this like other time. And she identified aspects of, apparently identified aspects of that culture that they didn't, that didn't, they didn't believe at that point. But then later they realized she was right. Or maybe she's crazy and she wants attention. This is what she does in order to be like the coolest version of the people that study Egypt. She pretends that in another life lived there. I was there. I'm not saying she is relaxed folks. I'm just talking. Well, look, I mean, no, who are you going to make happy here? Like a huge group of people who are like, shut the fuck up. It'd be that in a huge group of people like, come on, Joe, it's reincarnation. Stop being such a cook. Yeah, yeah, exactly. But you know, it is the, you can't make everybody happy, Duncan. Regardless of like the, the girl who rose from the dead with memories of ancient Egypt. Oh, what year is this? Hold, please. 1904, I don't believe, believe a fucking word of it. What? Back then they believed in chiropractors. They believed in a lot of shit. Still believe in chiropractors. I mean, regardless, I do think like from my perspective, that it's just good karma. Yeah. We call whatever you want to call it, but to be sort of, I think anything that you're drawn to like that, whether it's like, you know, religious imagery or whether it's a style of literature or whatever, you're supposed to, that's, that's like the X marks the spot. Like you're supposed to go deep into it to understand. Because you know, those images, there's so, there's so much associated with those images. They're fractals. Right. The fractal contains within it all the scriptures. And so, you know, the scriptures when you convert them into imagery, they turn into a ganache or a Buddha. But because it's all the same, it's like the way if you make ice hot, it turns into water or you know, but if you make it water hot, it turns into steam. And the same way, like the Dharma as they call it, it appears in these specific ways. And one of them looks like that imagery. You know, it's just one of the ways this data set condenses in a matter. Well, it appears when you're under the influence of psychedelics, that's the weirdest thing for me. My first psychedelic trip ever, there was like an infinite number of Buddhas in a lotus position that was golden Buddhas floating around. They had like, they represented like perfect symmetry with the way they were seated. Because they're seated in a lotus position and from the top of their head, the peak of their head went straight down and they were floating and moving all around and synchronous and it was like, whoa, it was heavy. And they didn't want, you had to abandon, this is the first thing I remember about the DMT experience when I first, the first one with the golden Buddha, which is literally why I got this tattoo. Because it was one of the most profound moments of my life. Because it was the first time where I felt like 100% clear that there was no room for bullshitting anybody. Like you can get by with charisma and you could say things the right way and you can pretend and maybe you have a little bit of luck and maybe you have some like a genetic gift for certain things. But who are you? What are you? Who are you really? And you realize like, oh my god, I'm carrying around all this nonsense for no reason. And it don't work on them anyway. When you get over there and all those Buddhas were like floating in and around me. You know, they knew I didn't sleep as much as I did. They knew I used my phone more than I say I do. They know everything. They know all the lies and all the painful memories of regret that you have from the time you could remember from being five. I hit my cousin in the face with a bag of cookies when I was five and I still feel bad about it. I feel bad about it. This is what happened. How big was the bag? It wasn't very big. It's not that. This is what happened. I hit him with the bag and the cookies went flying. They hit the dirt and then we couldn't eat the cookies. And I was so mad. He was bigger than me. My cousin was bigger than me. And he was upsetting me. And I remember I just grabbed a cookie bag and fucking swung it out. But when the cookies went flat out, I felt so bad. And that was one of the first times I had ever made an epic mistake where everybody around me wanted these cookies. Because we were in New Jersey and there were these delis that would make or bakeries rather that would make bread and we would go with my grandfather all the time to get bread and we would get cookies and little pastries and I would look forward to them so much with my cousin was fucking with me. And I just wanted to swing on them and I needed something to hit him with. I guess I was five years old. But I remember that. Like that kind of thing, like that kind of regret. Like it stays with you. Like your whole life. Yeah. Isn't that intense? And you, that, so what happens is you start thinking that's who you are. Yeah. Because it's so loud. And it's just you just naturally start thinking like, oh yeah, that's me. I'm that regret. And so that's how you become a person as you start picking out the loudest aspects. You focus on that. Yeah. And assemble it. Now you've got a personality. Yeah. This is the shit you put in your Twitter bio. You're like, I forgive, but I never forget to do that. Now you got to stick to that fucking rule. And you know what I mean? This is a rule you just made for yourself. It's just saying this is what I must be like. And it's, it's like no different than like when you have your imaginary friend and you're like, leek, he enjoys dancing. It's like, well, that's not anything there. Or that shit you put on Instagram. Yeah. The guy was looking so this sculpture with it was a zero thing. I think there's this. He sold it for $18,000. But this, this is why I love that symbol of art that he did because I think it's a critique of what lots of people are doing. Or I think it's a drug deer looking to launder money and some easy way to do it because there's no object. Where's that fucking sculpture? Why can't it be doesn't even exist? You can actually launder money and make a social critique simultaneously. It's that's what fucking art is. That's, you get larger money and make a social critique simultaneously. That's what fucking art is. You're not mutually exclusive. Put that in quotes and let's make t-shirts. Let's go. Right. Anyway, anyway, you got to move here. I can't do this without you. No, I got to move here. Don't torture me. Let's just do one a week. One a week. We just got my, I'd love to you by the way. I love to fear. No, I love to too. I think we could sort things out. I think when I had, I get like the most, most ultimate cancellation and then all the other celebrities aren't willing to come on the podcast anymore. Just you and me. Okay. I can get people love you. You're not going to get, you're just in a little bit of trouble. You're in trouble. But anyway, you're in trouble. You're in trouble. You're getting a little bit of trouble. Yeah, you get, you get in every, there come on fucking Twitter. It's like God damn it. Stay out of Twitter. Well, yeah, well, you know, but we were talking about before with like Russians and bots and Chinese and bots and all these things. Yeah. The problem with Twitter is, and then it's falling off. I'm so sorry. I'm so sorry. Just the wig break. People are probably done with this anyway. I'm not, I'm not done with this. Freedom. I've always bought druids, right? I feel like monks. Yeah. No, that's a bulb. Um, the problem with Twitter is the same problem with how easy it is to pretend you're a person on Twitter because it's so impersonal and so little of you comes through in text that it's easy to start thinking of people like their text. It's easy to say mean things or be disrespectful or dismissive or the completely lack compassion. Yeah. And as a person who's been the subject of it, it's, it's fascinating. And my strategy is always been like, I'm just going to just not pay attention to this. Right. Because I don't want to argue with everybody. I genuinely try to be the best person I can be and like all of us on flawed. And I know what my intentions are and I know how I try to go about business and life and just try to be as nice as possible. That's my goal. So when I see people communicating the way their community on Twitter, I'm like, there is no way that that syncs up with my view of the world. And I can't argue on either. Like if you argue on Twitter, then you're synced up to this really low vibration. Right. Now here's the problem. Occasionally it's a resource. Occasionally you learn some really interesting stuff. You see a funny meme. Some of them forms you about a documentary or a book that you really, you're reading. Like holy shit. Thank you so much. Yeah. Occasionally it does that. But it also harbors so much negative thinking. It's so bad for the people that are slinging that shit. You're just thinking about it all day long. That's all they're thinking about and they're engaged in like some sort of verbal battle. And the promise I know a lot of them independently. So I know I'm outside of Twitter and I'm talking to them and they're on medication and they're doing all kinds of weird things to deal with their anxiety and I'm like, hey man, do you ever think part of that might be what you're in? Just battleground you're engaging in this impersonal emotionless battleground where it's like 70% insults? What are you doing? Dude, I saw the Dalai Lama speak in Anaheim and one of the things along long time ago. I was on mushrooms. It was fucking crazy. But one of the things he said was, and it's weird because like this again, this is stuff you hear. This is stuff that anyone could say, but somehow when it's coming out of the Dalai Lama who by the way has this translator, he's been with him forever. And you see those two on stage together and then you will understand what Buddhism looks like because it's like not serious. It's not heavy. They're like talking to each other to translate. They're laughing to each other. Is there like translating? It's just so in the moment and fun and you look at that and you're like, oh, that's not like the boring like thing that I thought it was. This is just, this is like alive and like sweet and fun and they're enjoying what they're doing. It's really, really cool. But one of the things that came up was this issue of, you know, when someone insults you, when someone says something shitty to you. And I don't remember the question, but someone was asking this question and the weather doesn't put it was they don't know you number one, but it's an, what you're seeing is an echo. Someone did that to them. It got inside of them and then it is echoing. It's about like they're like the wall of an weird infinite geometric cave. And it's this like wave of negativity is bouncing off of them, bouncing to you. And you know, you have a choice to react to it as though or real. And if you do, you become solid enough to bounce it onto somebody else or realize what it is. You're just looking at an echo and just let like once you realize that you don't feel as defensive. If it's a person attacking you and you feel like I've got to defend against this, this person. But if you realize like really most people when they're saying shitty things to other people, they don't know that person because they don't know themselves. Well, the problem is even if they do, like Louis CK said something that's really appropriate here. He we're talking about it goes, it's just talk. He goes, it seems like it's different because it's written down, but it's just talk which is like one of the most ultimate Louis CK things to say. Like people have always just like said crazy shit, but it didn't necessarily mean anything. But now because it's written down all sudden we think it means something, but it's basically just people talking shit, right? But they're talking shit. And some people, unfortunately, it's like too much of their life. I've been around too many people where they're hanging out with you in the middle of the day and then they pull up Twitter and you see their eyes gloss over and they start arguing with someone on Twitter and then they check it every. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And talking to you, but then you have to check the Twitter Mike bro. This is not good for you. It's like Paw Patrol for my toddler. My wife's been putting off Paw Patrol now for a long time. I didn't know what it was. She's like, I don't like it. She was a nanny. So she's like, I don't want to do Paw Patrol. Finally, she's like, let's just do Paw Patrol. We show Paw Patrol suddenly forces watching it. I'm like, hey, Forrest, you want to go feed the crows because in the morning we feed the crows and he doesn't answer. He's looking and she says to me, he's gone. Paw Patrol. He's in Paw Patrol now. But yeah, it's, it is. I think that's, that's the real tragedy. It's not so much the, you know, micro moments of feeling better because someone that you will never meet decided to say the meanest thing and he would never said to you. It's not, that's, that sucks. But really sucks is all those moments when you're completely glue trapped into this technological opiate and you're not interacting with people around you. And then also you're carrying the weight of whatever the particular thing because like my God, it's not like everyone out there is just like, you know, there's some precise archers of pain. I'm talking about a shotgun. That's perfect. This is not your, your mama jokes. Yeah. Like this is like surgically designed. Like this. Like this. Like this. Right. Where you're just like, dear, dear, dear. You know me. You so well. Oh, you're so good. I'm a fuck. You got me. You got me. But see, this is the difference between those Buddhas you saw and humans because a human identifies that thing and number one pretends that it's weird that another human should have a flaw, a paradox of fucking a contradiction that they're not perfect. And then for whatever reason, well, also think because you're not perfect in the specific way, I'm going to fucking do everything I can to expose and hurt you. Whereas those things that you saw, they love you. Anyway, they love it itself. Yeah. And so this is the difference between humans are affected by demons is what you're trying to say. I'm, I'm saying. Demons to keep you from loving. Yes. You know, I'd say humans are not the demons are just a confusion. It's not a demon. The confusion is, is that, is, I think surrounds what that nature of human identity really is. It's a confusion is a, it's a problem of it's like a, so in the term ignorance comes up in Buddhism a lot and it doesn't mean like dumb. It means active ignoring, right? So like any given person has within them stuff they're not proud of, but not just not proud of like you'll admit it on a podcast. You know, like man, I just love to like suck a woman's feet wide jerk off. Is it the most appealing thing? No, do I feel weird admitting that? Not at all. Who cares, right? But I'm talking about the deep shit. There's stuff you don't want to say. You're literally so ashamed of it that you don't want to look at it yourself. So that's called active ignoring. And so what that does is sweeping the shit under the rug. So then now you're going through day to day, ignoring whatever the fucking thing is. You smack the person with cookies, which is not that big a deal. Some people burnt their fucking grandparents house down and never told anybody, you know what I mean? And so you're going day to day and you can't really, you pretend you don't look at it. You don't look at it. You don't look at it. And then this is where aggression comes from is because, because you are pretending you're something and that takes so much energy too because you always have to like avert your eyes from this aspect of yourself that you consider to be subbar or whatever. And so this produces all this aggression. But in. because you always have to like avert your eyes from this aspect of yourself that you consider to be subbar or whatever. And so this produces all this aggression, but because you're not looking at it in yourself, you see it in someone else. Right. So now it's all reflected all around you. Your entire life has become a disco ball upon which the shit you don't want to look at is being reflected back at you over and over and over again. Now you're in hell because the thing you thought you could just ignore is in your friends. It's in the government. It's in your dogs. It's in every single thing. Some version of it weirdly reflected. So that's that's called active ignoring. And so one one aspect of Buddhism is the invitation. Look it in the eye. See what happens. What happens if you stop ignoring it and just not just like look at it like it's separate from you. Be it fully completely. Showing them trumpet calls that like compares it to like when you go out to like the badlands. And it yeah. Is this a beautiful place by normal standards? No. Or even like volcanoes like an Iceland where that volcanic eruption happiness, love and cracked and in hospitable. Is it like beautiful in the sense of Hawaii? No. But it's fucking beautiful. And so when you start looking at the entirety of what you are, you stop focusing on the Hawaii side and give some equal attention to the fucking mortal side. And in that you become a real person and all of a sudden the people around you that used to think were fucking like, you know, assholes or how to get you or this or that, you stop seeing it in them anymore. And the reason is is because you've acknowledged it in yourself. This is the idea. And then maybe you can become like those Buddhas you saw because when you've done that with yourself and you see someone who's like, things they're being clever and hiding the fucking thing. Yeah. And the way I think I'm hiding my bald spot because I can't see it. And then when I'm trying on clothes, I see it in the mirror and I'm like, oh my God. Does everyone see that? Yes. They feel whenever they're there. You're walking in front of them. But anyway, so that's to that side. And then and then and then you can love people not because they're perfect, but because you see, oh, they're just like me. They have shit that they're hiding from themselves. They have shit there in Paris. They have shit they're working on. But everybody, everybody. Do you can ask you this? Do you think that there's a there's something that's happening with the understanding of this for the most part? Like a lot of what you're saying resonates with people. It resonates with me. I'm sure resonates with a lot of people that have embarrassing moments or disappointing moments in their life. And they just don't like who they used to be and they want to move forward. Whether it's whatever it is losing weight, whatever it is, just it's applicable to anything, kicking addiction. Do you think that this and this new ability to discuss shit like this? Like where in pop culture did this conversation ever get to take place up until now? In terms of the past, in terms of like if you wanted to reach millions of people, how the fuck could you do this on a VH1? How the fuck could you do this on MTV? Yeah, it's not their fault, but it's not what their business was. How could you do it on CBS or NBC? How could you do it on Fox? You couldn't. But it's not their fault, right? It's like that's not what they do. They do something different. So here you are talking about this and a lot of people like yeah, well, why do you think of yourself as who you were when you were 16 or how why do you think about yourself who you were when you're five hitting your cousin in the head with the bag of cookies? Yeah, why do you think about yourself like that? What is it? Well, it's weird. It's memory, but it's also there's a thing where the engine that tries to improve your life can get out of control and start gobbling up things that doesn't necessarily need to. Yeah, and it starts taking over all the various aspects of the life. Like you, you meet someone who's amazing, but they're also like super hyper critical and they hate themselves. Like, yeah, okay, listen, I think you're fucking awesome. Like, dude, why you why don't you like yourself? Like, you somebody people like you, like you got to re tweak this thing, turn it to the left, click, click, click, you're out of alignment. You know, and you see it, but you can't re tweak it. I don't know about that, man. No, I mean, I don't mean it's not, I don't mean there's no hope. I mean like, Pima Chodron, there's a great book. It's called The Wizard of No Escape, but in the very beginning, she says these people, they take up this process of meditation because they want to become better people. This is an aggression that yourself as you are right now. It goes back to this idea of like the thing here, it's, and this is not to say, so therefore we don't improve. But the idea is like right now, what happens if, because the thing you're talking about, what the tortured mind, the way the mind produces thoughts, the way the tongue salivates, it just produces an infinite form of thoughts, an array of thoughts, many of which are completely mundane, some of which are horrifying, some of which are just basic day to day bullshit that you have to do, but it's always doing this thought production situation within, which is encapsulated all of your neuroses, all of your complexes, all the things that you feel awful about all the all the karmic shit from your whole life, right? So if you begin to realize, oh shit, that's in me, but I'm not sure it is me. And then you start attacking it. Like in other words, you're like, try to fix it. It's a project now. So I'm going to take this thing in my mind. I'm going to fix it. Now you're interacting with it. You're affirming it in the affirmation. It becomes more condensed and crystallized. Then you become a person who's like deeply in the engaged in the process of getting better. I don't know if you ever run in those people there. They've been reading self how about the last 30 years. They're just like constantly like, I'm working on myself. I'm the only thing that really shows is where are you? What have you done? That's what shows where have you done? Where'd you used to be? Where are you at now? Like right now? Where are you at? And why are you there? Are you there because you just got kicked out of your parents house and you're trying to get back on your feet? Or are you there because you're 40 and you've made every wrong decision over and over and over again. You're mad at everybody around you, but you're not mad at yourself. Okay. Right. Yes. In the invitation here is instead of coming to that conclusion, which is called waking up out of a dream. You wake up. You're like, oh my fucking it was all a dream. You used to read word up magazine. And you wake up. And suddenly you're like, man, I used to read word up magazine. Now I can't pay my fucking mortgage. I don't know what the fuck is happening. And so again, in that moment, a lot of people feel intense shame, intense shame, intense guilt. So the idea is the first step is like, and then in that intense shame and guilt, how are you going to treat people around you? Right. Like shit because you're hurting. Yes. So the first step is it that very least do this wonderful thought experiment. To me, it's more than a thought experiment, but it's like what my group named curly Bob. I talked about wrong. By the way, when you can just casually say my guru, that's what my guru named curly Bob you know, that guy, whatever, whatever, I'll try to say it super fast. You wouldn't notice it. You said it to be a thousand times. I'm hearing it this time because I'm like, I'm like, I'm gonna do this. But I could. But it was like my girl named, named curly Boba. Yeah. You know, so the idea is it's really an intense idea. In these days, it's weirdly controversial. And there's certain times when it's not the right thing to say to people, but essentially the idea is where you're at is perfect. Play around with that just for fun. Give yourself one minute after the one minute. You can go back to whipping yourself with a fucking belt of your mind because you didn't make the right choices. You're a bad boy, bad girl. But for a minute, play around with the idea that where you're at's perfect. It's exactly where you need to be. You're there. And the same way people go to a gym because this situation is going to teach you everything you need to know about the universe and start living your life from that perspective. So in other words, you don't become passive and they go, this is perfect. I'm addicted to fucking meth. And my apartment is covered in cat shit. No, it doesn't mean you just leave it like that. But instead of beating yourself up for it, just allow that to be perfect. And then see how you start acting. You know, man, when I've started taking these fucking vitamins and like, you know, I've been drinking more water and trying to eat better because the pandemic I got a little unhealthy and now I'm feeling like good. And when I'm feeling good, I'm nicer to people. It's just how it is. Like I feel good. I'm going to be kind of sure. So anyway, this is the idea first, just let yourself be where you're at. That's perfect. It's wonderful. In fact, you've been invited to the most incredible academy that ever was and the form that you've been invited to it in and the situation that you're in right now. Just forget the idea. You caused this from a lot of decisions you made in the past half the time you were fucking asleep. You didn't know what you were doing. You were scared. You were running from something. You're fucking angry. So angry. You're dealing with your childhood, the way you were raised and taught and trained. Yeah, you are. It's like when I got on it, when I, at one point when I was combating insomnia, and I got on ambient and fucked that shit, man. But like I got to talk to me about that. Oh my god, dude, I got on ambient. You know, Kevin James told me he went to the supermarket and bought food and came home and cooked it and doesn't remember any of it. Yep. Well, ambient. I think he went to the supermarket either way. Cook the fucking meal and fucking sex was ready to call the cops in the morning. Taught someone broke into his house and cooked dinner. Not for me, man. It's like, because it's like you want to, you want to sleep. It's like a disassociative, right? It's like you teleport from when you, you close your eyes and you teleport to the next morning. No rest just as though you jumped through time. And how do you feel? Fucking awful if you were me, but to be, to be fully honest, that was a dick. The cat means I was like, I was on a bit of a rampage. I wasn't. So it's hard to say it was necessarily because I'm cat. I'm fucking funny aside. I've full disclosure, but that's a hilarious aside. But I remember like the next morning, my wife being like, well, do you know what you did last night? And I'm like, no. And she's like, well, you kept calling a temple in Bhutan. So like, I was I look at my phone and I was just calling this fucking beautiful temple in Bhutan. You know, many times, I don't know. I was trying to do there. What was happening, but yeah, fuck, fuck ambient man, but the point is like maybe not fuck ambient. Maybe while you were doing that, like what maybe the problem with ambient is not ambient. The problem is that ambient only it only projects to everybody watching the reality of this carbon based life. Yeah. But when you're on ambient and you're calling that temple, you're trying to like, you're trying to mind-sync with a lot of these Buddhas. You've got on a phone with you, like, you're like, hey man, here I am. I'm fucking hanging out here in Georgia and I was thinking I'd like to join. I'm addicted to God. I mean, can you? Yeah. Maybe. Through the phone, you don't even remember it. You wake up. You don't even feel like you slept. Because you've been tripping balls all night with some Buddha. Well, yeah. I mean, I would love to believe that. I think probably what happened is I was one of many fucking high people who probably leave an answering machine every night at that point. Stop being so hard on yourself. I will. Maybe you're psychic. I will. Look, you know, man, I think like these days, like the big trick is that we is like, it's just kind of give temporarily give up the project of crucifying all the people that you view as being like villainous and realize that you've kind of been crucifying yourself. And you're not fooling anybody. We all know that you have been tormenting yourself. And really, you've been so hard. A lot of people don't have a mom. You know, like, I see the way my mom, my mom, that's a fucked up Freudian slip. I see the way my wife acts with a child and that love and then the children just eat it up. Eat it up. It's like watching like rainfall and it's like, I think how many people in the world do not have that situation. They don't have it. No one's loving them like that. No one's eating them up and loving them no matter what. And they know and taught them to do it for themselves. Oh, God, it's a disaster, man. And because of that, they secretly think they're just abject failures. They're comparing themselves to like, like LeBron James. You know, I like when I'm writing, I compare myself to like, pakowski. And I'll look at my writing and be like, this is the worst writing I've ever seen in my life. Well, no shit, because you're comparing yourself to like one of the greatest writers that ever lived. And so in my opinion. And so anyway, all I'm saying is like, damn, as planet on a planetary level, take, you don't have to tell anyone you're doing it. But let's fucking have a little, like, a little armistice, like on that Christmas Eve, when the, I think it was the French and the Germans as Christmas Eve. They played football together or whatever they played. Let's have a little armistice. And for a second, like just give yourself an hour of not thinking you're the most secretly rotten piece of shit that ever wandered across the planet. And just realize you deserve all the love in the world. And where you're at is just great. And like you're great. And I know no matter what you're like someone's listening to this, you're like, factively, he's probably got a bowl of like hot dog shit. They're just eating it. But, but even that, just give yourself a break. I'm not saying start some bullshit sweet nonsense. Like be nice to the people around you. I'm saying for just give yourself a 30 minute respite from the never ending constant secret self-loathing, like, like horror you've been subjecting yourself to because, you know, that's it. That's going to be a great 30 minutes. Yeah. And if you can do that, you'll probably have this inclination towards like spreading that to other people. I would say that could be an inevitable result of that. But even if it's not, even if you immediately go back to like, fuck you motherfucker, you fucking you, you, you, but hate your voice. I've never heard a more annoying voice than your voice. Whatever, go back to it. Go back to the war and enjoy it. But you're Joe Rogan. Well, you have that cuck with that fake voice on your show spout now at Marxist nonsense. He's a, yeah, it's time fucking Marxism. But yeah, he's got a fucking Illuminati ring, bro. Oh yeah, I wore the fucking Illuminati ring. I got it. It is wonderful. Oh Jesus Christ. Jesus God, it's scary. My young instincts are on point though. All reflexes. Yeah, I mean, stop shit. Hey, dude, did you see that naked girl attack the fucking hour? Heard. Yeah. Start throwing things and bottle one. You gotta watch the video. Okay. Yeah, let's watch it. I saw it like briefly on Instagram and I didn't, I didn't continue watching. I've, I've limited my Instagram intake to positive things only. That's great. Well, I mean, I'm not sure this is entirely negative and occasional car accidents. I, you know, this, the problem with a lot of these videos, man, is you don't get the back story. And that to me is like, I really want to know why she decided to attack this out. Because she put on, well, I have to blame her parents. First of all, did you see the couple that fell off the balcony? Oh, yeah. Oh, that was horrible. That was horrible. They're probably dead. No, they survived. They survived. The impact of the head. They survived. They got, they had like bad injuries, but they survived. 53. I did that. She's 53. Yeah. She actually looks pretty good. Yeah. She looks great. Yeah, for 53. No, I think she just looks great. She's out of her mind. No, wait, that's way into it. You got to see the, this is going to the beginning. That video didn't happen. Oh, that's where it started. Yeah. Yeah. Why did Tazen like that? Well, because she was running at him and she had been like, you got to see the video before you'll understand. Like it wasn't like, he should have just gave her his number. So this something I get off it. The number after you take off coffee, sit down, talk about how you got naked, listen, head to the outback steakhouse. I've got passes. I've got Applebee's discount coupon. You should be like a counselor. You know, that's the thing they say about police. Like a lot of of times these mental health issues. This is one of the defund the police ideas that we, they need mental health counselors, not police to do that kind of work. Dude, I've seen it work. I've seen it work. I will tell you health counselors. I'm going to tell you a burning. That's what I'm saying about that guy. Yes, I agree with him better. I'll tell you a burning man's story. They'll make you make fun of me for a little bit if you want to hear it. Well, okay. Why don't we? That's how I'm asking for him. So a burning man like, oh, wait, let's just watch this. Okay. It goes right to the, I don't know. Well, maybe they cut it out. They make it the funniest part is like when she gets tasered. No, I did not need to tase her, man. Like honestly, does he really need to tase her? You got to watch the whole thing. She was throwing bottles at him. What did you, what'd she say about my sister? I don't know. Call Brian Casey. I got poor Brian Casey. Brian, don't have a sexual relationship with a wrong lady. This is so Brian Casey. I like how she's got sneakers on, but totally not flip flops. Are they? I thought she had a bikini on her first saw but apparently not. But that'll be the move. What did you mean? The bikinis? No, you move. Yeah, you make your point. You don't have to go to jail. I think you go to jail. It doesn't matter. Why are you wearing if you're demolishing a bar? But yeah, she was like her bottles at him. That's hilarious. Yeah. Yeah. That's how it goes, man. What do you mean? Well, hang out one of them gals. That's how it goes. All right. A lot of fun at the beginning. Not so much fun at the end. What's a bad swipe? Somebody swipe their wrong way. to learn our products in her system outside of the HG. It says, yeah, outside of her fucking mind. You don't have to have dark products to be crazy. That sucks to like own a bar and someone calls and is like, yeah, it's like no different from like a bad. Or doesn't it? They should have their watermark on that bar. Be worth a million dollars in advertising. It's a fucking NFT. Right. Salut. Make yourself some doji coin. Yeah. Oh my god. I do. Yeah. Doji coin. I just invested in doji. I thought it was doji. Whatever. You're probably right. I'm not paying attention. You got invest. We got to drive up the price. For right. I got in at 36 cents. It seems like anonymous is mad at Elon Musk for tweeting about Bitcoin fucking around. Right. I didn't know anonymous is that real? Why does it thing? Like who? Where's the what's the source of anonymous? That might be artificial intelligence from Russia. Like that created some video to try to make us think that some people out there really had updated Elon. Typing that and typing an anonymous mad at Elon 24 hours ago story on the same website says anonymous accuses Elon Musk of destroying lives updated five hours ago anonymous denies involvement and anti Elon Musk video. So yeah, see anybody can make a video and say I'm anonymous. And I think that Elon Musk had each shit or I'm going to blow the planet up. How many times? Honestly, how many times have you secretly thought I'm going to make an anonymous video? I mean, who the fuck is the anonymous spokesperson? Are we sure? Exactly. Are we sure? Are we sure? This is the anonymous spokesperson? How do fuck do we know? Wendy's on tunnel road in Nashville. Your time has gone. Yeah, just like who's who's the boss here? You guys have to have a president like the NRA. You can't just run they can't just run around and call yourself anonymous. I did see a story yesterday. Not as deep as this, but there are ransomware attacks happening. Not just like that gas pipeline, but there are multiple cities. There's like a hospital that was going to have all of their records deleted within five days or something. Sorry Jamie. Now go ahead. There's like a $55,000 payment the requesting. Will they attack the meat supply? They attack the gas supply. They're just called the like small town. The small town like they paid, but they're like, look, we can only get together $8,000. You hit the wrong people here. Let's look at this. Let's look at this honestly. Think about what happened with just right here in Texas when the power went out for a week and everybody panicked. Think of what would have happened if the power grid collapsed. Like they said it was like minutes away from collapsing. Think of what happened if that's nationwide. Think what would happen if somehow or another China or Russia figured out a way to collapse our power grid through some sort of computer. Think about instead of China or Russia, one rogue hacker that decided he wanted to get about a nation. What about someone who's doing it for the laws? This is the problem. This is this is why this is one of the Fermi paradox things, man, which is like if you look at human personalities, most of us when we get a technology were totally cool with it. I grew up in the South. My dad had fucking arsenal. I have never seen so many guns. Yeah, you had like the number of guns like like a general in like Eastern Europe would need that many guns. And never never the worst thing to happen in is apparently he like was hunting doves hit a vulture act, you know, and it threw up on his face. He's like my mom would like happily tell that story after the divorce. But like, but that's it with the guns. But what one tiny percentage of us is so insane that we're going to take that fucking thing and ruin it for everybody else. So that is a problem because right now it's guns and definitely computers for sure people have already been using computers to do more than just like I want to make a cool app or you can learn out of code. People are obviously been using computers like the people who made the early computer viruses. I used to work in my computer lab at my college and I had like a court board of viruses that I like found in computers in the early days just for fun, you know, it's cool. But like so clearly people are going to do that with computers. So okay, CRISPR gene editing. Oh yeah, right now if I wouldn't know how to get all the shit I need to have whatever a CRISPR gene editing thing is or I wouldn't never in a million years probably be able to get the stuff to do gain a function or genetic engineering on things. But what about in 20 years? What about in 50 years? Right. Eventually if we have around the entire planet one person who's got his butthurt, that's the apocalypse. That's the apocalypse. So this is the Fermi paradox where they say like why aren't we seeing things out there in the universe? It's because on these planets where they developed a technology that could easily have created a utopia, there was one supreme asshole who was like let me see what happens if I fuck with the mousepox again. And then just everyone dead. Well, you know, I had a bit about that. That's a black mirror. Oh, that's why you get all that DNA from everybody here. Tom, that's a good. Have you ever seen that episode? I didn't finish that. Oh, it's so good. That's so good. I don't want to say anything. I don't want to say anything. I got so watch. I got that. That made me so nervous. I couldn't finish it. I can't get through some black mirror. I got a piece so bad. Yeah, well, I'm going to come back. You guys talk about black mirror, but I do have a point. What were we just talking about? So I can remember. Viruses, Fermi paradox. That's right. I got a piece so bad. Go pee man. Usually it's me. I feel like that. That's pretty cool. I don't know what happened. Yeah, we got two shows today. So you got so you're just playing golf now. You're out of video games. Oh, yeah. Hard time. No, it's, but I'm adding that to it. I always I'm like most tiger woods golf back in the day. Have you started buying clubs? Oh, yeah. I went for a fitting. I have two drivers now. How much is a driver cause? They can go up to, I mean, really, I've learned I've some learning. I'm diving headfirst into this. They can go up to probably a couple of thousand dollars, but that's a driver head, the shaft, the grip. Dude, I had to, okay, so I had a friend a long time ago who played bersam to me, you know, like death. People always, it's do metal. It's like intense, heavy duty, hardcore music. And he played it for me when I was really high. And I like, I was like, oh, and he said, like, do you feel the pole? Do you feel it? And I'm like, oh my God, I feel it. It's like hypnotic it like draws you in. That's how I feel about golf. It's close. It's scary. Like you feel this. I don't know. Because to me, when I look at it, I think that seems like something you should have to pay people to do. It's like you're hitting a ball and you it's like with the tools you're using or horrible for you could pick it up, but, but so many people have given over their entire lives to this thing, indicating it's gotta be the most joyful thing on earth. But why? What makes it so? I'm sorry to think about it recently. Compared to every other sport, the thing I've got onto with right now is that it's Uverse nature. Uverse yourself, but it's also Uverse nature. Because the day you go out there has a lot to do with everything that's gonna happen. Wind, sun, rain. That and then can you conquer that? Can you take the course over? I don't know. It gets a little way too much. I'm not that deep as you do it. But when people, most people like when they're playing like pool, most of the conditions are controlled. Yeah, that's all inside. So it's Uverse yourself more than that. And like, control conditions. Locked into a space, but this is the whole you have 7,000 yards of space to fuck around. And suck. Suck a lot. It sucks. You always suck. But you never get better. You're talking about golf? Yeah, he just started bringing it up so heck. Yeah, Jamie's obsessed with hitting the ball far right here. Aren't you afraid of getting sucked into golf, man? I'm terrifying. Me too. I don't play it. But I can't play pool that much. I'm getting a pool table installed here soon, but I've been avoiding pool. I'm going to try it. I can't have the video games. We did the video games for a few months. And I was like, you get to daddy can't have the video games. Yeah. We got problems. Because you, because you start feeling crazy. You start feeling like what am I doing? Fucking crazy. That to me is like protecting my children against wolves. It becomes this obsessive thing where it's like, I got to protect the tribe. You get locked into these goddamn games because they're so exciting. Good God. I wish I wasn't such a simpleton because if I could just play for like one hour and stop, I cannot. Because at one hour, I start getting a better feel of where my cursor's going. When I'm moving the mouse around, I get a better understanding of strength jumping and how to aim with my rail gun. Same. Can't do it. Same. I'm too dumb. I get too excited. I get too locked in. And there's the realization that that's more fun than anything else I do ever. The best. Other than like, like beautiful things involving people that you love dearly, like real love and emotions in real moments. Like regular shit, you do like watch TV. It's never exciting as a game of quake. If you and I were sitting in front of two monitors playing quake, calling each other pussies, yelling each other, laughing when we died. It's a cackling, ridiculous fun time. We would walk out of that studio and our fucking heart would be beaten too fast or adrenaline. As I've gotten in a golf, I've started this is only this is what it's about really. It's about hanging out with three of your friends, having the word playing terribly, but drinking beer and talking shit for five hours. That's what it's really. Do you dress up in the golf world? If you have to, he does. He has to. That's why I'm just kind of actually do have to play. It's to play. You have to. It's there are weird rules. Like I just heard there's a rule. I need to have it explained to me, but in England and Scotland, on some of these courses, if you don't turn in your card with your handicap correctly, with your score, you're going to be like banned from the course. Okay. So you won't even be allowed to play again. So I, I, you know, what I don't want to say, because I don't, I don't like shit talking here. The point is I golf people are a little uptight. Yeah. What are you saying? Okay. I'm saying a friend of mine. You're saying this to your really gay? A friend of mine will now not say in that. Is that that's how it on what I got out of it? No. That's what I got out of what you're, the way you're saying it is. You're saying they see you really gay? A friend of mine will now not say in that. Is that, that's how it, what I got out of it? No, I, that's what I got out of what you were, the way you were saying it. It seemed like that's what you meant. Most people who work at golf shops, I have made love. I'm making love. Thank God you're the first one to say. I was gonna say like, they're erotic. I think everybody's gonna go me too. It's gonna be like that, that's seen in Toy Story. Ooh. What's more erotic than golf? I'm not saying that's never been said. But like, that, some people love it. But some golfers, they're uptight as ones. Are golfers uptight? Well, it's very fancy. There's a movie, I think about it all the time. It's why I think I even like it at all. Took called 10 Cup, Kevin Costner's a little. I remember that, about in Texas golf. There's two modes that he's like this laid back golf pro. It doesn't give a shit about a lot of things. And Susan Sarandon's hot. It's five, Renee Russo. Isn't she in there? Renee Russo's in it. Who's in it? I don't know who it is. It's not Susan Sarandon. Don't think so. Go, go, go that. I will. I feel like that it's going in with me. Yeah, yeah. He's just going to get some pro who's like, it's his life and he's just wanting to make a name for himself one time, just one time. Yeah. And my theme of the movie it is, but. I think I'm thinking of the wrong movie. Maybe I'm not, though. Golf movies? Oh, you're right. I'm thinking of a baseball movie. There was a baseball movie. She's a more driven guy. She's a more driven guy. That's right. Thank you. Thank you very much. Yeah, that movie, that was a great movie too. Well, Kevin Costner's made some goddamn gems. Except for a lot of world. Hey, guys, it cast them to, you know what's great about water world, water world sucks, but that fucking show a universal they do? Yeah. It's really fun. Fuck people. I'm not you. I'm sorry. I love you, but I disagree with the water world critics. Are you kidding? The movie. What are you looking for? What are you looking for? It's hilarious. It's now it is, but it's like showgirls, but in the water. What else would you want in the world? Well, you know, you don't get it back in the day. It was like a wet, the postman. Did you see that one? That was his other giant flop. I didn't see that. By the way, Kevin Costner, I love you. Me too, Kevin Costner. The giant fan. You tried. Water world, you tried. Listen, man, if I made that movie, it was sucked a thousand times worse. But you also did dances with wolves. I fucking love that guy. He's been a lot of great movies. That's not my point. My point is like, water world is not a good movie. It's just not good. And the postman's not a good movie either. They're just not good. They didn't work. But the water world show at Universal is really good. Yeah. It's really fun. You know what, man? It's somebody who worked on water world. A lot of people know. I know I have friends who worked on water world. It's got good reviews on YouTube. No, it doesn't. Because I'm just doing it. They're just fucking around. There's nothing cruel or you can say to an artist and they say, you know, the thing you made, it's not that great, but there's a universal right based on it. Cool. That's what they say about a fear factor. Is there a universal fear factor? Yes. Some other dude does fear factor at Universal. Has nothing to do with me. I'm three people removed. It's like that guy and then ludicrous. You know about the imposter, Blippi? You know, Blippi, you know, Blippi is? No. Blippi is like the new Pee Wee Herman. He's like my kid. Do you know Blippi? Blippi. Blippi, by the way, I'm sorry. I really do love Blippi. In the same way, we were saying, I love Kevin Costner. I love Blippi. I don't know. Can I just stop for a second? I don't think I'm ever doing shows with lights on again. Yeah, this is my favorite show. So that's Blippi, right? Now Blippi, that's the imposter Blippi. What's going on? The one on the right is the imposter. The one on the left is the original Blippi. So Blippi. The original Blippi. No, so that, the Blippi on the left, there was some controversy because the Blippi on the left started doing tours, saying he was going to be at the tours, but the Blippi on the right showed up at the tours. And so people are like, what the fuck? It's not the real Blippi. It's an imposter Blippi. What is Blippi on? Blippi's on YouTube. Angry parents are demanding refunds for YouTube star Blippi's live show. The popular kids entertainer previously involved in a poop video scandal. It's launching a little large. It's like a read, all the words. It's watching a live show tour. You see it impersonated. By the way, I must say that again, previously involved in a poop video scandal. This is what the aliens hold. And you fucking fools your holding us back. The aliens are hovering and then plunging into the ocean. Blippi, it's a fake. They got a fake blippi. We can't not yet. You know what it's like? It's like a complex souffle. You want to make sure you pull it out of the oven at the exact time. And the aliens like not yet. You don't want it to collapse. Not yet. Wait, wait, wait, wait. They got their oven mitts on. They're looking through the glass window in the oven. Like not yet. They're not done yet. They just, they made a fake blippi. Like damn, I thought it was done. He should not have eaten on a trip anymore. I got to say this. The aliens, I think Blippi is one of the great things about scroll back down. Hold on a second right there. I didn't find out until five seconds after I submitted my payment and ticket master refused to refund me. Said Angelina Sakowski, who spent $126 on tickets. To the New Jersey show. Angelina Sakowski in New Jersey would be a fucking blast Duke Oakworth ticket master. It seemed to have any info about it being an actor on their website. The info was buried on the bottom of the frequently asked questions page on Blippi's website. Yeah. It's like Gallagher too. It's the scandal repeats itself. Well, look, you know, for I like, I love Blippi. Do you love Blippi? Well, no, but when my, what's your favorite thing about Blippi? Because what's cool about Blippi is he like, you know, in the way you go to Walt Disney World and Walt Disney clearly respects kids. There's like the toilets or the size for kids and like there's a sense of like understanding child intelligence as as as as astute as an adult. They just don't have the words yet. He's really good at that. So like when he's like showing like a fire truck, he's not brushing over anything. He's like pointing out all the things that like my that a kid would be interested in, which is like, what's that? What's that? What's that? What's that? That's what I like. I think it's really like of all the crazy shit that we've watched my kid. It's the most like it like at least it like acknowledges that children have some like intelligence. So that being said, when so you the way YouTube works is you're just watching Blippi videos. You know how it is. Man, a two year old. Oh, wow. I found his own band video that got him in trouble. What is it? It was a video. It was a Harlem Shake video. Wait, show the Harlem Shake. Not while I'm like singing the brain. The Blippi guy. So he's 20. This is the pooping video. The guy is all always pooping. That is friend. Oh my God. Oh boy. Oh, one more time. Rewind a little bit. Don't know. A little bit. Rewind that. I need to see that. OK. I was willing to go to bed for him until he just shit all over his friend like legitimately says Harlem. Yeah, I forget. I forgive Joe. I don't want to say the URL. That's how it is. Anywhere. All right. So this dude gets up and he literally hurts. She squirts and empties out on his friends. That big one is friend. The friends flinching like a first time porn star catching a fish. No, it's friend acting like a roach that got sprayed with some kind of poison. This is bizarre that his friend is lying. Ask up in the air. Also naked while this dude shits on his naked asshole and dick. Listen, some things should be illegal. I think we have to like Blippi grew up a little bit. He wanted some views. He ate bad ramen and shit on his friend. It doesn't change the fact. Some things should be illegal, though, Duncan. Shitting on your friend should not be a shit in your friend's asshole. If he apocalypse could come out of that. Imagine if the next plague didn't come out of a wool hand lab, but this guy shitting into his friend's asshole. Just imagine if there's something that happened when shit he shit and it just becomes like some super toxic evil alien. You know, it's like mad cow disease from preons. The idea is that a human being, if you, yuck up his crut's fell disease is when cannibals eat like human spinal tissue. That's one of the ways you get it. But they can get that disease from humans eating other humans spinal tissue and brain matter. Right? So they get the preon disease. Well, that's the same thing, isn't it? Like, because it's not supposed to do that. You're not supposed to ever eat your friend's brain. So nature's like, nature's like, yo, this guy's got to die. You can't have him eating his friend's spinal column. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. So nature has some like built in fail safes to keep you from eating your friends. Yeah. But this motherfucker shitting in his own friends as whole. Like nature's not ready for that yet. Well, nature thinks it's fine because Blippi's still alive. He makes great kids videos. So it's OK. John started making gross out videos in 2013 under the persona of Steezy Grossman, a boy who was born as poop after his parents had anal sex. He doesn't. He makes great kids videos. Listen, and Logan. Who hasn't been a kid? And Logan Paul put up a hell of a fight last night. That's right. This is where living in a cloud world. We're living in a cloud world. We're in a cloud world. The cloud world. Logan Paul went eight rounds with the greatest box to the server lived. Dude, I mean, like, there was no, because there's like, you know, many people, and I think Logan Paul is aware of this, we're looking forward to the satisfaction of watching Logan Paul being knocked out by a great box. So there was a sense of like, we are going to see the hand of justice in the world. You can't just decide you're going to fight through greatest boxer that ever lived and come out of that unscathed. You're dead. We were watching it the way we, like, people used to watch gladiator things where they were like, you know, put the fucking short face bear out and like, let the gladiator fight it. You know, it's going to happen. The bear is going to eat the fucking gladiator. But not in this case. It didn't happen. But here's my, you know, it's, I brought an Instagram post about it today because I was, I was genuinely all day, I was thinking before we got, before I got here, when I was at the gym was working out. And I was thinking I was like, there's something about that that's really intriguing to me. Like, what is it? Yeah. And I tried to figure out what it was. Like, what about the novelty of the moment? Like, we were, you, me, Tom Segura, Tony Hinchcliffe, Ron White, and Curtis, Curtis Nelson, we're all sitting in my house. We couldn't wait. So the thing is about that, we were all like, I can't believe this has happened. I can't believe this is happening. We're looking at them across the ring from each other. Jake Paul's like three feet tall. And I'm like, this is bananas. This is so wild. And he survived. And flip me with him, like, $100 million. He'd made like $100 million fighting a guy who would never won a professional boxing. Oh, the annoying thing. So what is the announcer is weren't acknowledging what was happening. Which was like, what the fuck? The problem is that too many people talk in there. They had a lot of people talking to them. There was tomorrow, yeah. How do you say that now? There's a scenario. There's a scenario. There was a scenario. Who's the other guy? Or an auto. Tomorrow we're now already said. And there was one other gentleman. The guy who got on the ring and interviewed Floyd. And, uh, anyway, there was one, two, three, four guys talking, which is a lot of people talking. It's hard to do. It's, it's, but it would have been nice to have options. This is what you said. If there was an optional stream, we could listen like Teddy Atlas. Yeah. Like a boxing expert. So because those guys would be in funny and they were having a good time and everything like that, which is great. And then I think that like comes from trailer, you know, trailer like you have Snoop Dogg fucking around. Oh, yeah. No, no, I get I understand what the reason was behind it. But sitting next, I'm not like, I don't watch boxing a lot. So it's cool to be sitting and see when you're like, oh, look, he's like trying to drain him or look, oh, look, he fucked up because in the very beginning he expanded too much energy. These are things I don't, I don't even know. Yeah. So that's all just it just added a dimension to it. It was it. Well, I was trying to break it down technically. I'm like, just some interesting things that are happening here. Like, first of all, Floyd is consistently putting pressure on him and moving and putting pressure on him and moving, putting pressure on him. And after the third and fourth round, everything comes out a little slower. So he has to be more measured. So what Floyd is doing like is consistently engaging with him and then pulling out and consistently engaging and making him swing and mess and swing and mess. It's brilliant for people that got mad at it. I get it. It's not Manny Pacquiao versus Floyd Mayweather five years ago. But what it is is one of the best boxers of all time, making a hundred million dollars, fighting a guy who's three feet taller than him and 35 pounds heavier than him who can't win. Yeah. It's amazing. It's amazing. Dude, that fight was amazing. And there's a lot of amazing things. First of all, Floyd's amazing. The fact that Floyd has the balls at 44 years old to decide, oh, I'm just going to go ahead and fight some dude's 35 pounds heavier than me. Yeah. 26 years old. It's crazy. It's crazy. And then the fact that he could put it on a guy like Logan Paul. And here's another one. The fact that Logan Paul went all eight rounds, that's astounding. You have no idea how tired you would be if you were boxing with the greatest boxer that's ever lived. I mean, maybe he's not the greatest because that's subjective. But in my opinion, he's the greatest. The reason why he's the greatest in my opinion is he's only been hit hard and hurt like three times his whole fucking career. There's no one that can say that. The art of boxing has always been hit and not get hit. And in my mind, no one's ever done that better than Floyd Mayweather. Yeah. Now, here he is in his 40s. He's made hundreds of millions of dollars fighting people who have really no chance of beating him. Yeah. Yeah. That's crazy. That's amazing. Dude, the controversy of the day. Oh, people think that knocked out. They got knocked on a big hold up brother. Here, people are so silly. What if you don't understand? They don't understand shit about getting hit in the head. He's the same dummy. He's just hanging on, man. He's just, he went for an over hook. You guys have no idea. This position right here, high elbow, going in for an over hook. If he was wrestling, he would go back the other way and throw him on his back. This is a normal thing for a wrestler. Logan was a wrestler. In fact, ready for this? See how he's got that high over hook on the left hand side. Watch how this happens again. This is what happens when a bunch of people comment on fights. Don't know shit. You see that high over hook that watch one more time. So they, they, he hits them and now look at Logan's right arm. Watch what happens or excuse me, left arm. See what happens? He's in control. He's right, right, right, right. He's a wrestler going limp. My friend Guy Sacco who runs defense soap. That's his company. He owns that company that I rave about all the time. He told me today that Logan Paul was one of his wrestlers in the 1990s. And he said, he's really fucking good. He says really talented kid. There's a video of him wrestling with Paulo Costa, who is a UFC, who is a, rather, excuse me, a UFC middleweight contender. Yeah. Like a beast of a guy. Yeah. And Logan's fucking scrambles on this guy. And like he looks really good. Like he can fucking wrestle. So when you see that, he's not knocked out, you knuckleheads. You stop talking about fighting. He's holding on. Yeah. And he's protecting himself. controlling Floyd. And he's pushing his head to Ford's chest. This is what happens when you don't get commentary from a guy like Daniel Cormier or from a guy like Teddy Atlas or, you know, all the Max Kellerman, Jim Lampley, all the people that really understand boxing, you know, Andre Ward, Roy Jones Jr. Those are the people that are supposed to be commenting unboxing. I think it's, I think it's Bradley. I think it shows Logan Paul for whatever reason, even though he knows he's like, got him good at boxing. He didn't realize that he's become a contender. He felt weird about it. And so he had funny announcers. He wanted that to happen. That was a decision he made. I don't think it was his decision. If it was showtime's decision. Well, anyway, you know what? This is what has occurred to me. What if Logan Paul starts getting good at other shit? Like it's like people think he's going to keep boxing. But the next thing is he gets in a fucking chest. And he like is like, right. He almost beats a grandmaster. And then like after chest, he becomes like an incredible, like violinist. You know what I mean? So now you're watching Logan Paul and some symphony doing the most incredible. Look, it's not impossible. Here's the thing. It's not impossible. But it's just going to require a tremendous amount of effort and growth. But it's not impossible. See, the difference between someone who tries to get really good at fighting, who's obviously a really good athlete with Logan Paul and someone who gets really good at chest is you don't have any inherent advantages anymore. Because if you're a strong, fast person, you have advantage. And those advantages ultimately trip you up in your mindset of learning. And I realize this from martial arts, both from myself and from other people that are watched. There's certain people that they were really physically talented and ultimately was bad for them. Because the physically talented people relied on their physical talents and they didn't learn the technique as like cleanly as the people who weren't physically talented. There's nowhere that's more true than Jiu Jitsu. And Jiu Jitsu, the best fighters are not the most physically talented people necessarily. The best ones to learn from are usually the smaller people. And like Eddie Bravo was not a very big guy. You know, there's a bunch of people like that, Horr Le Gracie, not a very big Marcelo Garcia, not a very big guy. But they're super, super, super technical because of that. And you learn from them, you're learning the real shit. Some people, like unfortunately, they just get, they get fortunate. Unfortunately, they get fortunate. You know where they have like these physical gifts. And so they're not forced to learn and grow. But Joe, this is what we were talking about earlier. Here's the problem. What happens when suddenly that goes away? That entire process goes away. So now you're not forced to grow. And I don't think that's true, Duncan. This is why I'm arguing this. This is what I was arguing before. This is what I'm arguing now. I think we've conflated struggle with improvement. Oh, cool. I don't think they're necessary. I don't think they're necessary. I think, listen, if anybody thinks necessary, then it's me. Dude, I get up at seven o'clock in the morning thinking I'm a loser. And I can't wait to go to work. Yeah, man, all day, I hate everything I do. I want to work out like a fucking demon constantly. That's the only way it works like the way it works with me. I have to have like a battle to fight. So you feel like that might not be necessary. My battle's always internal. It's always internal, like almost always. Like the thought process behind it is always my own criticisms of my own work. Holy fuck, man. There's no, you know what? That's why, but that's why if you look at the numbers or how successful some of the things that I've done is it's not me. It's like a weird mental illness that plugs perfectly into some endeavors. All right. Yeah, it's so weird. That's what it is. It's like a mental illness that wants to be nice to people, but also wants to want to run. I want to go. Let's go. Yeah. Like it's all day. Let's go. Let's go. Duke guy. It's suffering. It's like, yeah, I had this weird moment when I realized that I realized like, oh my God, like the thing I think of is inspiration. A lot of the times it's just me trying to escape from stuff. Yes. Yes. Yes. That's why you're running so hard that we're trying to accomplish things. We're trying to escape from our own for from our own suffering. And I 100% recognize that. And all of my ambition and all of my like, even like my most aggressive moments, I look at like their week. It's a weakness. Okay. It's a weakness. It's a weakness to embrace this resistance against the ultimate. It's a weakness to to hype up aggressiveness to like compete. It's a 100% of weakness. I'm aware of it while I'm doing it. It's exhausting. It is exhausting. But it's also sometimes fun too. It's like both things. Right. It's like sometimes fun to indulge in like the the champ DNA. Oh yeah. Let it loose. Well, you know, this is the crazy like this is one of the, this is probably, I'm sorry, my Buddhist friends are actually even be talking at this point, but like why? Because I'm a little drunk, but like I just get mad when you talk drunk. No, but there's some, no, they don't get mad. Any real like anyone who's a Buddhist that you're probably is not going to get like mad. It's not like that kind of thing. It's more like you don't want to like, I guess anyone looking at someone in a row, wearing a wig who hears what they're saying. It's like, that must be what Buddhism is. Not that's their fault. In other words, like it's not like to give them the ideas like what's cool about Buddhism is it's so beautiful. And the system is so beautiful that you don't want to like you don't want to put it in the same way if you were talking about Jiu Jitsu, you wouldn't want to say a thing about how a train that was slanted a little bit because you wouldn't want to hinder someone's like ability to become good at Jiu Jitsu. Yeah, for sure. That's what I mean. That's what's that. So there's this idea of like it's some sauerkraut in Nirvana. In other words, like confusion and enlightenment are wrapped up together. Or bliss and suffering are actually the same thing. Like when Jiu Jitsu, they're connected like teaching and improving or radically connected. Inextorably. Oh, you mean like to teach helps you get better. Yeah. Right. Yes. But yeah, you know, you respect Jiu Jitsu and I respect Buddhism. No, I respect both of both. I know. But I mean enough to be like where you would want you don't want to do something. I just know Jiu Jitsu in an intimate way, but those two things go hand in hand. My friend Brent, we were like kind of the same level. I think we were like purple belts at the time. And we always used to have like really good roles. And then he became an instructor start teaching people and like right away I was in danger. Like like maybe like I probably you know, sometimes like Jiu Jitsu is weird. If you take a class like you've been it, you've taken classes. You know, it's weird. Like you might be in the same class with a guy like four weeks in a row and never roll with them. Right. Because there's a hundred people in the class that roll with a bunch of different people. Then one time I rolled with them and all some of them. I mean, deep shit. I mean, danger and it fucked up my elbow for like like a couple of weeks. Like I didn't he got me in a commora and I wouldn't tap and I tried to get out of it. And I couldn't do chin ups. I was fucked up. Yeah. It was like a lesson, but he got way better from teaching from teaching. And then I think there's two things going on. I think one is the examination of the fundamentals and the deep understanding of positions. But I also think there's something about helping other people. That's really good for the head. Really good for the head. And there's something about like help when you have your head in a good place, you can be freer with your movements. Yes. You feel less burden down. Absolutely. Yeah. Martial arts, what I there is no there is for sure a hierarchy that acknowledges it, you know, very spouts or levels of expertise. It's teacher and like to there's nothing worse. I'm sure and I know it happens because I thought what's that great Instagram account? Mid dojo life. Oh my God. So there was a guy we went on today about a guy like shaking guys off with his shoulders. Yeah. It gets dumber and dumber. And the thing is the dude who created that website like he's run. I mean, excuse me, he hasn't run out of examples. So many. There's so many examples of the most ridiculous shit. So many. Look at this guy. So this is by the way, this is happening with snoop sounds. So snoop's music is playing. Give me a little snoop. Are you kidding me? No. Watch. Get put your hands. Get it. Go up in there. You're old. Get the groove and you move it around. Not. So dumb. That's pretending that no one like these. I don't know what's happening. It's like these guys are like bad actors. They're falling down and falling behind them. Look how they're grabbing his shoulders and falling down here at this point. Look at that. He's my worry. That's meta. My worries that it's meta. My worries that they're trying to get on. Yeah. They're trying to get on McDowell Joe life and they're creating videos. Probably there's this right here is fucking with me because these guys are bad actors. They have smiles in their faces. They look too far. and sunglasses. Yeah. One guy is wearing sunglasses. That's a set up man, but it's a funny set up. McDowell Joe life might be behind the camera. How about that? Oh, God. You son of a bitch. You know, it's like when the government does those things, they do black ops and then they do false flags, right? He ran out of videos. No, he has to keep it going. No, he got false flags. He's a video. I don't know if they're false flags, bro. I'm real. I'm just joking around. I think there's enough people out. But there might be and they might just be making these videos to get put up here. But at the end of the day, there's a lot of those videos. Most of the videos McDowell Joe life at Instagram puts up are fucking real. And it's disturbing. It's a great, it's a great account to follow. But like I'm saying is the reason when I'm saying that I'm confused regarding Buddhism is because I would never in a million years want to be a, like be the person professing to know a thing that I don't understand. And like, and I think it's important and both resist to and any kind of real, any kind of path that like there has to be so acknowledgement that there are actual teachers. Like there is a way of conveying the ideas that has been evolved over thousands of years that is the best way to convey the ideas. And then there's also people like us who just love talking about it. But it's good to make a distinction because at least you alert people like if you wanted to like go deep into it, there's an Eddie Bravo, there's a David Nick. There's a Ramdas, there's a person you could go to if you really want to go deep into it that's there for you or you can listen to us talk about it and it's and talk about it like us. And that's also completely great. You know what's interesting, man? In boxing that exists where people that are not even really good at it are really good at teaching it. Oh wow, that's cool. Yeah, like there's a bunch of people that were one of them. Some of the best boxing trainers that have ever lived and they weren't great boxers. Like Angelo Dundee, the guy who trained sugary Leonard and Muhammad Ali. Yeah. Not a notable boxer, a manual stewart, a guy who trained Thomas the hit man, her, Gerald McClellan, Milton McCrawery, I mean, a manual steward, Lenox Lewis, a manual steward is a legend. Wasn't really a great boxer himself, wasn't a world champion. It's a bunch of those people. You know what? Teddy Atlas is another one. I think that's one of the shitty things people say. They're go, those who do not can't do it, teach it. And it's like fuck you. No, it's not fair, dude. It's not fair. People have genetic advantages. They have societal advantages, cultural advantages. And some people just learn things. They're really good at teaching things. There's a lot of those options. I'm sorry, I got a pee. I'll be right back. I'll be right back. This is so fun. I never let it do it. Oh, man. Oh, man. The move here will do it once a week. Jesus, that told you. Let's make a deal, son. Come on, let's make a deal. I've become a production company, young Jamie. Does anything you like to get made? Let me know. I've got a list. Oh, do you? Yeah. Good. What about a pull that up, Jamie. Oh, that's not even yours. I won't let me have it. This sort of a bitch, that Weinstein fella, who I love to death, Eric. You can't own pull that up, Jamie. Come, that's rude. Squatter. You're a squatter. Come on, man. Just because you're my friend. Eminent domain. On a domain. But young Jamie.com is live. And you can get all sorts of alien abduction shirts. Pull that up, Jamie.com. Those will be available again soon. Pull it up. You should sell t-shirts on your website that say, give Jamie back, pull that up, Jamie.com. And make them in a rainbow so people have to go. They have to agree with you. No, you make it in a rainbow, like a Napoleon Dynamite, vote for Pedro shirt. But with a rainbow, if you put the rainbow in, people think you support LGBT issues. I was trying to make it in an F.T. Even better. That's also interesting. Talks about that. I was saying, you guys are talking about Logan Paul's that thing. He not isn't the reason, but he could arguably be a catalyst to why that got so popular over the last year. NFTs? Yeah, he sold $5 million worth of NFTs opening a box of Pokemon cards to people that were going to get those cards online and sold them moments of opening them. Solid move. Yeah, he made a lot of money just doing that. Good for him. I like him. I like him. I told you I met him once in Hawaii. He's a really friendly. Like, you meet someone that doesn't mean anything and no one's paying attention. That's how you know who they are. He's pretty friendly. Real friendly. Came out with like, touched my- Friendly. Like, you meet someone who doesn't mean anything and no one's paying attention. That's how you know who they are. He's pretty friendly. Real friendly. Came out with like, touched my shoulder and like, hey what's up man. I was like right after his fight with KSI. That's hilarious. Did you shit all over the toilet like that guy shit on his friend's asshole? He didn't shut the door, man. I guess I have to go not to do it. I'll get it. Jamie's gonna go. Jamie's gotta go. Jamie's gotta go. No. I gotta go. You can remember how to get out of here man. Yeah it's a fucking maze bro. It's like a solid movie. Designed by those military motherfuckers that were talking. Yeah that's a, you know man and like being friends with you that is something I never think about like what would come. I never thought he's gonna have special forces type people guarding him. As long as I'm keeping me, that's the balance. The balance is never stop being you. If you can figure out how to balance your life out and never stop being you and the way I've done that the best, give me that joint over there. That one yeah. This one somehow you guys wanna go wet. The way I figured out how to do it the best is just keep being me. Just keep being me. It's not, it seems hard to do but it's just because it's hard to do normally and it's hard to do mostly because too many people are paying attention what you're doing. They're mad at you. If you just figure out a way to just be yourself all the time then figure out a way to just be the best person you can be done. It can be done. But who schedules the guards? Like do you have someone you like? Like how do you run? How do you find them? You have people around you that are like, I like them because it's like you. Hey hey hey we're out here. Oh I'm sorry. You just said you had. I know but you're getting specific. Okay well there's something magnetic about them. The bank, yeah they're fucking elite soldiers. But the point is if you could just be yourself and whatever's stopping you from being yourself figure out how to control that and then be yourself again. But don't give in to that thing and stop being yourself. One of the main problems I've had with this podcast is it keeps growing. because people expect me to be someone different now. Because it reaches more people. I'm like don't understand like that's how it reached more people in the first place. And that's all I have to offer. Okay if I can't do that look I can talk to brilliant people and ask them the best questions I can ask them and try to provide you with an insight into how I'm looking at whatever particular weirdness I'm talking about on the podcast. But I can't change just because a lot of people are watching more people are going to play that would fuck the whole thing up I can't do it. What a terrifying predicament to find yourself. It's not that bad. So you know it's a little it's like it's it's terrifying bro. What is you don't have options? You don't have things you can do. Trying to find a way to make a living. Those are those are real terrorists or you live in in a communist country that controls your actions. Right. Tell you what you can't say. I mean I mean people criticize me. Like here's the thing about cancel culture right. A lot of it is like people looking at what they think of cancel culture reacts differently on different individuals. Just like a lot of things do. And if you're in a situation where you can get fired right like you're working for a major network and if you get criticized you do something terrible and a bunch of other people chime in and then other people can lose their jobs right like different people that are directors or executives or like it's a different thing. If you're doing something creative you got to figure out a way to get to a position where you can be independent. Right. That you have to. Well you have to like I think there's like a it's almost not their fault if they're mad at you. If they're trying to mold you if their their mortgage depends on it. Yeah. You know it's like it's all set up in a weird way. Like people think it should be cooperative and like I mean it kind of should be but maybe not. Here's the thing. It's like you do your shit. And when it comes to someone expressing yourself about the nature of the world they see it's really important if you want to resonate with people that you come with no pretense you come with no filter. You might be wrong you might sound stupid. You might say something in the next day you're driving like what the fuck did I say it that way like you don't even know you're I don't know what the fuck the next word out of my mouth is right now as I'm talking to you right we don't know yeah and this is what we're doing right and while we're doing this thing we got acknowledged and so it's a weird touch and go situation. Touch and go I can't believe you said that that's what my teachers teacher Joe give a jump of a show you used to say about meditation yes touch and go which is like the way we relate with our thoughts is so funny you would say that the so the idea is like when you're when you're meditating you're the way I meditate there's a lot of ways about the way I meditate is you put your attention on your breath and then when you're when you find yourself lost in thoughts you go thinking and return your attention to your breath says basic mindfulness meditation but the idea is like you're not suppressing so in other words like if all of a sudden I'm thinking about like some vivid memory from when I was six that I haven't had it's not like you're like thank you back to your breath like you're scared or you're running away or trying to stop it it's touching go meaning like no that's there be with it but then thinking and back to your breath touching go so in other gets compared to the way like a butterflies land on flowers it's like you're there but then you go you're not stuck to it is all touch and go that's a cool thing that you just said man it's like all random interactions that you can't predict or chaos throw a wild and unpredictable yeah if you can't predict them you don't know what's going on next you don't know how it's going to end you don't know how it's going to go down yeah you don't know how any conversation is going to take place and people are all judging post you're judging post weird neural interactions between two human being spouting out noises that have meaning attached to them and you're trying to like wrestle your way through this weird conversation depending upon a lot of factors maybe you got a ticket on the way over there you know maybe you haven't slept right you know who knows maybe you haven't taken your vitamins who knows the fuck is wrong with you this is intention this is why intention comes in because it's like some people you will sit down with who are talking to you and they have a real intention maybe it's to sell you a car right to get you into some weird fucking cult to fuck your wife who knows what it is yeah you to what get your dance to get you to dance right gonna have a dance off yeah it's like intention man and it's like people it's hard because it's confusing for people don't want to acknowledge that the reality sometimes people can have a legitimate intention to like help but they're a little confused so the shit gets mixed up and so what what ends up happening is something that in the moment if you freeze that moment in time and lay that is the only reality of what this person is oh my god you've got a monster friends but if you recognize this is a process yes you're looking at like a process this is one part of a process that maybe I know you don't believe this but I do extends through lifetimes I don't not believe it I'm glad to hear that yeah no I don't I don't yeah I'm less convinced every day they have any idea we're not not believe it but I don't believe it you know it's a real baby the problem with like right now the problem is like people are getting abused regarding their identity so so people are beginning to think they are their identity as a singular thing and they're not willing to admit that they're a process and so it's a it's a it's fundamentally like disastrous to imagine this is the case you know it's like you look at a tree you're seeing the process of a seed that's not a tree that's a river of molecules flowing into time that looks like a fucking tree it used to be a seed that it birds shit out and it's like if you look at some of the most majestic trees and imagine that at some point that was in like a crow's asshole you know what I mean it's like what the fuck but it's like and but but this is a process so I think the problem right now is like we gotta acknowledge that we're all a process in the part in the way to like the way like if if as part of that process someone is manifesting aggressive traits that are fucking with society the answer is not to imagine this is who this person is but to recognize like oh this is something you're going through right now this is a display right now and to also recognize you could be that person if you live their life yes exactly that's the problem the problem is determinism versus free will and and and and and and I don't think either one of them are absolute right look I mean I like the whole determinism free will thing I the effort described as absolute and relative reality it's easier to acknowledge that both simultaneously exist and try to imagine one over the other it's like on one level we're all who knows what if you zoom for far enough out in the universe we're clearly a hole on or whatever but on another level there's a long oh yeah the totality of a thing like that I think that's called a hole on really yeah HOL and could be Rob Jamie please look it up so I don't get like a million tweets correcting me about my miss fucking communication of a word I it's a dope word I've never heard of her in HOLON could be wrong about that though yeah could be wrong God I hope sounds super similar to when like really wanted to Hawaiians get mad at white people it's a city in Israel so it's not that what it's philosophy correct so it says it's something that is simultaneously a hole in and of itself yes as well as part of a larger hole hold on a hole on so at some point we're a hole on another point that's a dope word there's a Joe and there's a Duncan and these two things are happening simultaneously so they both can happen simultaneously so this is called relative reality absolute reality and we have to accept that both exist but not just both exist dude but when you talk Neil DeGrost Tyson told me that he thinks that there are infinite universes and there's infinite Duncan's doing infinite things yeah not he thinks he didn't even say he thinks I'm phrasing it wrong in theory he was explaining to me this theory of infinity yeah that not only is there are you but there's a you who's done everything you've done yeah and then is you who's slightly deviated from that path yeah infinite numbers of times yeah and there's another that's slightly deviated from that it's it's it's impossible to imagine the numbers were that are involved dude it's not impossible to imagine go to the airport and look around that's all you that's all different versions of you and different things it's all you you don't need to go any further than your local target and take a look around at the multiverse that's true that's what pains us so about homeless people yeah we realize that could be us abs if you're honest with your honest with yourself if you if you were that kid who became that you know abuse person in a shelter at 14 who became that kid on the street at 16 who is now in a tent by the lake why why because he's a loser is that really what it is like so helping people by like telling them that they can camp out that's not enough that that's like at least you're not but the problem is like they want to be closer to all the shit that's happening but you can't just like take over ground because other people say no where you're camping I've decided since the sidewalk you're using I'm gonna build a fort these bills for it on the sidewalk you can't put shit up if you can't have a tent you can't have a house can have a tent okay no you can't just put tents everywhere but it doesn't mean that you don't understand that these people they got here somehow another they got fucked over but I think you if you really want to know what understand how beautiful humans are right now because you realize like in the human spirit is a thing that is like all right I guess I'll let you put your tent there because I want I don't I don't want to like impinge on your life you want I want them to feel better yes but they're saying man put your tent down yes so you look at that it in like like subtract everything other than that feeling and a person which is like I know you're me and I know you're me in a different timeline and so I'm gonna I guess I'm gonna what I'm gonna trust the process and let you do this thing and then you get this collision between that and the other versions of you who are on the same timeline or on a different timeline that are like yeah but that's where my business is that I like and so now you have these two colliding possibilities and we don't have to deal with it yet we don't know what to do it's like so brutal because like on one side you have like the most incredible the stuff that like the the heart of Christ the deepest compassion which is like you are me when you know Jesus says love your neighbor he doesn't mean pretend that you were in your neighbor's shoes he literally means those are you your neighbor is you you should love your neighbor because they are you love your neighbor as yourself that's you so now if suddenly we're dealing with this reality from a from a like what are we gonna do Joe because now it's like yeah great you have this incredible podcast and you have like achieved this and this like amazing apex in this little period of human culture that we're in but it's like what about all the non-use especially the ones you were like camping out you know what I mean now what are we gonna do if you look at things like that which is actually is this guy Bob Thurman Uma Thurman's dad is this incredible Buddhist scholar explaining this to me really oh my Thurman's dad is the most Buddhist scholar one of like the Dalai Lama's best friends he oh my god he runs like to bad house mentally he's like and I've met him he is such the coolest person he's ever met but like what would he say he well so he said the idea is like when in compassion or in thinking with the people and god I'm sorry Bob Thurman if I miss quoting you or something this is how I remember it it's not like I'm looking at you and thinking god what if I was in that person's shoes it's like you were looking at them and thinking that's me I'm looking at me that's me I am them this is me and so in this mindset this is where you start making decisions and so it's radical and wild because it's not like you do the thing where you're like god it'd be rough to be in that person's situation as me you're thinking I'm looking at me right now and a different time exactly yeah and so that's how real compassion starts appearing that's real compassion I must help I'm gonna help and that that's all that ends up happening you know we look at these people who we call saints and we're like oh god there's saints but it really what happened is they clicked into that reality and couldn't click back out and all that was left was like I'm just gonna help all this left to do is to help I'm just gonna help it's all me you know it's that's what we've got to get across right that everybody is you living another life if we can just come to grips with that and have some sort of uh but but here's the thing you can disagree with someone if it's you living another life but if you really felt like it was you living another life and you're talking to them you would have more compassion then they were if there were some random asshole yeah you would have more compassion and maybe you'd be able to calm them down because we all know that every single escalation that people have with each other is usually based on two people it's like maybe one person takes it too far yeah one person gets loud or gets one person gets physical but I think in many situations and I'm not blaming the victim but I'm saying in many situations a lot of interactions between people is dependent upon two humans and how this human approaches this human changes how they are and how they react is a little dance they do and some people are not tolerating any bullshit and they just want to hit you in the face right away and it's it's not your fault run it if you run into one of those people but they're reacting to probably a lifetime of being punched in the face right that's what it's what it starts winging on you yeah right that's if you were them like it but it's it's hard for us we're always looking at other human beings like this guy's gonna hurt me or he's gonna steal yeah or she's gonna take and this person's gonna do something bad to me right we but if we could get across the idea the world the same thing exactly living different versions of the same life yeah like literally that the life is a thing and the life goes through different personalities like like a river goes through creeks right like the ocean filters into a river and it goes through creeks yeah that's what the life does and the life does this with with all different colors and races and sexual orientations and proclivities and hobbies and intellect levels and it just goes through all those things and the key is recognizing that at the core of who you are is the same thing as the core of everybody else it's just that thing is powering different meat vehicles with different personalities and different loyalties to states yeah and different you know different fucking hobbies and things that they like to do and different shields they put up to protect themselves yeah man this is it and you know and a lot of people like so what do you do you just let yourself you vote Democrat only you start doing ketamine you get on the roof you try to you put a a magnet on your deck and hope you get struck by lightning I'm gonna vote for the second of those three possibilities but but you know what I think like uh the um why you just describe by the way I mean it's such a beautiful reality and and and it's hard for people to understand that a lot of people feel very defensive when they hear a thing like that but so I think like why do they feel the friends are we think well because like the problem is that there's a there's a narrative happening right now and the narrative generally involves some form of overcoming another person so it's like what's that thing I think Voltaire said not that I should succeed but that my friend should fail right you know what I mean so like that's built into the ethic yes and so so a lot of people who've invested their entire lives and perceived being better than this person or that person they've put a lot of energy into a really horrific mode of existence that isn't really making them happy but that I think that's one of the big secrets is like people will like have great achievements and then they'll find themselves in this like weird enclave of other people have all these great achievements and and and and at the end of the day that god I said at the end of the day I hate that thing but like they literally at the end of the day they feel so sad and empty and lonely and broken and numb but they don't want to say it out loud you know what it's like what if if you don't exactly know where the road is and you're in the desert yeah and like there's like some faint roads that left some maybe some brush in the way and faint roads to the right but one road eventually has asphalt yeah he might take the wrong road yeah he might go left you might be 45 degrees away from that real road and you're like heading towards the mountain you realize you fucked up and if you turn around it's all dusty you got to wait to the dust settles you're not exactly sure which way you turn left or right or right or left you got to kind of remember it backwards yeah trying to bring yourself back to the spot because you fucked up you took the wrong road you don't want to admit it you don't want to admit it because you're a proud person because your dad told you suck it up dunking you know ever admit you took a wrong turn ever ever I don't give a fucking fat out of that goddamn map put the fucking map away woman I'm flying by my go-n-ass we're driving into this fucking mountain yes and you do and you using my north compass yeah this is okay so like one of what there's I have many Buddhists teachers I love one of them is called Sharon Salzberg I repeat this thing she has to myself every other day which is the healing is in the return meaning that if you fucked up for 50 years straight and you've been making the wrong decision every day for 50 years and you have put your egos become so invested in this pattern that you're like stuck what she's saying is it does like all those 50 years of like going off track the moment that you admit it and you're like oh fuck that was wrong that was not the way I want to be and go back to where you were at it's the most glorious reunion with a you that you forgot even existed the moment you which is like by the way I just let me ask you this yeah how do you extend that to like people that have done horrific things like how to extend that to genocide to Hitler how to yeah how do you help yeah could you imagine a world where Hitler's forgiven whoa right just had this brilliant guy Neil I don't answer this this is gonna get you in real trouble no no my no my no I just had this brilliant guy Neil out and I'm he again I'm so embarrassed that what let me finish this new Allen on my podcast very very very smart he gave this exact example with Hitler oh so you you look at Hitler no you don't listen to my podcast you're a hot moment my point is you look at Hitler you look at Hitler and you realize that like the idea is like the time travel that you go back at time you're a friend of Hitler you look at Hitler and you recognize with Hitler this is me if I had gotten in the worst kind of fucking life I could have been this and then knowing that's you you shoot him in the fucking face because that's the right thing to do if you're on an airplane and someone's like I'm getting into the cockpit that's lies to the hall of earth you can look at that you know what I mean you can look at it you can go on are you kidding I love hall of earth shit and of course I saw the name came wrong my point is like you look at that person and you you look at them you're like that could be me if I eat yes more edibles before this plane took off but that doesn't mean you're like so go in the cockpit let's go to the hall of earth you stop them right you know what I mean so the idea that so we can have compassion and realism and like like justice simultaneously the two things don't have to be completely separate things that's I'm sorry I know yeah no you're 100% right that's a really good point it's very good but it just like I think all this is dependent like the reason why these conflicts exists like what you're just talking about is dependent upon whether or not people have embraced the idea of that we're all the same thing if we embrace the idea that we're all the same thing just if we can just figure out a way to use that and just put in the back your head yeah write it down and stick it in your wallet yeah just write that write that we are all the same thing we are all living different lives with the same thing different living different lives if you could meet a person on the street and think about them and don't do don't get mug doing this then blame me to a rugeter but tell me if I do the same as you and fuck you can't meet a dick and stole my watch I'm sorry okay don't listen to me I don't want I don't want to give advice maybe I should stop framing things in the way of advice maybe that's my problem yes Duncan when are the UFOs landing come on man we like you knew would you tell me yeah would you really would you do it over the phone would you tell me would you tell me to like put my phone in a bucket and walk into a lead room you're being so funny you know what I did if I knew like if I somehow have a new I got actual information about the UFOs right you know that within like as soon as I could get a place away from the people yeah we get a real nervous man you think I'm working with the feds you give me the look dude if you're working with the I don't care I don't like to me like that's what's great about friendship is it transcends all that shit you're if you I know I would tell you first I would tell you first I call you right away dude you don't gonna believe I'm gonna make sure I'm gonna fake phone to call you I'd be calling from a fucking 7-Eleven phone you don't know what you think about the UFO oh dude I want to believe so bad I don't trust myself oh my god I don't trust myself Duncan dude I just have my friend Jason Luv on the show and like I got cuz like I'm trying to get in to talk about aliens and like he's like so smart and he's like getting into like it's probably a distraction but every once in a while he's saying to me do you want to believe Duncan? what you guys I want to believe I do want to believe but you know what here's the thing with the alien shit I got annoyed someone on Twitter sent me a message he's because like I guess some leak came out and they're like it's not a wins and someone sent me a message like see it's not a way in no that was a really poorly titled article that's all that was no I shouldn't say poorly titled but they just did it because that was like the best way of getting people to click on it yeah whatever if you just say something's not aliens people will click on it what is it but here's the thing I don't care who the fuck is making that thing making that thing right I care that it exists exactly that's all that matters thank you so that's real well here's what's real something went 80,000 feet above sea level to 50 feet above sea level in less than a second yes this is all tracked by multiple sources including the best weapon system the fucking navy has to and you got commanders like a guy like David Freaver who is like literally a top notch fighter jet pilot who has a deep understanding of these weapon systems and they're locking in on this thing that looks like a tick tack and it zooms away what they estimate maybe thousands of miles an hour what the fuck are you talking about yeah you don't think that's bananas who I don't care what is the urge to dismiss that yeah like when you get a guide like a David Freaver who's like he's never told another story like that since he says the guys that he was working with had seen multiple things just like that for a couple of weeks it wasn't a unique thing it was just like they he went face-to-face with it that's what they were saying bro you gotta listen to him on the Lex Friedman podcast okay Lex does a fucking amazing job because they go deep into all sorts of aviation talk yeah so all this talk about how to fly these things and the weapon systems and Lex is he does AI right for he used to do it for MIT and he runs as the Lex Friedman podcast he's a really heard of him I don't know much about I gotta put you guys together he's brilliant but the point is they're talking and so he understands this kind of crazy super technical lingo and he indulges David Freaver in this explanation of this the weapon systems that they use and the visual systems and all the different things they can shuttle back and forth between different sources it's wild shit dude like so people that don't understand that and never heard that guy talk about those things they don't understand how I got specifically they know this thing moved off at thousands of miles an hour instantaneously okay no visible means of propulsion I got you so a lot of people they see these fucking videos that have been verified by the Pentagon and they dismissed them and they dismissed them because they're like look at it it's grinding you could have done a better video than that and they don't understand the technology behind what picked that up at all but the fact that we picked that up at all is insane pitch black at night and no miles away right yeah that's what that's what's an HD it's not real look at that some of it is night vision like those little pyramid things are flying over those things those in night vision I fish it some of them they're in infrared there's there's there's I'll continue this one thing Jamie because there's one guy who does a really good job of this there's a one guy that Jeremy Corbell sent me and this guy does a really good job of explaining why there's no way that these things whatever the fuck they are to be like a goose like people have called a goose yeah like people have said like maybe it's a goose and this guy who is a he's a fighter pilot like a goose what like what like goose geese are going out the aircraft carrier thing is rasping them listen man people love to believe whether they believe this way or that way Geez, they're going out the aircraft carrier. They're harassing them. Listen, man, people love to believe whether they believe this way or that way. They don't necessarily want to believe in the truth. A lot of times they do. And a lot of times maybe like 80% right. Yeah. But they're clinging to this idea that left is the way. And maybe sometimes you got to go right. Right. And maybe sometimes you got to recognize like, yeah, you're right. A lot of this stuff is nonsense. A lot of this stuff is hoaxers. A lot of this stuff is delusional people. Yeah. A lot of this stuff is people see in Venus and not understanding what they're looking at. But a lot of this stuff doesn't make any fucking sense. When they have multiple sources, radar, they're tracking these things on weapon systems on two different jets. Like this is banana stuff, dude. Well, these things. It's just something with no visible means of propulsion. You have a fucking Air Force pilot who never had a million years wanted to be on camera who just like flying those three. Or do we? Maybe it's an Android. Yeah, useful idiots. It could be an Android. Right. He's an real person. Oh, it could be a man. Like this is the guy. This is the guy. He's basically explaining how sophisticated and complicated these systems are. And one of the things he used if it was not on this video is on another. He said, catching one of those things on one of these weapon systems just randomly without any other input, whether it's radar or any communications for something else would be like looking at a finding a person through a straw, like trying to find a spot something through a straw. Like, you're just looking at the random sky. Like they have to lock onto these things. I have to pee again. Me too. So what do we have here? Yeah. It's kind of late. It's 723. We've already done three hours, right? That's so weird. Two is an surprise. We started a three-twent. Thank you. 420. This is perfect. Because we don't extend our welcome. Over extend our welcome. Yeah. Catch a buzz. Get some food. Duck and eat the best. You're the best. And we'll start our once a week show in September. Yeah. You know what? I was already coming here anyway, because I have to work on some standouts. That's what I'm saying. So that's what we do. Yes. What do you do like a month? Any time you want to come down here. I do it. Like, let's do it. Like come on this regular podcast. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Just two once a month. Come back once a month. Yeah. Once every two months. I'm going to come for a month. No. I'm going to come for a month straight. Whoa. And then last two weeks. And then like not an Airbnb. I'm going to use Tim Dylan as a reference. They don't like him. Are you joking? He fucks up Airbnb. No. No. No. No. He talks shit about this one couple. This lesbian couple that owns it. It might have been in fucking dope house. Yeah. And they kicked him off of Airbnb. Dude, I'm sorry. Dude, you could kick top Airbnb. Oh, Tim Jones is savage. That's brutal. Tim Dylan is a savage. But getting killed in a fair Airbnb is rough. That's rough. He'll find a way. He can do that other one. Vermal or whatever he does. Listen, he's a new Airbnb. It's called Vermal. Only left dishes in the sink. That wasn't the problem. The problem was a shit talking. We got to stop Airbnb and be in. We have cameras. And it shares harsh stories of rising fees, filthy homes, and scary hosts. And can I stop here? So great experiences that nobody fucking writes in about. Also, most of the people. Yeah, but if you're fucking Airbnb someone's watching. If you're fucking Airbnb, there's an 80% chance someone's watching that. Ladies, gentlemen, thank you for everything. Duncan Trousell, Jamie Vernon, and Joe Rogan. Signing out. How did Krishna?