I'll go back. I'm glad you're here. So you're on Twitter. I didn't even know you're on Twitter. And then the ghouls decided to destroy my son who's got the same name as you. And because in our family, they're only like four names and everyone's required to use one. And I think they mistook your Twitter feed for his. I don't know if he has a Twitter feed and and all of a sudden he became really famous and a couple of your nieces called me, books on Twitter. I didn't know that. How long have you been on Twitter? Not very long since 2010, but mostly as a reader. Yeah. And now that there's nowhere else you can get news except for UnzReview. We are allowed to talk about UnzReview on us. Other than UnzReview, the only or revolver news, the only other place you can get information these days is on X. So if you're not on it, you're not getting information. I had never actually rendered many opinions on X. Yeah, but I started doing that recently. Oh, did that change? Yeah, did. It did. And it's been so fun. Actually, you made some interesting people on X. And there's a lot of creativity on X. I agree with that. There is a lot. Like, I wouldn't know how to make a meme of my life dependent on it, but I sure appreciate them. Other than that, there are some seriously well researched, smart people who know, got a lot of interesting stuff to say. So, and it's addictive. I try not to spend a huge amount of time on it. I actually have work to do. So, but it will suck me in. But once you beat alcohol, you beat cigarettes. But Twitter's hard. It's much. Thankfully, I've got a lot of nicotine with me. Good. That's how you are. By the way, I always assume you normally have a gun right on the table, but I don't see it. Sadly, I had to fly through. I had to be groped by TSA this morning. And Don, it was awesome. They, uh, what's the strategy for that? My strategy used to be, hey, say please. And thank you. Um, because you work for us, right? They love that message. Yeah, they do. I've seen you try to enforce manners and Anglo manners at the TSA station. Doesn't work. No. And actually recently, since they've instituted the real ID and they have you stand and take your picture. I know they have your picture everywhere else and they have your bio metrics. Um, I took a principled stand a few times and said, oh, no, I don't think I'm going to picture it. Well, every time that's happened, they managed to discover that I have a duplicate ticket or no TSA badge. And I have to go back to the front of the line. So, I don't do that. I'm Captain compliant. I go through. I'm super courteous when I walk through. I say they broke you're like Winston Smith at the end of 1984. They just broke into your like two plus two. I think that's five. Is it five? You just have to surrender and explain exactly if you want to fly anywhere these days. So no, I'm not armed sadly, but I'm in the great state of Florida. I think I've ever seen you unarmed, but you're, this is a safe place. Um, normally, this little thing on the table. Oh, go back. What's that? Well, back up planner. But say you've actually been broken by TSA. I don't really think there's any other solution to it. I'm still angry about it. Right. Oh, for sure, legitimately, I've funded to be one of the most humiliating experiences of American life. And I do still say to everyone around me after I've gone through the groping, I say, do you feel safer? You do say that every day. You offer it at every moment in the line. It's amazing how few people actually will take the bait. They can smell the noncompliance on you and get away quick. Big time. No, like he should be deplatform. There's a lot of that on X. I had heard that you could say whatever you want. It turns out that's not true. It's not true. No, and people have no sense of humor of they don't, they don't like jokes anymore. Yeah. Can I just give you my strategy for TSA when I get groped, please? Little the left. Yeah, totally. Yeah. Like, I'm going to touch you around the belt area, sir. I'm like, bring it on, baby. And then just act like you love it. And it's so creepy that it'll abbreviate the experience. Do you go through the extra machine so they can keep the file? I try not to. I'm so paranoid about all of that stuff. I'm getting crazy. And I'm like, oh, I'm going to get some weird, you know, limphoma from the from the magnetometer or something. I just don't. I can't be healthy, right? No, I can't. Although I figure once you've surrendered and you can't do anything in American life without surrendering to some extent, even emailing or texting, you know that other people have it. So at some point, you should just adopt an attitude. No, I think you're absolutely right. I mean, we've we've both been tamed by the women in our lives and just like, stop making a fuss. But I always think these are the people who ran the burn pits at Camp Lejeune, where our father was stationed and the Marine Corps and never joined the class action on never. He never joined the class action. That's right. Not a litigious man. I'm saying something today. I'm 56. I've never sued anybody. So I said, people are slandering. You've got to sue. And I was like, I'm committed to a higher principle than in my culture. We're not until our suits at all. And I'm never going to I want to make it to death. And I hope it's, you know, while from now without ever suing anybody, that'll be a personal victory for me and my family. And really only our family will appreciate it because the culture we grew up in is just gone. Doesn't like it never existed. But I'm not honest. Yes. Oh, you've noticed. Yeah, I have noticed. Has it, has it been a net winner loss for the country? Would you say after we won World War Two and we got to Lageriate in our freedoms and and all the economic prosperity that is led us to be freer and able to speak our mind. No, no, it's actually tragic. And if you're having a children as you do, I guess they're no longer young, but you really see it with the way our children have grown up and the restrictions they've had on thought and speech, especially. I mean, we grew up at a time, as you know, where I don't think anybody's ever heard this question before in a in a school setting. One, ask any question you want. In fact, you're encouraged to ask a question. I was always taught and ask any question you'll never get in trouble. And then that's silly little ditty, you know, sticks and stones will break my bones, but words will never hurt me. That was real. And none of our children were taught that no, no American child goes through life thinking that they can deviate from the script that they can offer some opinion that's counter to the authorities that are in front of them. And that's tragic. And it obviously has a huge effect. It's stifles imagination and creativity. Which are why they've died. I think actually that's so good, which if you're under 50, you may not be familiar with, but it was a staple of, well, England, by the way. And then the United States, it's child. Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me. It's actually been inverted where we've endorsed sticks and stones. Violence is no big deal. We're totally for violence. Just blow up the drug boats, whatever. Are they drug runners? You care is kill them. And by the way, Charlie Kirk got shot. Well, yeah, because he used bad words, like he deserved it. People believe that. So sticks and stones are fine, but words are the threat. What is that? It's terrifying, actually. It's not a Western orientation. No, no, it's not. But it is prevalent here now in the West. It's everywhere. So you've, I looks like you've decided to play along. I am not playing along and I'm fortunate because I've grown up in an atmosphere where actually I was encouraged to say what I believe. I don't have a lot of governors in my life, especially now that my child is old enough not to be embarrassed by me daily. And I don't have to fight with his various academic institutions that charged me a lot of money and tried to wipe out the boy and wipe out the creativity from my son. And that was a, you know, 12, 14 year battle that I had to fight. And also I, so I don't really care. They're very few people whose opinion matters to me. In the end of the day, I have a constituency basically of one. And that's the woman I love and live with and my son. And then the slightly expanding circle of you and other family members. Beyond that, and every one of those people is perfectly apprised of my deep flaws and my history. And so. And you're amazing virtues. And as one of my children said to me, in fact, all of my many children said to me and my nephews when you made your public conversions on Twitter, the legend of Uncle Buck is there. It's now out there for the public to appreciate. And by the way, they loved it. That's so nice. I guess the key is just not thinking about it. I don't think about it. That's actually a best thing that I thought you might ask me about this only because it's a new thing in my life. I likened it to shooting rabbits on a sporting clay course. The most accurate you'll ever be is if you're just instinctive. You just pull your gun up and you shoot. That's totally right. And so I don't have a lot of time to think about what I write. I bet it's not to write anything too embarrassing. I don't write things that are intentionally provocative. But I also have no trouble expressing myself. And there's so much absurdity out there that needs to be addressed, I think. And I think that the most important act of defiance is not violence. I have come to believe in my age that violence actually doesn't seem to. I don't really know when the last time violence solved a problem. It's also prohibited to us as Christians. So there's that. But you can't kill innocence. Sorry. But I do think they're right to worry about words. Actually words do change the world. Do you trust them and change the world? Period. The Old Testament changed the world. I mean, truth changes everything. And you may not live to see it come to fruition, but it still is the most profound thing you can do to fight tyranny is to tell the truth about tyranny. Yes. Do you feel that? Very much so. And I think and there's a huge amount of people in this country and across the world who do. And it seems like they'll decide from podcasts like yours and they're very few. There are a few opportunities for people to express themselves honestly unfiltered. Well, 2026 is likely to be the year that some companies will find patriotism or discover it during the Biden years corporate America thought hating our country was the thing to do. So they did it. Now that we're in a new era, they are coming back to reality. It's not real though. It's a trick. They don't mean it at all. Black rifle means it and they've been doing it since day one. Not just discovering patriotism. They were founded on the premise is this country celebrates 250 years of existence. Black rifle is brewing bold American roasted beans, built for people who believe in the values that made America great. So kick off 2026 with roast made for patriots, not spectators. And for the new year, Black rifle is launching cold brew coffee cans in just black and vanilla powerful smooth and made in America. Want something even more explosive? Try grape X or tiger strike. Whoo. There are new zero sugar energy drinks with 200 milligrams of caffeine. That's about half the output of a nuclear power plant. But it's clean energy for Americans who mean business. Visit black rifle dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 30% off or find black rifle at Walmart, Target Kroger. Wherever great products are sold, black rifle coffee, veteran founded America roasted, it's America's coffee. You see, you talked about growing up. Obviously, we grew up together or they only children in our family. We had the world's smallest family. It's like three of us for a while. And, and then we've lived next to each other our whole lives until pretty recently. And you talked about telling the truth that your kid school. I should just say this because it's one of the things I admire so much about you. We sent our children to the same school. Obviously, I forgive you. Well, my wife could be sad. Yours to the school that our kids went to. And of course, it turned out to be a subawesome school, very liberal crazy school. But, you know, it's our neighborhood school, whatever we did it. Let's not regret it. But you were the only person in this rich person school that we sent our kids to to confront, you know, with politeness, but firmness, the administration of the school about what they were telling your child, which was like totally bonkers, like men can become women and hate yourself if you're white and all this stuff. And boys are bad test test runs, bad masculinity is bad. And everyone else was like, okay, well, it's a prestigious school. We'll just go along with it. And you were like, I know. And I remember all the moms kind of hated you, but Ross was sort of attracted to you, just to be honest about it. And they were like, oh, keep in need. You're brothers always making a fuss. And you were like, yeah, okay. Why did you do that? You were the only person. My son is the greatest blessing in my life. And it's the sole purpose. It was my sole purpose for a long time. It seemed it's the only thing that that could be important is the only enduring thing. When people ask me when I was a kid, probably because we had such a happy, thoroughly fucked up childhood, but really happy thanks to our father. That's right. So extraordinary in every way and made it very clear that we were the number one priority in his life. I mean, and it's like the busiest guy I've ever known involved in so many things. And yet we were without a doubt his only focus and or his primary focus. And he would do anything would do absolutely anything. So there are no boundaries. And and so that seems normal to me that was my reflex of attitude about my son. Well, I think the first thing I encountered when I took him to that school that pretended to be a nice Episcopal school with its own chapel, I noticed. They were anything, but Christian in their attitudes. And it was in the middle of the Obama administration when everybody got super empowered about, you know, indoctrinating children on a level that I don't think I'd ever seen. I don't think that America had ever seen that. No. And you pay all this money because there's really no chance that you would send your children to a public school in Washington. I thought didn't there's actually an argument probably for sending your children to something other than what we sent ours to. Anyway, I remember showing up. It was right after the election and I'm not a big bumper sticker guy, but I had a bumper sticker probably the only other only bumper sticker I've ever owned. And it was a series of four memes. And it was pro God, pro life, pro gun. And then it had the Obama horizon with a cross through with a slash through it. Yeah, I was in the back of my Chevy Tahoe and I pulled up and dropped my son off in the school. And the visceral reaction from the entire teacher platoon that was outside was obvious. And so actually I met a commitment right then and there again, I was kind of embarrassed to have a bumper sticker in my car. Like who does that? But I kept it on there religiously for the next like eight years until the car died. Yeah, until one of our friends actually took that car that I had tried to flip and destroy many times and unsuccessfully was unsuccessful when he flipped it and prokis nacked. He's okay. But he was sober too. Yes, he is. In his defense, he was dead sober. He was going hunting and it was in the morning. It was in Maine and he hit black ice. Yes. Even having grown up and we're all man, he somehow was an expert at dealing with black guys. He took the top of the pine tree off with the apple. Now I drive by it all the day. Quick for every time I go by it. He's unbeatable on every sample. He's going to have some of the spooky brochures. What a wonderful man. And that set the tone and then the other and then the fact that they have your child captive. He pale this morning. They should have a classical education that in this case was billed as something that was rooted in the Christian church. And yet immediately they adopted and started all these clubs that were race based. My son went there and fifth grade. So he was 10. And they immediately started not only indoctrinating all the kids there, but making them feel horrible about themselves. Segregating kids by race. This is cool where all the entire, it's in the middle of the swamp. So it's like the rich zip code in all of DC. And so the diverse. The richest in the United States. Yes. And the diversity that they had, they talked endlessly about diversity. And the diversity they had there was color only. Everybody was in the same industry. Everybody was working. Everybody was driving a fucking Range Rover. I wasn't, but they were. And yet anyway, so was stifling and confusing for children. And I'm just wasn't going to sit back and allow them to do that. And I tried to be reasonable. I was just persistent. And they boy, they didn't like it. They actually despised me. In fact, I guess I've encountered that a few times in my life. But boy, they they hardly dislike me. Yeah. And these are the kind of people who probably do have voodoo dolls back on 100%. We're all wickens. No, they were my back pains were not from being overweight or from not having a tough core with someone sitting, some booger eater sitting you know, stabbing me with a fucking dagger. I'm excuse my language. Sorry. No, it's fine. No, you're right. It was just it was so interesting because I saw it. Obviously, you know, I'm your brother. My wife is your biggest fan. So it's like, of course, we supported you. But I just, and but I was not as brave as you not even close. And I felt exposed because I had a public job. Like I didn't want to get, you know, whatever. I felt like a little bit constrained. But you're just you were braver than I. That's just a fact. And, but the reaction from the other parents, all of whom liked you because everyone likes you, but they were, they didn't want you, even the ones who agreed with you to keep saying stuff like this because I think they wanted to ignore it. They wanted to fit in more than they cared about their own children's moral and intellectual development. I mean, that's just a fact that. And also, I think, cowardice breed self clothing, which turns into hostility, like extreme hostility. I saw this during COVID. And that's in the same way that cowardice breeds self clothing. I think people who were cowardly hate being cowardly. They know they're being cowardly and they hate themselves for it, especially men or people who explain to be men. And then that manifests itself in extreme hostility. I mean, I saw everybody's had their experiences during COVID, but I encountered the most extreme hostility when it would, if I never wear a mask. I mean, I was compelled to wear a mask on an airplane, other than that, I never wore a mask. I just wouldn't have refused and I would travel a lot. So I would go through like Chicago Airport and be the only person that I ever encountered with no mask. And it wasn't the authorities who wanted to tackle me. It was the other people like going past me on the people mover on the escalator who looked like they wanted to fucking stand me in the face. Right? And then, and then when I would, I write for a living and I need to get out in the world in nature and it's a tough business. It's a solitary business. So I take my dogs twice a day and run them in nature. Oh, yes, I have a few dogs. Five dogs, which is I think actually about the ideal number. Yeah, it's about the ideal number. Yes. Of course I said that every time three, four, five is the ideal number. Yes, it's the better. But I would encounter people outside on a windy day in the sun walking. And I would, of course, didn't have a mask on and they would all have their beautiful masks on. And it would inspire the fact that I didn't have a mask would inspire in them this kind of hostility that I've never encountered anywhere else. And yeah, it was obvious. I think something like that was going on at the school, varying the little Episcopal day school because the other parents knew that this was bad. And when their kids started to become trans or get into drugs or whatever, these sort of know, like, it's not all your faults, you know, you can't play in parents for everything. But it is partly your fault. And they sort of, you can kind of blend parents. I try not to judge people, but I do definitely judge them about their parents. That's about the one thing that judge people learn. It's fine to be nice. I mean, you don't actually have total control. There are people who have ever and children that I believe are not responsible for it. But I think the majority of the weird child behavior stands from shitty parents or parents who were occupied with other people's problems rather than their children's problems. What you're saying is true. Yeah. We've got a new partner. It's a company called Cowboy Colostrum. It's a brand that is serious about actual health. And the product is designed to work with your body, not against your body. It is a pure and simple product all natural. Unlike other brands, Cowboy Colostrum is never deluded. It always comes directly from American grass fed cows. There's no filler. There's no junk. It's all good. It's he's good, believe it or not. So before you reach for more pills for every problem that pills can't solve, we recommend you give this product, Cowboy Colostrum a try. It's got everything your body needs to heal and thrive. It's like the original super food loaded with nutrients, antibodies, proteins, help build a strong immune system, stronger hair, skin, and nails. I threw my wig away on right back to my natural hair after using this product. You just take a scoop of it every morning in your beverage, coffee or a smoothie and you will feel the difference every time. For a limited time, people listen to our show, get 25% off the entire order. So we're going to cowboyclostrum.com. Use the code Tucker Checkout. 25% off when you use that code, Tucker at cowboyclostrum.com. Remember, you mentioned you heard it here first. So I should just say for the record that you were scoffed at for having the pro-life pro-god pro-god and anti-obama bumper sticker and a Christian school at a Christian school, right? No pro pro-god. No pro-life at a Christian school. But then you decided to take your defiance, another click up the ladder by driving your son to school on a big twin Harley in carpool line, which I personally saw. You just look, you little kid and there would be all these range drivers involved as all of a sudden. You look up, really, like there's uncle buck with the ape had to strap to my chest with the mungicord of a safe. No, it was, I mean, safe as a relative term. And our families, we know there's no such thing as safety. There's only destiny. Yeah, we both believe that. But safe. Okay, but it wasn't even a safe, safe devaluation. It was like a cultural violation. Yes. And all the moms would be, you could tell they were a little bit turned on, but also very kind of like, what is this? What? I saw that with my own eyes many times. What was the thinking there? Pure celebration of joy and freedom. That's it. That's how I try to live my life. You're called to be joyful. In fact, you're, you're commanded to be joy. Totally agree. You are. You are. What is that? Susie has that thing all over our house. First the salonians, rejoice always never stopped praying. Yes, my favorite. Right. No, you're absolutely right. And and Philippians 4-4, which is always be full of joy in the Lord. I say again, rejoice. Yeah. Yeah. That's just such a wonder. It's funny that that's triggering to people. Whatever it was, you were triggering people. And I felt like it was such an active bravery because it's one thing to like, you know, stand up in the Congress and say something unpopular or even like going to battle, but to stand apart from your neighbors at the $50,000 a year Episcopal school in Northwest Washington where there's just so much conformity. Yes. That takes balls. Well, I appreciate it. I'm I don't think I really thought of it that way. I'm so used. I don't know. I've lived my life. We were, as you said, we grew up that way. And what do you mean? Because I did say, okay, so I haven't looked at a lot of your I don't, I'm not on Twitter that much because it's, it's too upsetting to me. But I did go and check your Twitter feed, which I thought was amazing. And, but some of the responses are like, Oh, of course you feel this way because you went such a horrible childhood. It's like, wait a second. What do you people are very personal that way? Attacking your childhood? What did you think of your without getting, you know, too specific, but like you described it as happy. I actually had the best childhood. I'm really sorry for our children. They didn't have the childhood that we had. I agree with the had because it was a just a lesson in adventure all the time. You could define your own boundaries as long as you were as you went to school. You were respectful to your parents and you showed up for dinner. There were really no other boundaries. Nope. Nothing. That was it. So, and love to you. And I loved my father and I loved our mother. So, we had a happy home life. And it was creative and interesting. It was in a beautiful part of the world that was at that time very well run in California. In fact, I think it was the cleanest most efficient state in all 50. And it was obviously the center of creativity in the country and in the world. And it was fantastically beautiful everywhere. I mean, it has every single climate. We lived near the beach and we got to go swimming in the ocean and we had a bunch of dogs and we got to explore. We got to explore with our friends and experiment. And I also went, I'm sure you recall, it was a much different time we could actually walk across the border and to Tijuana, Mexico. And engage in all sorts of interesting. It wasn't the most awesome point. No, it wasn't the most awesome point. No, it wasn't the most awesome point. Yeah. It was something I was thinking. Yeah. Is revolution on Avenue still in the right? I know. It still looks accessible to American kids. I think the whole thing is so different now. You know, I'm not in Tijuana a lot. But I think it's like a huge, these bigger than San Diego is control of the drug cartels. I don't know. I shouldn't say that. I've never been against Mexico. I've always liked Mexico. Obviously, Mexico has done more harm to the United States in any other country, not even close. But I still like Mexicans and I still just have happy memories from Mexico. I'll never be against it just for, I don't know, reasons of memory here. But I wouldn't go there to Tijuana. No, I wouldn't send my 12 year old child there either. No, but we were, yeah, that's right. We were allowed to do basically whatever we wanted as long as we, you know, were polite and family loyalty was at the center of everything, of course. Yes. Yes. And it was interesting. Her father was involved in so many interesting pursuits. He had interesting friends. Yes. Our friends were interesting. He included us. He treated us like adults where it was a part brand. I guess all the time. He taught us invaluable things that no one teaches their children anymore. Sure. I mean, yeah. And you've used the word creativity a couple times. It felt to me looking back. I never have thought about it until recently as I see the decline in creativity and the awards given to people who are totally non-creative, which is almost everyone in our professional class like zero creativity and the creative people are penalized. And that's made me think that maybe the saddest change is the disappearance of creativity and the abundance of it in our childhood. Like that was, wait, I never heard anybody certainly not our father ever talk about how rich someone was who gives a shit. Ever plus. No one noticed everybody was pretty much in the same boat. We lived in an expensive area. We had a nice house, but it was not absurd. No one had $5 million houses. No one had $50 million houses either. There wasn't such a thing. No, there was literally not such a thing. So the measure was, and there was much less economic anxiety, obviously. It was a different economy, but still the values were different in creativity, the ability to create something out of nothing. That was like really prized. Yes. Especially if your father gave you the what was the the James Bond cookbook? Oh, was the other one. Oh, yeah. Sorry. I guess there were legal nouns. Sorry. Well, he had a library. He'd officially had a real library like almost a public library in our house and he'd read every book in it. And he was very serious about it. And it was talk about Catholic tastes. I mean, broad tastes universal interest. He's just like nothing he was interested in. And there was a book about every possible thing. And there was a ton of extremist literature on all sides. He didn't buy any. He wasn't like he was an extremist. He was not an extremist at all. But he was like really interested in knowing what people thought of why and this revolution happened. And Mr. literature on all sides. He didn't buy any. He wasn't like he was an extremist. He was not an extremist at all, but he was like really interested in knowing what people thought of why and this revolution happened and he hated the Soviets, but he had tons of Soviet propaganda literature, which was interesting. Yes. He had tons of left-wing and right-wing mostly left-wing actually, and he was not left-wing, but that was back when they were creative, when people on the left actually were artists and thinkers, and they were open-minded. He would always defend people whose politics he hated if they were creative. He would say, this guy's an asshole, I think these ideas are horrible, but man, look, the songs he wrote are the novels he produced. Do you remember that? Yes, very well. Clearly. Yes. Like that counted in your favor. Yes. And that's kind of gone. It seems like a... So I didn't even know this until you can be for actually doing a interview. I'm so glad. How's stuff that, too? Thank you. Could I ask you an album question, by the way? Of course. That's Nick of Teen products in the universe. Well, thank you, Buck. I'm glad you noticed. And yes, I did. And I'm generally, this is the problem I have. When I'm talking, I'm generally double barreling or sometimes triple barreling. Those are nines. Yes. I'm looking forward at the 12. So on the question of Nick of Teen, would you say, and I know it's hard to assess yourself, but would you say you've dic around? If I could, I like it. I really like this a lot. Although, so there's the question I have. Where does one tuck it? I know where people tuck this in. Yeah. Yeah. They stuff it. Yes, they stuff it. By the way, they should be more upfront on the labeling on this in. By no. They should actually tell you that. That's why it tastes like shit. That's why it's like dehydrated. They forgot to tell you it needs mucosa, but a particular type of mucosa to activate. Yeah, they got it wrong. I think they're expecting the bungledeshi guy in the convenience store to tell you to hand you the KY and the surgical glove and just be like, I think you know how this works. It's like when they have those little crack pipes at the counter with the flower in them and like, no, it's not a crack pipe. I think they're. It's an instance owner. It's a whistle. I think they're expecting like if you're using zinn, you know how this works. Yes, exactly. That's a good point. So I actually feel like a bit of an amateur asking this, but I talk to people and all of a sudden I feel like my Biden, my upper palate is like coming out. You're Biden is my Biden. You know, it's like the fake teeth I have up here. Anyway, sorry. I try to rotate them around because there are parts of my gums that get neglected and sharing the wealth. Plus there are different taste buds throughout the entire topography of your tongue and cheek. Well, what's that long ago that many Americans thought they were inherently safe from the kinds of disasters you hear about all the time in third world countries, a total power loss, for example, people freezing to death in their own homes. That could never happen here. Obviously, it's America. People are recalculating. Unfortunately, because they have no choice. The last few years have taught us that or would the power grid in Texas failed in the dead of winter? It happened and it could happen again. So the government is not actually as reliable as you hope they would be. And the truth is the future is unforgettable and things do seem to be getting a little so if the grid does go down, you need power you can trust. Last country supplies newest product is designed for exactly that. The grid doctor is a 3,300 watt battery backup system that will power full size appliances, medical devices and tools with clean reliable power. It's even EMP protected. That means it's shielded from lightning solar flares or an actual electromagnetic pulse event. There's no gasoline, no noise, no emissions. You just plug it in, charge it from the wall from your vehicle or from the included 200 watt solar panel and keep going day after day taking care of yourself and the people you love is solely up to you. And the amazing thing is with these new batteries, we use one at home, by the way, is there super easy to use. There's no inverter you need to figure out on the front of it or anything like that. There's like three buttons. It's very easy and totally reliable, highly recommended. We literally use one, as I said. Visit last countries supply dot com to shop the grid doctor for power you can trust this winter. Last country supply dot com. Are you surprised since we're only really a year apart? So we grew up and our father always treated us the same. There was never like listen to your brother. It was a fully egalitarian household like in a way that also doesn't exist. I'm sure there was frustrating as the oldest. I never even questioned it. It was like we had the same bedtime same rules. It would never any difference at all in the way that he treated us same buddies, which is one of the reasons we've always gotten along our whole lives because he treated us fairly. By the way, if you want to make people hate each other, treat them unfairly. Oh, I've noticed like Institute affirmative action or DEI and you will have like serious race problems. But we never had anything like that. It was a a pure meritocracy in our house with a quality at the center of it. But most intuitive accidental father there has ever been. I mean, this was a man who did not strive to be a dad. No, any ended up being pretty much the best father ever. The details of my conception have always been a little bit hazy, but I did get the I don't think they were legal. I don't want to know. And I'm sure they were creative. Everyone who was probably the motor. I know. I can't let. Sorry. I can't even think about it. But my strong impression just from like comments picked up over the years is that was not intentional at all. Like the whole thing was not intentional. It's since it was intentional by God. Yeah. I do was God's totally agree with that. The close day I've got to asking Papa about it was he obviously married like Cleveland at the end. And he was such a smart person. And he really understood women and loved women and really paid close attention to women. Like they love him. They loved him. He loved them, not just in carnal ways, but like he's thought they were really interesting. I listened to them all the time. And he had such deep wisdom about women. And so I once saw him. He was the deepest on women. And it was out of love like true love. He thought they were amazing. But uh, and he also loved them in other ways. But but whatever. But anyway, I once said to him like given your deep knowledge of women, how could you have married a really crazy one? Like how did you do that? And he goes, they're up sides. But so I said I was like, I don't want to hear anyone. It was just kind of like never boring. Right. No, I guess I was it. You know, I go with yeah, well, they're never boring once you engage with them. They're like amazing. And he would she had a lot to say. Yeah. Especially in public settings. Yeah. I can't. Yeah. I can't imagine. Yeah. I can't even get as I'm sorry. I don't even know where we was. No, I don't know. So one thing I want to ask you was when we were kids and like everyone in our family, and this is like so forbidden. This is more forbidden than Israel. But like everyone in our family smoke cigarettes, like everybody and everyone, they knew smoke cigarettes. And like the question was filter or non filter. And of course, our family was strongly on the non filter side because like A or straight. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, come on. I used to call them straight. Yes. I remember camel straits with the best sugar to ever make. Yeah. That's literally true. And pop it always say it's important not to have a filter in your cigar because when you're behind enemy lines, you can feel strip it. You can feel strip it. You can feel strip it. You break the, the butt done it many times. Roll up the paper, flick it away. Then the enemy will never know. Yes. You were smoking American cigarettes. They might, they don't only know your American. If you died and they saw your dental work. It didn't make a lot of sense. But anyway, but the in our family, they were, you know, people were very strongly in favor of cigarettes in tobacco. It sounds so forbidden now. But and then we were all convinced this is like so bad because America's killing itself. And if we can only get people off this, everyone's going to live forever. Is it a little weird? And I don't smoke. I'm not endorsing smoking that strongly, but I'm considering going back. I don't know. But whatever. And for this guy reached yesterday, I literally stepped over a dog that was talking to my girl, stepped over a dog to join her in a booth in a restaurant and I reached my pocket to grab my zipper. It's been 12 years since I've had a zipper on my pocket. Seriously. I was about to let us smoke. We'd had a pizza. It was fantastic. I was like, I know what's going to cap this off a camel straight. Can you even buy them anymore? Even in South Carolina. I'm lying. I actually know even in tobacco states, do you know how much of costs? Oh my gosh. For decades. You're so much. It's 12 bucks in South Carolina. It's $21 in the district of Columbia. Yeah, 20 bucks. I walked in with circle K at the other day. My girl still smokes God bless her. And I walked in and I bought her some cigarettes and the guy said, I gave and I laughed. I pulled out my wallet and I said, it's funny. What's funny? And I said, that's what I said. Well, I've been buying cigarettes since I was 11 and they cost a dollar. Do you think it's funny to make fun of people in the retail business? Said, dude, I'm not making fun of you. And making fun of the stupid rules. Yeah. Yeah. Do you have no sense of humor? But you can buy Ben said, I have a peanut. You can buy weed in any store. You can buy it online. You're encouraged to smoke pod. You're encouraged to do mushrooms. You're encouraged to do mascara or any other stuff. But you're the greatest pariah in America. You probably incur it. Well, you are encouraged to have touchy fee they love with the people in your gender. But if you're a cigarette smoker, you're the literally the dirtiest pariah in America. Actually, that attitude is overwhelming now, but it was still around 12 years ago when I quit smoking. And if it hadn't been, I would have quit smoking probably 15 years ago. I would have. I mean, the obvious. So you smoked in defiance. I did. I smoked aggressively with joy. I did. I loved smoking. And it made me smarter. And made me nicer. Yeah. Made me a lot happier. Not only your constant companion, but also like a self defense weapon or an aggressive weapon. If you, you know, you've got a lit cigarette on you, you're a force to be reckoned with, I would say, plus are you ever alone when you have a cigarette? No. Sounds so much like our father. Cause he, of course, he did once wheeled a cigarette in self defense. I had to do that too. You did it too. I most certainly did. Maybe not on someone's cheek, but on their rest, I held their hand. Cause he was holding my hand. I remember. It's like my second job. And he was a guy who had a married guy, Christian, self-evowed, loudly, Christian. And he had cute kids in a nice wife. And he like put his hand on me. And he said, can you move your hand, please? And he didn't. Well, you said it on you? Yeah. Had a company picnic. Like the first week, I was on the job. And I said, please remove your hand from my knee. And he didn't. So I grabbed his hand, grabbed his rest and put my cigarette out on his hand. It was a Saturday afternoon. And I had had some cocktails. But I also felt completely justified in doing that. I pulled his hand away. And I remember starting to go down this rabbit hole. But I thought about it, so early on Sunday and Monday morning as I was going into the office that they could be real repercussions for doing this. He was like the chief of staff of the organization. He was a political organization. And he wheeled at a lot of power. And I went in. I remember I was doing some copying some document. And I was standing in the break room next to the Xerox machine. And he came up to me. And he said, I can't believe you put a cigarette out of my hand. And so that can't believe you touched me and he wouldn't let go. That was it. And we had like a staring contest. And then he like, you know, was lip girls and they looked down and walked out. I never heard anything about it. He never told anyone. So I think it is fair. I think that's called gay bashing. No, I think you are recklessly or yeah, you're without proper defense when you don't have a cigarette. You should have a cigarette with you at all times, even if you don't smile. That's my attitude. Seriously, I want to bring back smoking because actually smoking without the filter is probably pretty flippin good for you. I have a lot of views on this. I don't want to articulate because I don't want to. Some crazy. But I tend to I'm sorry. We were certainly raised thinking that and our father considered filters like a really bad thing. And it's smoking does, you know, whatever, our real mother to have one cancer, you know, you can and she's smoked on filters, pal Mehl's. She engagement some other eggs. Yeah, that's it may have been responsible for her pants. I think when you're in the dark side and you get cancer, it makes sense. What do you mean? I think if you lead a life of extreme narcissism. Yes. And you are completely self focused. And one, it's unhealthy. Two, it's unhealthy outlook and the people around you suffer. Yes. But I can't imagine you as an individual don't suffer. And now that I'm 54 and I'm old enough to actually witness people who've lived their lives this way. And I mean self focused all the time. Not one of them is healthy physically mentally it's stifling it. Kill something in someone. It's like it's like I'm not to attack people who aren't able to have children, but people who throw men who've chosen not to have children. They reach a certain age and they are intractable in ways that are damaging to them and those around them. She was not a man. But she had that same problem. And I think I think she like was drowning in like me. Yeah, drowning in like me. Exactly. Totally. It's fixated on herself. So you've made reference to dogs. You've conceded that you have five. You think five is the perfect number. You were describing your childhood and you put it out the presence, the omnipresence of dogs. And as a highlight, why are dogs important? Well, dogs I think I've thought a lot about this aspect of raising children with dogs. I think it's important because your children are the center of your universe as they should be. Right. But the last thing you want to do is convey that to your children. I mean, that's a good way to fuck up your children. So having dogs around and instills in them, they have their first my first loving relationships were with my very small family, which you're half and dogs. We had a lot of dogs around all the time. And there are other people. I mean, have written endlessly and talked endlessly about how wonderful dogs are. But I don't think they talk enough about how wise dogs are and how dogs are clued into like a communications channel that most people are not picking up. My dogs know what I'm going to do long way for. I do it. They know exactly my intentions. Weird. If I'm working in my office and I've got four dog beds in my office underneath the bed, underneath the desk. And if I get up to go, where does the fifth dog go? Three of them are shamefully small. So two of them, two of them. Anybody else's brood, I'd say those are pseudo dogs. But actually one of my small dogs is an incredible relentless, actually. You know her. She's a gift from you. Yes. She is a hunting dog. That's my defense. She's a hunting dog. She's got autism. Bad. Bad. She is the most well-meaning. Yes, she is. She means well. 100% good natured. Yeah. Pretty good in the quail field, I will say. Yeah. She also has unaryng aim. She'll hit you right in center mass every time she sees you. I have more scars from that dog on my face. In fact, in the morning when I wake up, I now have started putting lightning collars on three of the five before I even let them into the backyard, which is actually kind of impressive because it's dark. I've had no coffee. I'm usually naked. And I'm a fixing lightning collars to three dogs. One of them continually bounces up and slams me in the face with her snout. Yeah. It's amazing. Anyway, dogs are an endless, endless source of joy and effect. Well, actually, even today, I was telling, because it's Christmas or everyone's at the house, or a lot of people at the house, your relatives are at the house. And the Uncle Bucks could be, oh, is he bringing in? Because I've never seen you travel. I don't think a single time ever in life without at least one dog. You always bring at least one dog. But you're dogless today. She's kind of vocal. And she's not very respectful to expensive camera equipment or genitals. Yeah. So if I was a smoker, it'd be great because then keep her at back. All she'd need is about 6,000 cigarette burns. And then I know I don't think I'd work. No, I don't think I would either. But use are surrounded by dogs. You work with dogs. As I just said, you travel with dogs. You are inseparable in the minds of everyone who knows you from dogs. They have great insight. You said that's one of the main reasons they improve our lives. I think so. I mean, I talk to my dogs and they understand me. My dogs have actually a very better understanding of the English language than I think most people I deal with outside of this room. They're so much smarter than people give them credit for. And why? And kind. And of course, it does remind me of the great little joke, lock your dog and your wife in the trunk of the car. Come back after three days and see who's grateful. The answer to that is always not your wife. So they're forgiving. They are actually the essence of purity, I think. They're even though they're capable. They're not capable of a heart of us. A dog will never pretend to be happy when it's not. And they have no sense of vanity. They're perfectly willing to display their immediate and current emotion at all times. And their emotions are almost exclusively loving. Now I have a predator and a three-legged predator. What a wonderful, wonderful description boy. I couldn't have matched that. Well, it's true. No, it's so true. I mean, I have five dogs at my house right now. Two. I'll just do that. So you're winning. You're winning the grand dog competition. I would say, I'm not about to render an opinion about which is best. But I can say not to make this into a cultural thing. But I know that there are other, I'm sure that there are other cultures that feel the same way. I don't know what they might be. But the culture that we grew up in, which was a culture, was, I mean, none of these were even questions like dogs and other things, politeness, bravery, loyalty, but dogs were in that lit. Like those that were some question. Dogs were at the center of the culture, not just the family, but the culture we grew up in. Fair enough. So oh, very much. So I never saw our father cry except when our dog saw it at the end. That's correct. Got a little more emotional as I've gotten older. So I've occasionally shed a tear about something other than a dog dog. But I've never been as affected by death as my various dogs death. And I'm also convinced, convinced, 100% that my capacity for joy is less than it was before my last dog died. But I'm also convinced 100% that we will see them all again. We will be reunited. I have a particular dog that you know who was, what's the phrase you use, a lifetime dog or the, the, the actual dog. And you know, now you agree that everyone has one of those. If you have enough dogs, there's always a dog or you're like, Oh, I'm never going to have a dog like this. Yes. Yes. And boy, do I love my dogs? And unlike raising children where you could never indicate which one of your children is your favorite. Not that that ever exists. With dogs, I think it's completely the opposite. My strategy is to convey to each and every one of my dogs privately that they, that they are my favorite. So every one of my dogs is going around me, I'm dead. It's forever. Yeah. I know you engaged in a little bit of that. You've got to. Anyway, I do the way that my children by the way, they all have that impression. I hope so. They are. But yeah, you had a dog. You had that lifetime dog. I have many pictures of that dog on my phone because I would not my dog, but I did. I felt real love for that dog and my favorite picture of that dog was called Bella was in the dog park and the rich lady dog park directly cross street from her house in Washington. They'll be both used every day. And they're always a million ladies in the park. You know, they're all nice. I don't want to attack anybody, but they're all a little bit of tight. Yeah. Went to HBS, but others take them to raise their kids very methodically. Let me look at them and your dogs have never kind of been with that program at all. They're off leash dogs. They are off leash dogs. And that one dog was amazing. Hunter finished spits. Yes. And this dog had killed a squirrel and has in her mouth the squirrel. You know, quite was a black squirrel. And she was this deep beautiful red. And just the content and the contrast from a photographic perspective was powerful. I had that on my screen saver for for years until my son got old enough to notice that his picture wasn't on the restaurant. Can I tell you one dog park story, which is like family lore, which is like my favorite story, which I've told him any dinner parties about you, which one is not a bad one. No, so you were at war. So in DC, of course, our parks. It's a federal zones or parks are policed by park police actual park police. Yes. Yes. Sometimes that horseback. Yes. And this specific dog park was, I mean, when I see it was across you from a house, like I could see it for my bet was right there with no one. But it was extensive. It went miles actually. We've known amazing yard system in Washington. And this is called, this was called battery kimbal. Yes. It was a civil war battery, beautiful park, beautiful part of the city. And you would walk your dogs there every day. And you had a million dogs as always. And you never leach them because you're a free man. And this is America. And they're well behaved. And they don't bother other people. Oh, generally, pretty responsive dog. Yeah, they call the wildlife little bit. Oh, that's for sure. Well, that's, I don't know. That's sort of your responsibility when you're. It is the food chain, isn't it? Like, I'm sorry. If you can't handle it, get out of the bar. Dude, I'm with you. And I remember when this happened, but like every woman in the neighborhood is probably still talking about it. Oh, this isn't a city rife with all sorts of other crime. So every time I know it's not this story, but every time I was accosted by someone. And the next door that's silly, next door online thing. Free COVID in a city that has overwhelming physical and property crimes. The number of the most prevalent complaint on that list, sir. Oh, I saw someone walking without a leash. And this is a terrible thing. And literally, that would garner the most commentary from any next door post. We need better rich people in this country. Yes. That's the number one thing we need us. Yes. Well, they need some hardship because complaining about shit like that is not only picky and, but like repulsive. It is repulsive. I totally agree. They have no self awareness at all. And they're all like that. But anyway, my universal response, I'm sorry, I'm not doing my universal response to them and to authorities who would occasionally and cost me would be so relieved. You've solved all the other problems in DC. All the the other crimes are no rapes or no armed robberies. CVS isn't being ransacked in a daily basis. Like, thank you. I really appreciate. I'm so glad you solved that problem. Now we can deal with lesser crimes like leashes. Oh my God. They did not appreciate the lecture. No, and after many such lectures from you, they decided to arrest you and they told you that if we catch you again without a leash, you're going to jail, sir. And then you get approached by a couple of these officers, I think on horseback. I was walking through a beautiful meadow at about 10, 30 in the morning, absolutely deserted. And I had four dogs with me. And we got all the way to the end of the meadow. And I heard someone say, Hey, hey, someone's clearly yelling, not in not like they needed help, but like they were trying to get my attention. I'm sorry, I don't respond to that. And so I turned it was on a slope this meadow. And I can see these blue helmets coming up the meadow. So they were clear that horses weren't even visible helmets. So I kept walking. And then I was you and peacekeepers. I'm exactly. So I kept walking. And then I was in the middle of the forest on a small beautiful path. And I kept hearing this female male voice, hard to determine was rather masculine. But also that flipping hysterical. So it could only have been a soy boy with a gun or a very masculine check. And it was, it turned out to be three cops, three park policemen on beautiful, very expensive horses with tidy helmets on. And they yelled at me for a good half mile. They finally caught up to me. And when they were about when this trio was about to make them just like, yell at you and chase you completely ignored them. I'm sorry. It's my park. I'm a federal taxpayer. I also live in DC. This is right. Don't we fund that park? We fund their salaries. I'm sorry. I have a bit of a sense of entitlement about two things, nicotine and dogs. Yeah. And that's it. And this was so I was mining my own business in our park. And so they were persistent and yelling. And when they got to be about 75 yards away, she lost her cool completely. And she yelled and said, stop, or I'll taste your dog. I'll taste your dog. So I'm sorry. That's just too much for me. So I said, yelled because they were so far away. So you're not going to fucking taste my dog. You do that. You know, the real problem. And so they were taken aback by it a little bit. And they finally came, they had met a man at a while at DC. So I guess not. I mean, two busy solving all the other crimes. So they got, they finally got up to me. And it was a very authoritative squat muscular woman who was the authority figure. And then two men, men, and who were embarrassed. And I made them further embarrassed because I said, this is official. Don't speak to me like that. Don't ever speak to me like that. Don't threaten my child. And she didn't like that. But she backed down a little bit. I actually had the, I had the moral authority. I was in the right. And they were absolutely in the wrong. And I did what you're supposed to do in a situation like that is I met and exceeded their aggression. Significantly. And to the point where I asked their badge numbers as their full names, give it to me now, pull out my phone. I was totally obnoxious. But also in the right. And I said to those men, how can you tolerate this? Well, she's your boss. She's telling you, oh, and these guys literally at the end of it, this is probably a three or four minute exchange. And they ended up, they gave up. And they walked away. And I was on this beautiful ledge that had railroad ties every three or four feet going down into the stream into this valley. You'd have no idea you're in the middle of DC is such a incredible heart. Great. Great. It's incredible. And they went ahead of me. She in the front steamed literally coming off her. And then these two extremely embarrassed men. And they started going down. Well, their horses decided this would be a great opportunity to leave some indelible artwork. On the path. And a horse when a horse goes to the bathroom, it's not a subtle thing, especially when they're walking down a hill. So they deposited, I don't know, 26, 27 pounds of artwork right there on the path. So they had to go slow because it was one of these winding paths with railroad ties. And they were stuck. So they were like slowly is the horse trying to go down. And I was yelling at them the whole time. Hey, pick that up. What's wrong with you? I can't believe you're leaving that behind. Who's going to clean up after you? Oh, I am so surprised. Actually, they did not shoot me. I was expecting it. Actually, I really was worth it. It was so worth it. And actually, I was enraged. I was still enraged at the point where excuse me. acting at action. I really was worth it. It was so worth it. And actually I was enraged. I was still enraged at the point where, excuse me, my Biden is coming out again. I, by the time I got back to my car and that was probably 15 minutes later. I remember this clearly. I had gone to one of the best sandwich stops. I had a meeting downtown and I was running my dogs first and it was, I had stopped and I'd gotten some clam shelter from Bob Laer's place. I can't think of it. I had a container of clam chowder. Yeah, they had good chowder. So agitated by the time I got, even by the time I got back to my car, which is like 15 or 20 minutes later, I opened up the top of the clam chowder and promptly launched it into the air where it came and landed on my dashboard directly in the air conditioning unit. In fact, that Chevy Tahoe smelled that clam chowder for literally the next three years. It was discussed until Patrick flipped it on a nice day. Until Patrick flipped it and broke his neck. But I was, I don't normally hold on to anger for very long. I've got like a reasonably quick and I can get pretty hot, but it dissipates fast. This didn't. I was still mad 20, 25 minutes later. And I drew, I think I pushed my meeting back. I had to drive downtown. I think I texted them. It was like I had a bit of an emergency. I'm going to be a half an hour late. And I drove around the entire perimeter, at least that western perimeter of that park looking for the telltale sign of the horse carriage. Because I actually really did want to record their names and make a formal complaint, not that it would have gone anywhere, but a right of peace about it. I don't know. But it wouldn't make me happier. I didn't find them. I look for them. So everyone, I should say for the fifth time in our tiny little very cohesive neighborhood where we spent most of our lives on and know every single person almost everybody disapproved with this kind of behavior from you because it was disruptive and like it wasn't you weren't getting in line with everybody. I never of course felt that way because we grew up together with the same attitudes. But now I think that if like eight more people in our neighborhood and 800,000 more people in our country had taken that attitude, we'd be in much better shape than we are now. Amen. Amen. I three more people would have been able to dominate that town. With that dominate that neighborhood. That's totally right because people are looking, not some great student of human behavior, but I do observe it. And I think that people, again, as we talked about earlier, I think people who are cowardly hate themselves for it. Yes. And are hostile towards those who express themselves or embrace their freedom in America? Right. Well, I ended up free home of the brave like I mean, not anymore clearly. And but I think there people are waiting to be galvanized by someone who's willing to say, I'm not saying I'm that person, but they need someone to rally around. Someone Trump was obviously that guy. That's obviously part of Trump's appeal that he was that, you know, hey, fuck you, this is what I believe and I'm not going to back down kind of guy. And I think our country used to be full of people like that. Is it did? And they were real heroes in this country. This country didn't have an easy time of it for the first couple hundred years. And the only people who exercised real power and authority were men who were courageous and willing to speak their mind and willing to follow through also and kind of other people. And but whatever leadership qualities that you just don't see in America, that often I don't. I mean, I couldn't agree more. And one of the hallmarks of that kind of society is decency. One of the things you notice about brave men or father being the the bravest person I think either of us ever met. It was 44 years old. Never saw him one time express fear in any situation. Physically. And like nothing. I saw if you were, you know, he could have any did, including when he died totally, unafraid, totally un-complaining, totally unmedicated, totally undiminished, totally un-dominished. Both of us were there. So yes, no, I agree with that. But that was the twin to that was a flip side of his decency and kindness. He didn't hate himself. He had no reason to. And if you made a mistake or did something wrong, which he did, he'd be like, wow, I did something wrong. I'm really sorry. And he was genuinely, genuinely inquisitive with other people and kind and interested. Oh, he's a favorite thing was talking to and many loved to talk. And he told the best stories around, but he loved people. And oh, he get back from dinner party. So we were kids all never for you always was always a woman, of course, because you as a man, you sit next to a woman in a dinner party. Thank God. I met the most amazing woman. She would grew up in some weird country and did this. And her dad was in the OSS and you know, it was always some intrigue always. But he was so interesting to other people. I can so passionate about it. Like their stories were like as exciting to him as his story. Yes. Oh, we paid attention to the details. Very close attention. Very. He was an amazing listener because he was really interested. Anyway, I think his decency, his love of children, animals, his family, his wife, people, he sat next to a dinner party. He's like, that was all related to his total fearlessness in a way. Yes. Do you know what? I can't quite articulate it, but I know you did, but he didn't know, but he was so self confident because he used all the talents that God gave him to the extent that he was able. I mean, he never passed up an opportunity ever anywhere to do anything interesting or adventure. That is literally true. And that was like his law and it's so attractive. And it's that was his law. Yeah, that was his law. Have an interesting life. That's like the only instruction I got me too. Yeah. And he constantly, I mean, I remember when you got thrown out of boarding school and the only family drama I ever remember was would pop be able to force you to join the French foreign Legion. And he was dead set on forcing you to do that in case you don't remember. I do remember and I don't remember being resistant to it. It wasn't you. No, I'm aware. Yeah, and that's someone else who is very resistant to it. You can't do that to him. Yeah. You weren't against it. But like you were seven when you got tossed, hold for you. 17 maybe I was 17. Yep. And he checked at the head office in Marseille. I'll never forget this. And 17 was old enough to join the French foreign Legion. And I'll never forget coming home for Christmas or Easter or some vacation where we were all home in Georgetown. And he was like, well, your brother could enjoy the French foreign Legion. And I was like, it's this way this is real real. You're like, yep, you fucked up at school, you got thrown on a boarding school, he's going to the French foreign Legion and it's a six year commitment. But the time he gets till only be 23 and I imagine people see all his friends. I spent six years in the French foreign Legion. I've got a fake name and a new passport and I served in Djibouti as isn't these wars and isn't that great? And I was like, yeah, that sounds great. And you're like, yeah, I'm totally fine. Thank God for female wisdom and strength actually. I think I would have been great. I probably wouldn't have survived it. But now thank God for my love. He was so all in. I'll never forget that. I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I knew people who had done it. Oh, yes. I'm speaking of without even getting into it. But in both of us have taken an awful lot of shit about whatever he did for a living and it's not even totally clear. But um, let me just ask a general question. Not about him, but about sort of the world that you grew up in, you were what like 14 when we moved to Georgetown maybe ish 13. So you spent your entire life in northwest DC like you never left except to go to Maine obviously, but, but like full time, right? You're living there. And um, in a world that I mean, you literally lived in a house that our father purchased from CFs or in cash. Yes. Right. And everybody in our world was involved in that kind of stuff. And, and then you have had jobs where you rubbed up against people in the Intel world. Yes. A lot of jobs though. Common probably in DC. But yeah, that's the point actually that I'm making. Yeah. Everybody would have been bringing this up. Well, by this point in the conversation, I think everyone knows you're not working for the CIA. You're not compliant enough. Have you seen my tax returns? Yeah. No, but who has? But I guess my question is, did you know until relatively recently what a huge role in tele agencies formed and domestic played in the life of our country, not just the political life, but the civic life, the cultural life. Did you know that? No. And it reminds me of what you said a little earlier in this conversation about not being aware of what's going on around you. Yes. You're steeped in it, of course. And I worked for some, I worked for a corporate intelligence firm that was founded by all former spooks. And I knew personally, yes, good guys. Great guys. Excellent shots too. We hunted with them. Only smokes where they get. Yeah. And also one of them done like the best death ever. Had grandchildren, children were married, walked out of his on K Street, walked out of his accountant's office, having received good news. And that a massive, hard like life-ending architect right there on K Street, crossed to the private. Yeah, like 76. Yeah. I mean, he was a great man. He was a great man. But in so guy, Intel guy, sorry, I think it's also important to mention. My attitude has changed like so many because of COVID, but even a little bit before that, I just had taken it on faith that we had a good government that was well-meaning that makes mistakes, but that was answerable to the people. I actually always thought that growing up. Generally didn't think what I heard from the government was a lie. I didn't think it was a manipulative lie. I remember, I mean, the most important thing that went on in our lives as we were growing up, the most important enduring conflict was the Iron Curtain and Communism. And remember talking with you and others all the time about those poor people who live in the Soviet Union who have no access to real news. They have tasks and they have Zvestia, what was the idea of Zvestia, Prabda. And they don't have the freedom to go to church. And they obviously their economy sucks because it's managed by a government and that never works. But really, they didn't have access to accurate information. Right. No access to any real news. And further, they had been taught as a society, terrible things about America and Americans. And specifically, we used to also talk after the Iron Curtain came down, had the same attitude about North Korea. Like here are these poor, emaciated captives who can't leave their own country who don't, who think these terrible and untrue things about Americans. And it was only a couple of years ago that I suddenly realized I had this epiphany. We're fucking North Korea. We are North Koreans. And so much of what the government has told us throughout our lives about big events and small events are simply not true. Not just massage, but like 180 degrees from truth and reality. Once you have that realization, it's very unsettling and dispiriting. I think and scary. And obviously, the election of 2020 brought it into focus, all of the suppression of Twitter and the New York Postpiece from Miranda Divine on Hunter Biden. And that's all the false news about masks and the vax and everything else. I mean, the list is endless and could go on and on. But no, to answer your question, I was not aware of it. I didn't pay attention to it. I didn't suspect it. And I really had no reason to suspect it actually because life was different even a decade ago in America and certainly in Washington. And now they've just, it seems a certain air of desperation or something that they're, they're clamping down to such an aggressive degree, even with Trump in the White House, which I wish someone would explain to me. I have my theories. But anyway, and the fact that they used to be good liars, this is the thing I find is scariest, is they used to tell compelling, thought out, well-fashioned, plausible lies. And they no longer do that. Now it's just, hey, this is it and you either accept it or shut the fuck out and we'll put you in prison or we'll take all your liberties away. And I do think it's akin to finding, you know, the great debate are you going to look under the bed and or are you going to jump across the room and leave the door? It's like once you look under the bed, he might actually find the monster. And now it's clear that our government is the monster and the intelligence agencies are the monster. And once you've seen that, you can't really not unsee it. Yes. And that's really unsettling. So nicely put, that's so nicely put. Yeah, that has been, I tried to talk about it too much because it's obviously way too personal. But that but the realization about the Intel agencies has been one of the really big things for me. I just I can hardly even believe it. I can hardly believe it. I know that sounds stupid. But it does that. But it grows out of a totally different understanding of the US government. Yes. And I always thought it was inefficient and the problem with the US government was there, you know, we're a lot of lazy people with guaranteed jobs and like big bureaucracies don't function very well. They're just they just don't work. But the spirit that animates them, which is the spirit to protect and improve the country is kind of unquestioned. They're not trying to divert the country. That's what I would think. Or maybe at worst they don't care. And occasionally you have a Soviet or Cuban spy, but that's like really far out. You know what I mean? Or some drunk FBI agent with having an affair with cell secrets because he needs the money, but like human flaws, human, thank you, human flaws. But never that this whole that there'd be huge parts of this whole enterprise that are working to destroy the society, like I'd never even occurred to me. No, no, neither. And in but it's clear that that's what's going on. It's clear. Yeah. It couldn't be clearer. And it's accelerating. It's not decelerating. No. No. So, um, yeah, and it's demonic. It is. And I actually don't even understand why that obvious observation that obvious conclusion makes people, I guess it's a religious question. I don't know why it makes people not just uncomfortable. It makes people super hostile if you mention that certain motivation is a hard demonic. And that there are demons among us. I think that's I've always known that. I've just known that. It's just obvious. I've known it my whole life. It is obvious. You don't have to be around. It's like being always as our father always said, trust your dog sense. And you talk about it. Everybody has it. All you have to do is pay attention to it. It doesn't even need to be that finely calibrated. I mean, if you have a weird feeling about a situation or about a person, you know, you're probably right. Yes. Trust it. Yeah. Trust it. It's not random. No. Not at all. And every human has also had weird out of the blue impulses to do things that go against their nature. And in all the time, this happens to me. Thank God. It happens to me a lot, especially when I'm out in nature with my dogs, where I can clear my head, where I can relax and think away from my phone. I get all sorts of un-bidden, unsolicited thoughts, impulses that I follow. Good things. Call this person, write this, do this. Really agree. And if I didn't have that in my life, I would be a mass, I would be more of a man, whatever. It would be... So it's not just... So I think... I'm just demonic. It's not just dark stuff. It acts like a bad ex-ox. Yes. Very much so. So boy, if I had the same experience, I guess my whole life, but I didn't recognize it for what it was until pretty recently. Yeah. And I certainly would never, you know, as a wasp, I would never mention it. Because you're not. Like, that's one thing you're not supposed to talk about your spiritual views, period. In fact, it's such a rarity. I remember exactly where I was when I first had this conversation. And it was with you, and it was in the state of Maine, which is obviously wonderful, but also something about the state of Maine is very close to whatever's going on around us that we can't see. Exactly. It's happening in Maine a lot more than anywhere else. The membrane is thinner in Maine, but doing this world in the next. There's no question about that. It's not... Very much not. It's not a light state. No. It's a heavy state. There's a reason Stephen King, when he at one point had talent and one point had a God-given talent. Yes, you can't read his early stuff. You can't read the sand without saying this guy is using God-given talent. There's a reason why all those books actually take place in Maine. Oh. And it's not just because he's from Maine. It's because something going on in Maine. And that's been, I think, recognized for a long time. Yeah. And it exceeds my understanding. I can't even guess. I do know that the first transatlantic television signal was broadcast from Maine. Oh, yes. You know, in a town for English. There's still there. There's still there. I hunted next to it. I flew over it. Yeah. But the point is, it's like there's something about its geographic location, its geography, as well that I don't know. There's something about it. Yes. But yeah, we grew up in a world and in a culture that did not welcome conversations about spiritual matters, the transcendent. No. Yeah. No, that was a huge week. Didn't talk about death. No. Didn't talk about illness. There were no support groups around this. I remember in the 80s, there was this black, because Georgetown had been black or partly black, like a hundred years ago or something. And so there was a black church on our street. Do you remember that? Well, like four blocks down on end street in Georgetown. And of course, I didn't even know it was there. But our father knew it was there. It was actually the end of Dumbarton. It was the end of Dumbarton. Sorry. One block up. And he was like, he just loved black church. Do you remember getting dragged to black church with that? I loved it actually. I was never resistant to it. You'll never find nicer people with better music, great food, and a super welcoming attitude. I couldn't agree more. As I think church is supposed to be, it's such a departure from the, who won't mention the name of the church, because I know family members of our still go there. But I was baptized there. And it was just too, right. It was beautiful architecturally. And that's about what it had to recommend the pews had a nice patina from hundreds of years. For the frozen chosen. Yeah, no, there's no question. But he would drag us to the black church, at least once or twice here. Let's go to to Eastern up to black church. They were always a little confused about what we were doing there, but he was so into it. They were on board though. They were, no, they were totally on. No, to give them credit. They were, they couldn't have a nicer. And they were like old fashioned Washington Black people. Like the definition of like respectable middle class people. And, but he liked it because they were just like all in, like they weren't beating around the bush. Like they're for, they're for Jesus. Yes. And I think that's just on a bash. Yeah. And I think those were the, that was the only contact I ever had in my young life with Jesus at all. Were people talking about Jesus? Yes. Jesus, do you feel it? 100%. No, no, no. I mean, I've had, I've had a lot of reasons to have an awakening in my life. And was forced upon me. And in so many ways, God has come into my life and changed things that needed to be changed. Yes. Exized certain patterns and behaviors that needed that I never could have done in my own. Yeah. Ever. And yeah, I know we both. I mean, I, so yes, no, I didn't think about it enough. I always had a reflexive faith. I always knew God existed. I never questioned, but I didn't know a lot about, I still don't necessarily know a lot about the history of religion or the intricacies of certain scripture. But I read the Bible. I commune with other people. I celebrate God. I celebrate fellowship. And I celebrate Jesus unabashedly. I mean, yeah, other. Yeah. So how, I would say the other thing, the feature of the world that we grew up in was Gina's alcohol is part of it. Yes. It was cocktail culture. Absolutely. My favorite food growing up was tonic water and cam in bear. It's when cocktail parties are out. So that's tonic water and cam in bear. That's where you remember that. Yeah, my remember wow tonic water. That's when you know your parents. You too many cocktail parties. Not many six year olds drink tonic water. I wonder if any six year old is drink tonic water. People even drink gin and tonics anymore, but they did in our house growing up. Anyway, where we come from a long line of gin and tonic drinkers. But yeah, so we both got caught up in it. And I would say you a little more enthusiastic than me. You were epic. I think it's the term people use now. But and then you know, you know, as anyone who drinks overly enthusiastic, the people who love them start to worry. And then you just like quit. Didn't go to rehab. No. I admire people to do. I think it's helpful. I'm not. I'm not exercising it. No, no, no, I didn't think you were. I just actually have had heard some fascinating stories that those say, I mean, it's been years since I've been in one. But I did have some concerned friends who'd gone through this journey themselves and who pulled me in and I was receptive to listening. Not necessarily receptive to stopping, but receptive to learning more. And I was flirting with it, flirting with stopping because you take those tests that they have and like answer 10 of these questions. And if you answer even three of them, then you've got a drinking problem. And it was always like, I've answered yes on all 10. I could probably give you six more questions to ask. So and I'd been I'd had a few run-ins with you with authorities quite a few actually. It had affected my life. Anybody asked you, oh, you didn't go goals affecting your life. Oh, gosh. I don't know. Let me contemplate that. Oh, so and I'd also reach, but principally what happened was my son was born. And that was a tough pregnancy, an early birth. And the moment I saw that child be born, I'd had a lot of preparation from you because you'd already had a couple of children and from others. But I and I was an aspiration for me from the entirety of my life to be a father. But the moment I saw that child be born and they're purple and unattractive. My son urinated all over the doctors. It was great. So very proud of him. But I remember unbidden, speaking of unbidden thoughts and emotions, the first thing that I thought when that child was born was, I'd fucking kill for this child. Yes. And I would do it with relish like if someone ever, someone ever threatened this child, I wouldn't, I mean, there's nothing I wouldn't do. So anyway, so he was born and he was young as a baby. My son has never seen me intoxicated. I'm happy to say he's 24. I had my last cocktail 23 years ago and March coming out readable and talked about it and thought about it and had concerned people discuss it with me. And had dialed back, but then had really an amazing and epic weekend with my son's godfather, great friend of both of ours who came in from New Orleans in like three day, but now I'm in Georgetown and got like physically ill and sort of my wife and she had a full on divine intervention where god like spoke to her out loud and said enough. And she, that was it, removed it from her completely completely. And then I was sympathetic on board with it because not only was I trying to convince myself that I should lay off it for a while was trying to convince her. And like most, she was resistant. And so that day I made the commitment, you know, I'm going to join her. But then one of my great friends was having a bachelor party like in two days. So I say, okay, well, let's just get through this weekend and then I'm committed in there. And I did. I had my last cocktail of the actual ageman party of great times, spacing his name. I'll think of a second. Oh, you know him is wonderful guy, his marriage didn't last, but he's around. And he had a great party. And I had a couple cocktails, didn't get hammered. And then I said, that's it, not doing it again. And, but it was divine intervention for me too, because he removed not only the desire to drink, but he implanted like a revulsion for alcohol. Yes, I feel that. A physical revulsion where I could to this day 22 and a half years later, summon the taste of a great goose martini or summon the taste of like three inch glass of maker's mark. And I could make myself vomit in like 15 seconds. And also for that first year, no one ever talks about this. At least I've never heard in my talk with us that for that first year, I couldn't sleep sweating constantly had horrible nightmares every night. And the enduring nightmare that I still have occasionally, I would say once a month, I'll be somewhere socially in my dream and I'll be talking to someone and I'll just reach and have a cocktail. And I'll as soon as it hits my mouth, I start sobbing in my dream and wake up really agitated and really upset with myself. But anyway, God removed the desire completely from me. And I've had a much better life sense. And I've never run, interestingly, I've never run, I could give you hours of stories about stupid and dangerous and destructive things I did as a drunk person. But I never have hooked up with an old friend that I haven't seen in like two decades, have a meal and they like order a drink and oh, do you want a drink? And I'll say, no, actually I quit drinking. I've never had someone say, what the fuck did you do that for? Like really you quit drinking like you've let her know. No, no, one's ever had that bad emotion. You're the only person I know who's crashed an airplane, a speedboat, a motorcycle, and multiple cars. And that's literally true. That's just a fact. And you're here. I think we differ on the definition of crashing. I did not crash the plane. It was a what force landing they call it. Okay. Okay. Well, force landing. There's some responsibility for sure. But the plane survived. Oh, completely. Well, okay. Clearing in a national force. I'm just saying, and by the way, I'm not blaming you for whatever mechanical error, force your plane. But again, we could just take the plane out of it. We still have the motorcycle, the boat and the cars. Yes. Yes. I also once fell asleep while flying an airplane from drinking. Yeah. Pass out in in a really trafficked area. And I was aware that I was, you know, when you're really, really, really tired, you can't hide it from yourself. You can slap yourself in the face. You can pinch yourself. I was a smoker at the time. And I, you know, it was chain smoking while flying. And I was in a traffic pattern. And I just couldn't keep my eyes open. Not in an international airport. And someone else's airplane. Yeah. And I kept nodding off. Was anyone else in the plane? No, I was by myself. It was really terrifying. I wrote a piece about it actually for a friend of mine who also subsequently quit drinking and started like a web zine when those things were around. And yeah, it was pretty clear. That was sleep while flying an airplane multiple times. I was going on a local trip and I took off. I was tired. I was sleep deprived. I had a friend, you know, those friends who come and visit you. Oh, yes. And then ever leave in their great company. Amazing, especially after like 5 p.m. Yeah. Yeah. And well, he stayed for like two weeks. And so we developed this, this great strategy where we'd go at we'd drink all day in the beach and then go out to while they hedonistic meal and then we'd get back to my apartment and like two in the morning. strategy where we'd go at we'd drink all day in the beach and then go out to while they hedonistic meal and then we'd get back to my apartment and like two in the morning and then he would stay up smoking and reading so he can make sure that I got up at 4.30 to go make it to the flight line. I was in flight school at the time and so I did that for two weeks. He subsequently got food, alcohol poisoning. I think I did too but I was just exhausted and but I loved flying and it was actually the only academic experience I've ever had that I was really passionate about. I loved flying and that was in a great flight school. I took it seriously not too seriously not seriously enough to quit drinking but we're just late or to sleep but yeah I showed up at dawn, flu, you know places prone to massive fog manks everywhere it's flat and it's actually in the state on the Atlantic Ocean and the flight school itself shares an international airport with like six carriers, big carriers so it's got like a 10,500 foot runway and it's got north and south and east and west. It's got a lot of traffic and so I was wary I'm feeling you know tired or exhausted but it wasn't until I took off that I thought this is bad like this is dangerous like I really can't focus and I'm falling asleep and so I went about 10 miles north and came back because I didn't want it to be super suspicious just take off. You have to basically declare an emergency to get back in the pattern in an international airport like that so I went north for like 10, 12 miles and then called approach and said I was coming back and I'm going to identify why and it was in the approach with like 737 flying around and although it was a very high traffic airport and I was on like a five mile downwind or crosswind trying to think whatever I was on a long approach to this airport and communicating with the tower on the radio and I would fall asleep in between communication you know sesamevember 678 echo are you there it's just on the vember 678 echo yeah oh yeah it was and I said a lot of prayers and as I said I smoked some cigarettes in that plane and I pinched myself and I landed safely excellent landing and got to the flight line and turned the engine off and promptly took an app in the plane for like an hour it was bad and then I got I had a motorcycle at that time too and I hopped on my motorcycle and I went home and I was like you gotta go back to your real life man it's like one of my oldest friends you gotta leave I can't sustain this so then you wind up your blackjack dealer in a riverboat mr. sippy you work for a couple different political candidates a presidential campaign and all nice guys I don't you know I see one thing like if you name I'm not gonna name them you can if you want but like people you thought were impressive 30 years ago in politics they're also discredited now on I know it's sad it is sad I don't want it to mean not only discredited but actually there was a much better stable of real candidates real people for one one example I briefly was a communicationist director at the Maryland Republican Party for like six months you work communication instructor yes kind of imagine a Maryland Republican Party it's like a different country now they were like 16 Republicans even then but they could still raise some money and they could make some noise because there were no other Republicans and actually was great for me because it was the communicationist director which really means it was writing nasty press releases and trying to generate lots of news and you know it's a fully corrupt state and so there's a lot to talk about and no one's looking over your shoulder because it's Maryland like really right so I'd write the most incendiary stuff and occasionally generate some news on it but I had license to do that and it was actually a really good was a really good launch patent it was a was a nice brief experience I had with some really good people they did they didn't have you know big aspirations I don't think you could stay at the Maryland Republican Party it's kind of interesting quickly I I've I started then and I've written for now in 25 years I love writing speeches and I write speeches for I've written speeches political candidates and aspiring political candidates and corporate heads I love it and it's so fun and interesting and I'm sure no one will do it anymore with the AI but I hope that's not true but anyway whatever I could write good speeches and one of the guys who actually was impressive in Maryland in the mid 90s was Michael Steele do you remember Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? Michael Steele? He's such an unimpressive person now it's hard to believe that I had one thought he was impressive he was articulate he was you know I wasn't going to use Biden's was he clean too yeah he was clean didn't smell bad news articulate I think that was Biden's quote Joe Biden yes yes and he was he's an president he's a tall man and he's got a lot of a lot of energy and yes like in your face looks you in the eye no that's totally right a good hand shaker and he was going to be like the face of Republican success and he had a failed Senate campaign whatever 10 12 years go by and in a much different iteration in my life I was writing still but like doing more interesting and more lucrative things than the Maryland and Republican Party and an old friend of mine named Lance Copsie who's no longer around I don't know if you remember him he's a very well-weight guy it's been gone like 15 years he called me and said hey I'm running Michael Steele's campaign for the RNC will you write some speeches for him I was like hell yeah love to do that I got paid to do it and I also believed in Michael Steele and so I wrote Michael Steele's acceptance speech and when he became the RNC chair not a huge deal but like kind of fun it was bigger than it was bigger than and and then he immediately like became reverted to type and by which I mean corrupt politician and immediately blew like 800 thousand dollars on you know redecorating his personal office he demanded a private jet because he claimed that Obama was president he claimed that he was a bomb his counterpart and the Republican side and Obama had Air Force One and he needed to fly private the incredible nuts of that guy I mean he had balls yeah but no interesting opinions and no you know principles no foundation and then he figured out he figured out the white guilt lever yeah he's like I don't get a plane is that because I'm black are you saying that I'm lesser in his defense wasn't Terry McCall of the DNC guy at the time probably so he was looking at Terry McCall of like pretty good deal Terry McCall of hadn't yet imported you know Chinese cars for for visas yet but he was living large man I didn't even understand how corrupt that world was when we lived in it so then speaking of you wind up working at you know basically the number two for a guy called Frank Luntz Frank Luntz for those who haven't heard of Frank Luntz he's still around over him I yeah it was the the biggest pollster in the Republican party and more than just a pollster he was like the message guy like how do we communicate that you know cutting capital gains taxes for donors is part of the American dream yeah whatever it's in the Constitution how do we soften all the environmental lunacy and make it palatable oh let's call it climate you mean the fucking weather no climate change did he come up with that came up with climate change what with death tax did you up with climate change well I say he his team I was part of his team for like six years and yes I helped run that show with a couple of other very competent people he as you know he's very complicated he's he's like a walking dichotomy he is occasionally brilliant he's very smart naturally he's lazy he's dirty he's dishonest dirty what do you mean dirty like his favorite food group is thousand island dressing well and you just can't eat thousand island dressing without getting it all over yourself and the biologicals which are supposed to be unmentionable but with Frank or ever evident everywhere oh it's disgusting no no no no the personal hygiene is like non exist and I get more graphic I can't even tell you what his nickname around the office was this guy who's walking around with literally a dead raccoon and his head yeah yeah I know I'm sorry so when I don't have fun the hair piece I'm that's like rule one I know I know but he was brilliant in his business because at least the business proposition that he had which was he understood I'm not sure if you remember there was a time yeah you really have to actually think back there was a time in America where there was something called cable news yeah I heard that yeah people took it seriously yeah and no one took it more seriously than Frank Lence so Franklin's aspired not only to hang out with famous people like in really close proximity but to be on TV and he's very articulate and he's very aggressive like people say people occasionally say oh that guy's shameless no no no you've never seen shameless until you've been Franklin's because he literally has no changing like there's nothing you could do to Franklin's in public to shame and he's unjamitable but then again part of the dichotomy is like also super socially awkward and socially aspirin like he wants to hang around people but he's autistic in his eruptions which are usually pretty funny so he's very verbal he's energetic he's got limitless aspiration to make dough and beyond TV and he recognizes actually that's a pretty common in corporate America and on the hill so he's very close with new Cambridge in 94 and he got a lot of credit for coming up with the contract with America I think he was maybe a little bit he was definitely very much involved I don't think it was his entire baby think it was more nudes than the people around new but whatever Frank weasel in there got a lot of credit for being part of the contract with America and then of course the republicans come in and they're in power for the first time in my lifetime and first time in like I don't know 32 years or something maybe 36 years the first I can't remember the 94 election when republicans got back into the house it was the first time in three decades at least and so Frank was there and his business model was I will come up with language and words and speeches for members on the republican caucus I'll do it for free then I'll promote those messages in corporate world and make a ton of money with people who also want to be on television corporate heads excuse me fortune 500 fortune 100 fortune 50 companies and I'll go pitch them on some research product project that will allow them to understand their customers better and I'll incorporate the language that I'm devising and using for the benefit of republicans so he ingratiated himself with republicans at the same time he's ingratiated himself with corporate America all around this hold antiquated now defunct medium cable news and it was brilliant so he made it and he had no iraq because his entire business model were lot upon getting people even though he was incredibly labelable conscious like he went to you pan he went to oxford he had an honorific doctorate that he insisted people call him doctor I'm called doctor oh doctor Frank I learned yes doctor lunch I didn't call him doctor lunch I called him I won't tell you what I call him call him Frank mostly but this is so Frank was rolling in the dough and didn't know what to do with it and he's indefatigable in his entire I will and there are things about him that I hugely admire for sure his relentless nature his shamelessness you've never seen a pitch ever seen a pitch people talk about oh he's such a great pitch man and he knows how to go and speak to these prospective clients no one does it like Frank lance and with literally no preparation because his entire his entire strategy I would call him at the executive was yeah he merely at the executive generally in front of his underlings or a sub like not a CEO but like the guys who are angling for the CEO spot the best vice presidents and stuff who are sycophantic towards the CEO he would gather all the all the executives in one room either a conference room or sometimes bigger like a like an auditorium inside a coca cola's headquarters or dows headquarters and he would go and he would give a presentation and like five minutes into the presentation he would identify one of these sub executives by name and he would do everything he could do humiliate that person in front of all of his peers and his balls yeah so there's a guy who actually understands the worst part of human nature because that does actually excite the sadists in certain people right and so who gravitates to those jobs except people who a lot of them not all of them but some of them have that gene like oh public humiliation love to publicly humiliate you and every single person like if you could see the if you could see the thought bubble above everybody's head they're all saying holy fuck I'm so glad that's not me right so everybody so at the end of his like how would he humiliate when he find oh the most personal stuff they're clothing they're the asymmetry of their face you know big earlubs no no me like I know he was predatory relentless ruthless and entertaining is how like he's really fast with English language like fast he's super fast I'll give him that he's in very articulate and man he would go after them and so at the end he'd like softened up the entire mean he would humiliate the actual lead okay quarters yes I saw him do it at Pfizer I saw him do it I mean we work he did work for some impressive people some huge companies work for the sauclers it Purdue Pharma I'm ashamed to say that I was involved in that and that's actually something I think about often actually I bought into the whole line it's like you're telling me before did you did you know that the intelligence agencies played such an aggressive role in American life and elections no I didn't I also really didn't know it turns out I should have listened to a lot of the blue hair vagina hat wearing crazy women because a lot of the shit they said about the Iraq war obviously true about Bush administration obviously true only on hindsight for me at least and I dismiss them and I dismissed in a lot of the jobs I had because I did end up in a position defending some of the worst corporate interests in America and I believe that when people attack big pharma for instance or the sauclers or they're really just against you know corporate world they're really against capitalism they're really they're just they're against America right they're against America so I grew up thinking that and it dovetailed well with my job because I ended up I mean they're not all evil of course in a lot of them employ tons of people and do good things and we couldn't survive without them so I'm not attacking all of them gladly attack the sauclers in Purdue Pharma though because that not only you know more about this topic than most but you know it also dovetailed with an entire societal effort that they had which I was very much a part of to convince Americans that there is no such thing as acceptable pain you cannot be in pain you shouldn't be in pain someone needs to be responsible for your pain and you need to eradicate your pain that was that was what they were talking about in 2019-1999 2001-2-3 they engaged in a society wide campaign to convince Americans that pain was unacceptable not just for chronic cancer sufferers or people who'd been injured in war or people who'd had you know back injury 20 years ago you should not be feeling in pain ever at all and there's a solution for that and they obviously had this solution further they're the ones as you know who pine or maybe didn't pioneer it but they took it to the next level attacking the people that they'd hooked on Hoxecon when they said and I said engaged in a ton of research projects and jury messaging with that company where we'd go in and test messages and arguments but really sort of like a push-pull design to not just gauge public opinion but to very much influence public opinion and then we would play at messages yes very much so and then of course because of his business model he would use those messages and it would be incorporated in thought leaders and elected officials around the country they would use that same language and that that was in its essence you're not responsible for your pain you shouldn't have pain but further you this is a non-addictive this is not an addictive product and if you are addicted to it it's because you've been abusing it it's because you have some latent some long dormant addictive thing within you that's now been released and you also probably have been abusing the product like have you been hitting it with hammer and smashing it into dust and snorting it well that's on you so that shit's evil and it's evil and I never you're thinking about it much more broadly than I ever have so I've always been focused on the addiction the physical addiction the societal destruction you know you and I both spend a lot of the year in a place that's been really really hollowed out all it out by it and we know people who were very good friend of ours is now in prison because of drug addiction so anyway whatever we have seen it both of us but I have never really thought about what you just said which is they were making a broader pitch about pain and how pain is always bad and I think if you any any man especially middle age looking back has to recognize that the painful moments are the are the best some of the best moments the most important necessary absolutely necessary yeah failures necessary pain is necessary including physical pain yeah very much so to say their goal is to eliminate all pain that's evil yes I agree and I wish I had recognized it as such I totally I don't think I was I think I was probably smarter back then because I was still smacking cigarettes so um and I was younger but anyway I was I still didn't recognize it like wisdom it that yes right yeah black and wisdom men in their 30s don't have the perspective that a man in his 50s house yes very much he makes it kind of say one more thing about the once thing it was it was actually the ball the business model was amazing in terms of it was very profitable it was effective he came up with some effective language so it's a it's a quasi it's a dual track research thing where you do quantitative research you know actual polling calling polling is long before online polling and then qualitative research with people in a group a focus group but he expanded it to like six times the normal size so near normal focus group has like eight to ten or twelve people in it and obviously it depends who you recruit to be in that focus group um but then he expanded that to like 60 people and then he had an electronic dial which was actually a dial that he called a dial testing where you could gauge individual words and sentences in real time so every single person in the audience is reacting to a speech speech which is littered with messages that you're testing and they could react in real time to each word and phrase like you know it's a visceral reaction right do you like it or you repel by it and it's pretty effective actually and I think a lot of the language that he came up with was great but because of his total inability because of his manic behavior and his dishonest a and his pension for yelling and screaming and treating people horribly didn't actually treat me horribly lied to me a number of times and I got into some bigger arguments with him and I was too young and unwise to understand you're not supposed to confront your boss and the way you would confront anybody else right he's not a park ranger he's not a park ranger I was more respectful of the park rangers probably the two men I felt bad for um but anyway no but sorry I was trying to compliment him which is all he cared about was the product and which was the written word and he never gave you enough time there was no schedule he was day-losed with clients with high-paying clients and he was disorganized and so he would rely upon there was a period where we were handling like 12 huge clients and was like three writers or two writers and client hand holders you know interfacing with the client because frank wasn't good at that he was very good at humiliating them and coming and coming to the crocs understanding human nature to the extent that he could get someone to say yes I'm going to pay you a ridiculous amount of money for a research project that will take six weeks and then allow me to understand my customer better that he was great at he was not great at allocating he was not great at planning and so the end result was a total beautiful meritocracy like you could only survive in that situation unless you produced and it was like a camp can't painters are like that too I'm sure you know of course it's like doesn't matter where you came from doesn't matter what you did yesterday or tomorrow it matters that you fucking produce now on time you can't it's like in that old medium cable news so you didn't have an opportunity to be like I'm not done with my script it's seven o'clock and you're going on the air regardless it's the greatest part about it it was the greatest part that was that's what I'm saying it was the greatest part about it because of that job because you just had no room for failure and every day was an opportunity to prove that you were up to the challenge and then further silly cliche but true that you know oh he's got an inch wide my long knowledge I feel like that a little bit because I was compelled as where the the other guys I worked with to absorb the details of something that's very complex particular business that I had never been involved in or a policy or some capability of a future product or something initiative and you had to be able to speak about it right about it articulately and compellingly I know notice at all so I think that sounds like the best training I am that's exactly how I think about it and despite the weird ending I wasn't trying to gratuitously attack no I wrote him a letter actually like six years ago and and just contemplative letter saying despite all of our differences despite the various tensions we've had despite the fact you fired me three times and then hired me back the next day and paid me more money still not fairly but despite all of those things I thank you because it was the best most satisfying job I've ever had no no well he I had a stroke and it changed oh that's no I know it actually he had his own admission he had a stroke that he survived like all of us at certain age you know he has a terrible diet and it leads an unhealthy life and had a stroke and it changed him it actually made him more compassionate from good yes no he had that attitude so frankly I remember and I don't want to be I mean I feel sorry for Frank and I love the fact that he's improved after his stroke both that he's okay and that he's that it's made him a better person I do think that's common I mean as we're saying about pain it actually can him it certainly improve me and he was aware of it by the way can I tell you how I know no I called him five or six years ago about some common interest that we had and a shot of a text and said do you have two minutes I just want to tell you something interesting maybe let me tell you something interesting so he texted him back said yeah call me so I call him first words hey how are you I was like I'm doing great man let me take and he's goes no how are you I was like no I said everybody put a cigarette out of his neck isn't no I said I beg your pardon Frank he said no I just I'm genuinely interested like how are you how is your wife how is your son do you still have dogs I was like someone take over your body and like are you fucking serious I've known you for like 26th or maybe 28 years at that point you've never once asked me a personal question and that's just fine but you're asking me how I'm doing are you okay and that's when he said I actually have a stroke and I said oh I'm so sorry I was genuinely sorry to hear that but it yes it had a good effect on him and I as I said I am eternally grateful as I have expressed to him worse no I feel that way about all my bosses some of whom you know regularly denounce me but I'm always grateful for every experience and especially when you're young and you're learning a lot I mean it's amazing I know of course I know Frank also there's a fixture in republican world in DC is at the center of republican world in DC yes I was really kid weird he kind of hated the wasps did you get that from him ever I did it was it was a I'm encountered it before but with him it was very kind of a lot yeah me too say it but not just a hate but a an attraction also yeah it was a yeah it was like let me settle up next to you and then let me stick a fucking dagger in your kidney that that was the other thing but there was something about that the fact you were a wasp triggered him right he would talk about oh actually are you joking oh he would talk about it all the time well you make you know drugatory comments or derogatory complimentary comments some thing it was an attraction and a revulsion or something it was like what did he say oh that's well he would just say nothing huge the creative but he would say oh that's what the wasps though you do that or you've got such a new attack my name occasionally or my dress that's a big one man I didn't wear a dress in the office very often but only on only what do you remember I was Frank yeah exactly but he was fixated on that there no evidently yes unquestionably yeah Bill Crystal was the same way with me I remember when Bill Crystal if we may take a moment yeah Bill Crystal was a smart guy oh yeah not that smart but that's not he came across as a smart guy yeah a thoughtful guy compelling guy it was weird I used to respect him yeah yeah he's like a puddle yeah but you know it is I've learned so much like yes he's clever he did a fair amount of reading back in the 70s you know in school yes he went to collegiate in New York which is you know was it a really good school a rigorous school they went to Harvard got his PhD forced to do a ton of reading so he had read you know ask a list and you know he had read a lot in Rousseau and he could kind of remember parts of it and sort of half quoted sort of but was you real I was just impressive I'm not against that he had like three lines of poetry he could probably do but you realized over time that that was more a party trick than a reflection of his like actual airy edition and that on the wisdom scale like there was none and he was really mission driven yes and parent now and a parent now but he was it was not obviously on the wisdom scale like there was none. And he was really mission driven. Yes. And parent now and a parent now. But he was not obvious to me because I was an idiot. And he was smart for sure. But he was not that smart at all. And the mission was hated Christianity. Yes. And it really really hated it. And the mask is off now. Well, the mask is off now. But if I look back on this, he was opposed to American sovereignty. He was opposed basically to the population of America. He's really hostile. A lot very hostile. And there were glimpses of it. But I just wasn't. I wasn't wise enough to understand what was going on. Plus I was like, you know, young. And he was employing me. And so there were lots of incentives not to notice. But he was very fixated on the last thing with me. And he would bubble up some time. So like, that was that. You know, it wouldn't occur to me to be like, well, I never really thought about him being Jewish, to be honest. I really didn't. He is Jewish, but I didn't think about it that much. He thought a lot about me being a wasp though. There's no question. And it would come out. Anyway, it's just interesting. I never have heard anybody mention that dynamic before. But I noticed that in the once too, because he would say stuff to me too. Very much. Well, I was like, well, there's no like meeting. Probably should be. Probably wouldn't disappear if there was, but it's when it turned out all different. Right. Get off the golf course. Get yourself awareness. Get a defense mechanism. But you know, no, it was a visible respect yourself. Exactly. And make sure yourself. What your ancestors built. A hundred percent. And I do think that one, I don't deal with many wasps anymore, because they really, really hate me. And I'm sure you probably have the same experience. Don't you think it's the same dynamics? Yes. Self-alode. From cowardice. Powerness leads to self-loathing, which leads to hatred of others. Totally agree. If someone will hate himself, he's probably not going to treat me well. Yeah. That's correct. I think. And they have a lot to be ashamed of in the cowardice department. I mean, these are the bravest people in the world. Yes. Who went over the top of the trenches? The wasps. Yes. And there's a lot of lying about that. But their numbers are there in the first reward. So a wasps, including our ancestors. So a lot of them. So yeah, they had a lot of bravery. They seem to have lost that probably through comfort. Empose. Empose. Empose. Sorry. Yeah. And booze. And they kind of know that. And they're shrinking little islands. Well, now they've almost shrunk to nothing. But in their mad, do you take any shit from them when you run into them? Funny. I took some shit actually from Neil Bush, who was in an unimpressive family. Probably the least impressive of that family. Right. Because the rest of them are charming mostly. There are a couple of them I like. Me too. I'm not going to shame them by naming them. Me too. Well, I don't mind shaming Neil Bush. Because Neil Bush, this is George W. his brother. Yes. Attacts me in the most passive aggressor way. It's a fair way. A fraternity party that my son's fraternity put on, which was like a formal cocktail. And I accidentally bumped into him. And backwards. And I turned around and said, oh my gosh, forgive me. I'm so sorry. And then I said, oh, Neil Bush. Hi, Buckley Carlson has to see you. I mentioned in Washington years ago. And then he did something. He has this expectation about, he's not very smart. First of all, he has this expectation about him. That you encounter occasionally. And he said something really nasty about you. And the content of your show, you were on that. I forgot what it's called. What are those channels? One of those channels. And he was named after an animal. That I really admire. But back when that medium actually mattered. And he made some often common. And I said, I beg your pardon. And this went back and forth a couple of times. And I was trying to be a gentleman. I had my son next to me. And Neil Bush's son, who was a fraternity brother of my son. And so for the cocktail party, I'm not going to get in some argument with this guy. But I wasn't going to back down either. And so I said, here's something about the content of your show and what you'd said. But he wouldn't be specific about it. And he said, oh, you know, I'm not judging. I just call it like it is. He must have said that six times. I'm not judging. I just call it like it is. And I said, well, Neil Bush. Really? You call it like it is. So what exactly specifically did my brother say that you don't agree with? Well, I haven't actually seen his show. I read about it in the New York Times. He said that. This, who's part of a family that, I mean, actually, exactly specific people in the family are quality and nice and deserve kindness. But the policies and the administration of George Bush was disastrous. And we're still feeling the effects of it today. I think about it often. And I lived in Texas for a while. And I can tell you that people in Texas think about it all the time they feel completely betrayed by that family in George Bush specific. It's every reason I feel that. Yes, they do. And so I share that revulsion. But anyway, I'm sympathetic to the fact that he is a sibling, a non-public person, and a sibling of people and the son of a man who was attacked relentlessly by people who didn't have specificity in their attacks, didn't even know what they were talking about and had no trouble attacking family members to him personally. And yet he's going to engage on the same thing with me. Exactly. And I thought this is exactly... That's actually when it really came home to me that the Wasp have not just lost, but that they've lost a will. And they've surrendered. Totally. And they're unwilling to make a stand. And the fact that he had adopted the leftist attitude without being smart. Well, it's part, you know, one of the things that there are a lot of good things about the Wasp, obviously there's bad things about the Wasp. But one of the good things was they were totally committed to fairness. And if the heart of fairness is the understanding that we're born and will die and will be judged as individuals, non-us groups. And therefore, we do not believe in collective punishment. The country was founded on that premise by Wasp. And, you know, to abandon that is to abandon everything. Especially when it's the last country on earth that's still believes that. That's exactly right. It's important to never... To do a attack a man for one of his relatives. I mean, everyone in our family has been attacked for some other member of the family. So, I'm sorry. We're all very familiar with that. But, you know, I'm proud to say one thing I'm proud about our family is that no, whatever do that. No. Not a chance. No. I'd be happy to have dinner with you. He has a brother and never, you know, attack him for cannibalism because he's not the one who committed it. Yes. That I know of. Yeah. Welcome back. I just got to ask you one final question. You've spent your life. I haven't even. I'm not going to violate your privacy by explaining some of the things you've done or places you've been or people you've worked with or whatever. Because it's nobody's business and you'll divulge it if you want to. But you've had a really interesting life. But it's been very interesting life. But it's been like our father. But it's all been very private. Haven't been a public at all. No. Right. No. I know. Oh, I'm aware. So yeah. But now all of a sudden you've like just entered full blown into the public debate online after, you know, 54 years of avoiding it. And you certainly have seen stuff you could have added to the public conversation. But you didn't. And you've reserved it for Christmas dinner at our house. So thank you for that. But now that you're in the, you know, public, what's that like? I hadn't anticipated it. Shockingly calling Neil Bush dumb. I feel pretty dumb that I didn't anticipate that. But it's because I haven't had a governor. I've had the freedom to say what I want to say in the venues that I operate. I must say I've had a lot of fortune in my life, a lot of blessings. But principally in the business world, I've been able to work with some people. I have some long time clients who've, who are, who are, who are, who are Christian. Who are very smart and very loyal. And they've allowed me to operate. And my job doesn't demand. I write primarily. I come up with strategic stuff, but, uh, strategic. But I've been allowed to lead an independent and private life. And I've enjoyed it. I don't have any young children who I can embarrass or under my work at the moment. So that's great. But again, I didn't anticipate it. And, but the other thing I would say is, I'm not a coward. I love this country. And I really don't appreciate what's happening to it, what's been happening to it. And it feels like there's a lot of foot. There's a lot going on that I don't necessarily understand. But I feel like there's a battle. There's a massive battle. And it does remind me, um, simple thing ever. Someone said the other day, and I'm not saying it was. It was great. Rick Warren, who wrote Purpose Driven Life, started listening to his podcasts. And boys, he was. And boys, he, using the tools that God gave him to communicate, sometimes complicated things in a very simple way. And he said, at the end, you know, we're going to have a final exam. And there are exactly two questions on that exam. And you can't avoid it. And it's what did you do with my son Jesus? And what did you do with the purpose God gave you? Wow. That's a pretty sobering thought. Yes, it is. And what's true. It's true. And so I'm not, I guess I'm middle, middle, young, middle aged, something like that. Little weathered. But our father was more weathered. Both of us put together. Not at a long time. Yes, he did. But I don't know. Every man has an obligation to defend what he loves and to practice that. So I love this country. And I, and there's something going on. And I want to play a role. I want to do battle. I want to do battle. That's that clear. Seriously. Seriously. There's no one better. If I get to end with one vignette that's been in our family the last time, but it's about, I don't know, almost 10 years ago, I was at work. Because of my job. The time I was at work was public. So when I was at work, Antifa came to her house. And of course, as I've said, we've always lived next to each other her whole lives. So my wife is home alone. And all these people came and tried to bang through the front door and spray painted her house. And you know, often Antifa mob came to her house, whatever. I was not even aware of this was happening. So my wife is in the pantry of the house. Like people are trying to break down the door. Dogs are barking. Dogs are barking. She does not call the police. She calls you first because everyone in our family would always call you first if there's a problem. And and then she calls the cops. Well, the cops for some reason got there before you. And then you showed up as the cops were just pulling up, which meant that you couldn't shoot anybody. And you were mad for weeks after I'll never forget that. I saw you for allegedly. I just feel bad. I couldn't shoot anybody. And they were terrifying, Suzy and I, but the police were right there. I was like, couldn't shoot them. And I'm just, I just feel bad about it. And I was like, it's okay. It was, it was a justifiable sanction calling. It would have been. Society would have been much improved. I would have declared a tax credit. Thank you. Don't you think? Oh, I can't talk about this. That was so good. It was so, it was so good. And everyone are famous. Yeah, I'll go back out there after the police. You don't get good. So then Antifa was lucky. You're hilarious. I don't think I've ever experienced such frustration. Oh, actually. Oh, I know. Man-dated restraint. Oh, I'll go back. Thank you. Thank you so much. That was awesome. You should hit it.