So, you're I I would say one of the living experts on the Oklahoma City bombing, which to some of us seems like just the other day, but it was 30 years ago this year. So, for those not steeped in the details of the story, could you just if you wouldn't mind giving us the overview, what was the Oklahoma City bombing? Sure. The Oklahoma City bombing was and is America's deadliest domestic terror attack. It happened on a Wednesday morning in 1995, an April morning, out of nowhere, 9:00 in the morning at the federal building, the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, nine stories tall, a devastating explo- explosion hit the building and killed 168 people who were working or visiting the building that morning. The front of the building looked like ice cream that had been scooped out. It was just uh a scene of unbelievable destruction and death and blood and confusion and the entire nation was left just aghast that this could have happened in America's heartland. It was it it was shocking and there was immediate there was confusion. I I remember that morning well in April and people immediately went on CNN to say that Muslims had done it. That was that was the the first understanding was this was some kind of Islamic terror attack. Uh and then we were told that no, it was really one guy with an accomplice who wasn't there. The guy was called Timothy McVeigh. He had a Ryder truck full of ammonium nitrate uh fertilizer mixed with diesel fuel, I think. >> Yes. And um that's when most of us learned that that that mixture could produce an explosion like this. Now, that's I think well known, but that's what that's when most of us learned it. And um he was a white supremacist. He was mad at the government. He was mad about Waco and Ruby Ridge. And he's a former uh he's a veteran. And but he was part of a network of white supremacists and and then we spent the next year or two hearing about this. Bill Clinton often referred to this. Um And then he was executed and that was kind of the end of the story. So, that's that's the layman's understanding of Oklahoma City. Yes. And it was quite an amazing couple of days. Enlightening fast speed, the FBI found Timothy McVeigh um tracing the axle from the Ryder truck to um a motel 275 mi north in Kansas uh where McVeigh had checked in to the motel using his own name and pretty soon, just within a matter of a couple of days, the FBI found its way to Perry Oklahoma, about 75 mi north of Oklahoma City, where McVeigh had been arrested on traffic charges driving his Mercury car, the getaway car, without a license plate. And the officer, the arresting officer, found that he was carrying a concealed weapon. Um McVeigh was very polite the entire time. Uh there was no thought that McVeigh was connected to the bombing. The highway patrolman took him into the Perry jail, and he sat there. He was on his way to a bond hearing and to be released when the FBI, through this incredible speed of their investigation, found him in Perry, Oklahoma on Friday afternoon for that now famous perp walk out the door without a vest in his orange jumpsuit and his thousand-mile stare and the gathered crowd around chanting baby killer. That's what we remember of our first sight of Timothy McVeigh, the suspected bomber. Boy, the FBI is good. I mean, they got him within days on the basis of a truck axle. How did they How did they say they did that? They They tracked They tracked the the VIN number on the truck axle to Ryder in Florida, and Ryder had a record of that truck being rented out of Junction City, Kansas. And so, they went to the rental agency, and sure enough, put two and two together. The identification was made from first the Ryder the rental truck agency where McVeigh had rented the truck, they remembered him and they made a composite sketch of the two men, not one but two men who had been present for the rental of the truck and with the sketches the FBI spanned out in Junction City and found that motel where McVeigh had registered under his own name. Hm. What do you mean two men? Who is the other man? The other man who eventually would emerge as the mystery man of the Oklahoma City bombing was never identified but the uh staff at Elliott's Body Shop where they rented the Ryder truck two days before the bombing on a Monday, they all said there was a second man there and he was described as um being very muscular, having a tattoo, having dark hair and just standing to the side while um John Doe 1 who called himself uh Robert Kling rented the truck. Okay, so and Robert Kling was Timothy McVeigh. Robert Kling was John Doe 1 believed to have been Timothy McVeigh. >> Who in the end was convicted, sentenced to death and executed in pretty pretty short order. Right. What When was he executed? He was executed in 2001. That that is short order for a capital crime. >> Yeah. For sure. So Six years later. So he's been um dead for 24 years. The terror attack was 30 years ago. When you say the the man with him was never identified, do you mean to this day? To this day. Never identified and really the abiding mystery of the case. >> I'm confused. How could you have the biggest terror attack, domestic terror attack in US history, destroy, you know, the downtown of a major American city, and you don't over 30 years, you don't find the second guy? That's a great question. One of the truest observations ever, it's hard to have a good time if you're stuck in bad boots. And that's why you need Tecovas. They make it easy for anybody, including people like us, hardly experts in boot fashion, to find the perfect boot. Here at TCM, we love Tecovas boots. Everybody's got them. You can find us wearing our favorite pair during the day or an evening out, not even line dancing, anywhere. Tecovas crafts quality western boots for everybody, generational ranchers, lifelong cowboys, to first-time buyers. They handcraft their boots over 200 meticulous steps to create broken-in comfort the second you get them right out of the box. The difference is obvious when you put them on. It's unbelievable, actually. You never know that they were brand new. There's no compromise between quality and style. There's a reason Tecovas gets such high reviews from everybody. It's the total package. Get 10% off at tecovas.com/tucker when you sign up for an email and text alert. That's 10% off at Tecovas, t e c o v a s.com/tucker. Honor the west by leaving your own boot print. tecovas.com/tucker. Well, let's go back. Are we sure there was a second guy? Yes. Although it has been disputed, um we're sure because, first of all, 24 ordinary people in Oklahoma City who eventually were interviewed uh by the FBI about the bombing run 24 eyewitnesses saw Timothy McVeigh with a second man in the Ryder truck. So, we know he was there. As the As As you can remember the investigation was a very big deal for a very long time. >> Yes. Journalism covered it. And journalists reported top journalists reported that the um the FBI had surveillance videotape because of course that's what they do on in a in a big crime like this. They went out and collected all the videotape. And they had John Doe 2 with Timothy McVeigh on videotape delivering the bomb. They had videotape of the bomb exploding. The preliminary hearing um for the the case was held you know, a week or so after the crime. And the videotapes were discussed there. The FBI agent on the witness stand um admitted that the FBI had videotape of the delivery of at least of the truck on its way to deliver the bomb. So, uh we we know that John Doe 2 was real. Well, now I'm really confused because I I don't I mean, why is John Doe 2 not at the top of the FBI most wanted list as a perpetrator of the country's worst domestic terror attack in its history? Pretty soon and in puzzling fashion considering that this was the biggest manhunt in history. It was a global manhunt. There was a $2 million reward offered for the identification and capture of John Doe II, but pretty soon, within a couple of months, the FBI began to back away from John Doe II. Uh they produced a a new theory that John Doe II was a case of mistaken identity, that the that the staffer that was the basis of the sketch at the body shop was mistaken, that he was really talking about a completely innocent soldier So So I'm sorry to interrupt, but just to to hold this up. So this is the flyer produced by the FBI after the terrorist attack, right? So I believe that turned out to be Tim McVeigh right there. Believed to be Timothy McVeigh. Our investigation would raise some questions about that, but yes, a look-alike for Timothy McVeigh or a look-alike for Timothy McVeigh. >> can kind of account for this guy, whether it's the correct accounting or not. >> Absolutely. This is the sketch of John Doe number two. This But this is the This is produced by the Feds. This is FBI. FBI. >> Okay. So um and this person has never been identified, no one's looking for him, and the FBI is now saying he never existed. That's correct. >> Okay. On on what Given that you had um dozens of people identify this person as a person, you know, as being alive and being with Tim McVeigh, dozens of people, um and given that the FBI itself said, "Yeah, he existed." On what basis are they now saying he never existed? Well, a couple of months later, they introduced a new story. This was that the man believed to be John Doe II was this innocent soldier who had come into the body shop the day before and had somehow been mistakenly time traveled into their into the memory of the mechanic who gave the the info about the sketch, but that it was all just a mistake that Timothy McVeigh was by himself. It was never a very credible explanation. >> this Yes, they identified him. They talked to him. They um they found that, you know, he had the uh baseball cap that some of the witnesses had described John Doe II wearing and he was in with a friend, so the two the two of them were together. And it was somewhat it was somewhat credible or credible enough and they were very certain and confident about it, and the story began to change. So, they said, if if I'm following this, that actually some other guy and a buddy walked into the same body shop around the same time and the guy at the body shop just misremembered and thought that that guy was with Tim McVeigh. >> That's right. But, it wasn't. That's right. And so, the FBI is now saying that Tim McVeigh did this alone. Yes. Okay. What How do they explain away the eyewitness testimony of people who were there at the scene and saw them both in the truck together? Tucker, that is one of the abiding questions never answered about this case. And as a matter of fact, years later after the some of the controversies that would you know, develop, one of the top case commanders, Danny Coulson, conceded that this single fact of 24 eyewitnesses who saw John Doe 2 in the bomb truck with Timothy McVeigh is not something that can just be explained away with this new story. I have an idea. Let's go to the videotape. There was videotape um that was admitted, you said on the stand by a federal officer that they had the videotape, so that would just show where where is the video Have you seen the videotape? No one, Tucker, has seen that videotape outside the FBI. In 30 years, they've never produced that. They've never produced it, and imagine this was uh an incredibly high-profile mass murder trial. Um those images were not shown at the trial. The the videotape was not shown at the trial. It was not shown at the trial? >> No. Why? Well, that's never been credibly answered by the FBI. Okay. So, I just want to start as big picture as we can before we get into the details, but I'm already coming just as a ignorant person who sort of sort of remembers all of this, we're coming to points that are just like don't make any sense at all on the most basic level. >> are many of these. >> I'm aware. I'm now aware. Um but I want to go into this slowly because I think I this is not one of this is not the Kennedy assassination, this is not something on which there have been 50 books written. I mean, you've written a great book on this, maybe one or two others, but most people, I don't think as of right now, summer of 2025, have revisited this in their heads and said, "Actually, the Warren Commission was fake." Like that's not that has Absolutely. Okay. So, you have um now the claim by the FBI that McVeigh did this himself. He may have had He had help from this friend of his called Terry Nichols, who is to this day still in prison serving life. Um but he was not in Oklahoma City that day, is my understanding, correct? Correct. Right. >> He was in Kansas. He was in Kansas. So, they're saying that Tim McVeigh did the the actual bombing totally by himself. Rented the bomb truck in Junction City by himself, drove to Oklahoma City by himself, delivered and detonated the bomb by himself. And that's the state's case >> That's the the government's case. And escaped by himself. What do they say his motive was? He was enraged at the government for its overreach at Waco, which was the the government um assault on the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas. >> before. To the day. To the day. April 19, 1993 was the the FBI, the final assault after an 80-some day standoff. Two years before Oklahoma City bombing. That was where Janet Reno killed all those kids. Yes. There were children There were heavy casualties for children as well as adults. And they said Tim McVeigh was so mad about that that he decided to bomb the federal building in Oklahoma City. Any indication as to why Oklahoma City? Well, Oklahoma City is was central to an anti-government movement in the Midwest. Uh so, it it was it was a it was a high-profile target. So, the US dollar is not the bullwark it has been for our lifetimes. It's actually getting weaker. It's depressing, but it's true. Decades of Washington money printing, the misbehavior of the Fed has devalued the US dollar to a point that you couldn't have imagined 30 years ago. Bad decisions in Washington are making you poorer, and it should make you a little nervous. Makes us a little nervous. The entire system is just backed by trust in the government, but what if no one trusts the government? So, one of the results of of this is that a lot of people want to invest some of their money outside the dollar system and some in crypto. They don't know where to start though, and that's where I trust capital comes in. Their platform makes the crypto game easier, safer, and smarter. You can use it to pair the long-term tax benefits of retirement account with the freedom to invest in digital assets. So, there are potential big upsides here. They also offer secure non-retirement crypto accounts. I trust capital uses a closed-loop security system. So, if someone gets your login, they can't send your crypto to an external wallet. And if you ever need help, there's someone right there to talk to, a real person in the United States, an expert at your service. It's complicated, crypto, it can be. This makes it simple. It's easy to set up an account. You can do it in minutes. You can start investing today. Click the link below or visit itrustcapital.com/tucker. Use the promo code Tucker for an additional funding bonus. So, um the FBI backs off of its claim and then completely erases its claim that there was a second perpetrator involved working with Tim McVeigh. How hard did they look for John Doe number two? Well, it was a global manhunt. Hm. Uh, $2 million reward offered. Uh, all over America people were being stopped in the street, um, detained, in in a few instances arrested. So, they were looking hard for a month. Hm. Who was Tim McVeigh, exactly? Timothy McVeigh. Timothy McVeigh was a 26-year-old Bronze Star ex-soldier, um, from the Desert Storm operation in Iraq. And he had come back home in 1992. This was 3 years before the bombing. And kind of kicked around his, uh, his home, his where he the home where he grew up in, uh, Upstate New York. Had a couple of jobs. Uh, security jobs, security, uh, work. Um, but never really never really gripped into a future after the army. There's a story about he was an a a great soldier, uh, an intense, passionate soldier. And he was offered a tryout for special forces at the end of his tour. And, uh, he he de- he had developed blisters on his feet, so the story went, and couldn't make the physical part of the tryout. So, uh he he washed out of of special forces. And that had been his dream. That's that's what he That's where he always saw himself. So, when he came back home, security guard work wasn't satisfying. He was living with his dad and uh and he was just he was he was pretty aimless at the time. So, how did he get from um being an unemployed security guard, Bronze Star winning veteran living with his dad in upstate New York to blowing up a federal building in Oklahoma City? Yeah, that was a really curious passage. He became very uh political Mhm. and um he headed south to Florida and hooked up with one of the kind of mysterious connections that we know about in the next couple of years of his life. A an and a retired gun dealer named Roger Moore and he basically went on the gun show circuit. Um he would he carried with him uh copies of The Turner Diaries, which is this anti-Semitic uh apocalyptic novel that um he was very much and and I not just anti-Semitic, but but anti-government. It was just It was basically the story of an insurrection. Um and he would um take this with him to gun shows and try to, you know, sell it or convince people to read it. He was trying to convince all his friends to read the um The Turner Diaries. And he just floated around uh it in without knowing what really was going on in Timothy McVeigh's life for the 2 years that led up to the bombing, it's it's really a puzzle. And he just he he lived this road warrior life staying in motels, unexplained um I've heard somebody account for like it would have cost someone in at the in those dollars in those days like $50,000 to live this way. Um but we only know of him having earned like $5,000. So, where did he get the rest of the money? Unaccounted for. But he just he drove drove you know, thousands of miles, stayed in motels, hit gun show circuits, and eventually 2 years later um plus some months uh bombed the federal building. So, we know at the time um so, the government had committed a number of a couple at least of high-profile massacres of conservative Christian white people. One at Ruby Ridge and one at Waco. And so, they were, as I recall, they were very concerned about backlash from conservative Christian white Americans becoming radicalized, white supremacist, you know, Nazis, what you know, whatever that means, but like radical anti-government white people. Yes. That was the threat. Yes. In their view. In the Clinton years, so they had first Clinton term. And so they were trying to neutralize that threat by infiltrating those groups with federal informants. Correct. But at scale. Like they were really working on this. Can we say that for certain? Yes. Yeah. Um So Tim McVeigh going to all these different you know, basically hanging around with all these people, joining the the circuit of um you know, this political philosophy based in gun shows. And no visible means of support. We can assume he was a federal informant, sounds like. Or may have been a federal informant. There's never been any um record. I think I I think m- that would be perhaps a bit of a reach to to assume he was a federal informant. It was at least to my understanding and there is going to be some evidence about that. I But I think making that connection the gun shows were a hangout. Right. >> Um you know, if if if you were lost and male and ex-military >> Yeah. and seeking direction, you know, as as McVeigh's attorney would argue in his defense at trial um there were a lot of people who shared his beliefs about it what what had happened at Waco. Yes. Who were seeking others, seeking a clubhouse if you were. Well, and the gun show circuit was that place. So um I I think it it it it could have been just a he was searching. Um Oh, I'm sure. But what That world would have been crawling with informants. >> Yes. Absol- Crawling crawling with informants and crawling with law enforcement. Yeah. I mean, that's what happened to Randy Weaver, of course. Yes. >> His world was crawling with law enforcement because again, the FBI had identified that world, that brand of politics as the main threat. Randy Weaver sold a shotgun that was like too short or something and they wanted to help. Well, he was being pressed to be an informant and refused. >> Yeah. And so they murdered his wife and son. Um So, but back to Tim McVeigh, so we don't really know what he was doing during that time. It sounds like with any great specificity. >> right. Who was Terry Nichols? Terry Nichols was an army buddy of McVeigh's and um he was older. He went into the service older. He was uh perhaps 10 years older than McVeigh or five. But they had served together, they they liked each other and in fact with a third soldier named Michael Fortier, who will be part of this story, uh the three of them served together. And after McVeigh Nichols left the service first and then McVeigh and they hooked up again together um to be in the army surplus business. So, that was how they came came back together after the army. We thought this through when we started this podcast a year ago and we decided we're never advertising anything that we or people on our staff don't use. Period. We're only partnering with companies that we agree with and endorse actually in our personal lives. So, we want to announce new partnership with a survival company we trust most. Last Country Supplies is the name of our collaboration, Last Country Supply. I have a big surplus of survival food from that great company. If you get a bucket of food with a 25-year shelf life, 2,000 calories a day, potatoes, rice, bread, drinks, you feel a lot better. Let's say there's an EMP attack or civil disturbance and you don't know what could happen in the future, you are prepared and you are protecting your family with Last Country Supply products. So, head to lastcountrysupply.com to shop for our new collection Bulk Up Now. There is no scenario where you will regret being prepared. So, the government alleges that the two of them, maybe with 40A, hatched this plot to bomb the Murrah Building. How did they pay for it? They There's a lot that's missing about the money and nobody ever the investigation never succeeded in following the money in this enormous terrorist attack, which is just remains an unsolved mystery. But, uh because they were both virtually penniless and um Terry Nichols had run up credit card debt and um tried to declare himself exempt from uh tried to give up his citizenship at one point and tried to say none of his credit card debt was valid, but they were scrambling to put together a business because they both were familiar with how the army surplus business works. Um so, they were That was their plan. That was their hope. >> no other, so far as we know, they had no other source of income. That's correct. Now we're getting into the again stuff that doesn't make any sense because I think not to get ahead of the story, but I think Terry Nichols made a number of trips to the Philippines, didn't he? He did. He traveled >> That's about as long a flight as you can take in the world. How do you pay for that? No one knows. >> What was he doing there? No one knows for sure. He married a what a Filipino um and but he didn't take her on all of these trips. Um he the people who investigated later found out that he um reportedly took a bomb building book on one of these trips that a Filipino terrorist turned government informant said that Terry Nichols attended a meeting on one of the islands there with Ramzi Yousef who was plotting a terrorist attack during Nichols' last trip to the Philippines which was in late 1994. That would have been months before the Oklahoma City bombing. So no good answers for how these guys Ramzi Yousef was a World Trade Center bomber. 93 Correct. The first World Trade Center bombing. >> That's correct. Do you Do you think it's possible that Ramzi Yousef met Terry Nichols? Well, that's what this terrorist said claimed had happened. Well, that would just be um given the Earth's population outside the bounds of probability, correct? Correct. >> Random probability. >> Correct. >> Yeah. And it was also known that uh at this boarding house where Terry Nichols made many phone calls in Cebu City. It was It was a hangout for Islamic terrorists. So, there is this very curious, intriguing, but unanswered possibility that Terry Nichols had some connection to that lobe of activity. That would cut against the prevailing story, which was that Terry Nichols and Timothy McVeigh were Christian nationalists, white supremacists. You know, why would a white supremacist Christian nationalist be hanging around with Muslim terrorists in Cebu City, Philippines? Good question. Well, it's a very obvious question, uh but it's a question Again, we're getting to the This is a question that has no answer. Yes. Terry Nichols is in prison. I I I believe you've interviewed him. I have. Has he answered these questions? No. No. Terry Nichols, when um Representative Dana Rohrabacher on in Congress took up this matter and and really pressed, Terry Nichols eventually bailed out of a second interview with the congressman because he said there is no connection between the Philippines, my travel there, and the bombing. So, that was That's Terry Nichols' word on this. >> But Terry Nichols never explained how he afforded to travel as an unemployed person trying to start an Army surplus business to the Philippines multiple times or paid for the Ryder truck and ammonium nitrate. That is right. This just seems Now Now we're getting to like bonkers-level unanswered questions. It's like, what did the feds say about all this? In the indictment, during the trial, did they ever explain the money? No. This trial was basically simplified. It was political ideology. It was Timothy McVeigh, the mastermind. It was McVeigh built the bomb, delivered the bomb. And that was the end of the story. I don't know why I'm laughing. It's um you know, it's uh let me just pause and say parenthetically, if you're just a news a hapless news consumer as I was at the time. I was in the news business, but not covering this, just sort of reading the news every day. It's crazy what they can exclude from the story without you noticing if the story is big enough, loud enough, salacious enough. You don't ask the obvious questions. It's like, how did these two unemployed losers afford this bomb, this truck, this plot? Like, where'd the money come from? So true. It is so true. I've never thought about it till right now. Um Okay, so another dumb question, but what was the point of the bombing exactly in the in the Feds' telling? Like, what did they hope to accomplish by doing this? Did they have a manifesto? Were they starting a group? Were they No manifesto. Again, the the Feds always pointed to McVeigh and his rage at the federal government. His, you know, his rage at Waco, his rage at the overreach of Waco. And remember, this was the Oklahoma City federal building where a lot of agencies had their offices. Not the FBI, but the ATF and DEA and and other federal agencies. So, that was you know, the the theory, the crime theory here is that this was Timothy McVeigh's revenge on the federal government for its overreach at Waco. Did Timothy McVeigh or Terry Nichols ever explain their motives? Terry Nichols basically has always steadfastly said he was that he was the helper here, you know, and got in way over his head and had done things. I mean, Timothy McVeigh made sure that early on that Terry Nichols helped him rob a quarry in Kansas of blasting caps. So, he was you know, he was in up to his neck. He would say, you know, before he even knew it. And then he was helpless to say no to to McVeigh. As to McVeigh, he he his story is the same as the government's that, you know, it's the it's revenge over Waco and the government's overreach and the government's um attempt to take, you know, guns away from people who are entitled to to hold them. So, they steal the blasting caps from a quarry. They assemble an enormous amount of ammonium nitrate fertilizer from ag companies. They they spend many months apparently planning this. The government never offers or even suggests an accounting of how much they spent doing this. Is that correct? >> That's correct. >> They never tell us that. And they basic basically they're saying that Timothy McVeigh did it with the help of Terry Nichols. But by the time the trial comes around, there's there's no hint of a of an accomplice of a John Doe number two, right? That's right. >> Right. So, by this point, are you starting to ask yourself, well, maybe I imagined John Doe number two? Well, there's another there in that first year, Tucker, um there were some other really strong indications that John Doe 2 was real. Um one of them, an extraordinary story, is as you know, grand jury proceedings are completely closed, sealed, and off the record. Inside the McVeigh grand jury, there was a grand juror named Hoppy Heidelberg who was so upset about the way the federal prosecutors were running, managing, steering, and in his opinion rigging that grand jury, that he went rogue. He began complaining to his congressman about the fact that the government was hiding evidence of John Doe 2. He became uh an unnamed source for the Daily Oklahoman newspaper leaking what was going on inside the grand jury. And eventually, after the indictment came down in August of 1995, a couple of months later, he went fully public, wrote Well, he gave an interview. He broke rules which could get him kicked off this grand jury, but he also wrote the judge, the federal judge who was overseeing this grand jury, a letter in which he said the federal government is hiding the identity of John Doe II. The victims of this crime deserve to know who committed this crime, who was really behind this crime. And it's it isn't happening and actually petitioned the judge to impanel a new jury. The judge wrote back in three or four sentences kicking Hoppy Heidelberg off the jury and warning him that if he broke the grand jury rules, he could go to jail. So there were de- there were more details. >> the judge? The judge uh his name was David Russell. And um he was not the judge of the McVeigh trial. >> Right. He was a different judge. >> Presiding over the grand jury. Yes. >> the to produce the indictments. >> Yes. Um but Hoppy Heidelberg, who was the grand juror said he believed the government knew A that John Doe number two existed and B knew his identity. Not that he knew his his identity, but knew he existed and Hoppy Heidelberg told the in the interview with the journalist that he gave, which he was absolutely a violation of the grand jury rules, but he was going rogue. He said for him the red flag of this whole scenario was the was the story the government put out about the soldier Yeah. from uh who who supposedly innocently um happened to be at the Ryder truck rental place. Exactly. Exactly. >> buddy. He said Hoppy Heidelberg said this was the red flag to me. That soldier didn't look anything like the John Doe II sketch. And this was a cover-up. So, one of the reasons that we know, um, that everything you're saying is right, that it was a cover-up, that the government knew that there was a second, um, accomplice terrorist, John Doe number two was real, is because of an incredible story that I had never heard before until someone I know told me it, which is why I wanted to do this interview with you, about a man called Kenneth Trenidad, if I'm pronouncing his name correctly. >> Yes. A construction worker from San Diego. And this is this is all real. This story may be more than other any other I've heard in a long time makes me think, I you know, I'm we have serious problems with our government. This is evil. So, will you tell who was Kenneth Trenidad? Kenneth Trenidad was a construction worker who had, um, in the past, been he he basically had a drug problem, came back from the army in the Vietnam War era, uh, addicted to heroin. He, um, turned to rob robbery to feed his habit, and, um, eventually got arrested for bank robbery. Went to prison, did his time, came out. Uh, he fell had a falling out with his probation officer over whether it was okay for him to drink a beer after a day of hard work. And he was a construction worker? He was a construction worker. The probation officer said the parole officer said no. It was a red line and Kenneth trying to do walked away, stopped making his uh appointed visits with the parole officer. They Nobody was looking very hard for him for 6 or 7 years when >> What was he doing during that period? >> working construction, putting his life back together. He married his long-term girlfriend and in 1995 they were expecting their first child. Um she was Hispanic. They had He had was coming back across the border. Was he involved in Did we know of crime of any kind or was he just a construction worker? Just a He had totally put his life back together. He was totally on the up and up. Um and he uh he he crossed the border from Mexico where he had been visiting his wife's family and he was arrested for the old parole violation. >> Okay. So they just put his name in the computer and bam there was a warrant for the guy and they arrested him. Yes. Is it San Ysidro border crossing in San Diego? Yes. Crossing from Tijuana. Yeah. Yeah. So then what? So okay, so he goes to jail on a parole violation. >> Now a very again uh inexplicable chain of events occurs. I'm sorry, when is this? This is June of 1995. So 2 months after the Oklahoma City bombing. This is the 2 months in which this manhunt for John Doe 2 has been most active. It is now in mid-June at almost exactly the same moment that the government is beginning to back away from the John Doe II story and um support this innocent soldier uh mistaken identity story. It's almost exactly that moment that Kenneth Trinado is arrested. He is a dead ringer look-alike for the John Doe II poster. He's driving the brown truck that John Doe II may have driven. He's got the John Doe He's got the tattoo on his left arm the John Doe II >> like that guy. Yes. Okay. Is there any indication that he was that guy? There there there come to be some strong indications as the investigation unfolds. Um but at that moment uh no. And he he wasn't that guy. But at some point the authorities are holding this guy on a completely unrelated charge and somebody says notices internally, "Wait a second. This guy looks a lot like the John Doe John Doe number two wanted poster." Well, that's what we assume happened. But but what is known to have happened and what is the remarkable chain of events that happened is that Kenneth Trinado now in jail awaiting minor penalty for the probation violation is suddenly moved from San Diego. This is two months later. He He chills in custody for two months. And And then he is suddenly moved to Oklahoma City 1300 miles away. So he's busted just randomly coming across the border from Tijuana visiting his in-laws and then 2 months later he's on a plane on some like federal marshal plane to Oklahoma City. That's exactly what happened and the family couldn't figure out why. They were concerned and suspicious. Um his crimes were all in uh California. His probation officer was in California who presumably would have been a witness at that hearing. Um but Kenneth Trenadue is now in Oklahoma City. And uh just to complete the timing, this is uh approximately 1 week after the indictment came down in the McVeigh case. So he's So clearly the feds think he could be John Doe number two. I mean I think we can assume that. That's a fair assumption. It doesn't make any sense otherwise. He looks just like the wanted poster. They move him to Oklahoma City. They think that this could be John Doe number two. That's a reasonable assumption. >> I can't think of another. What happens to Kenneth Trenadue? Two days after he is moved at 3:00 in the morning Well, first he's moved to a special housing unit for reasons unknown. Uh but he's in solitary confinement in a suicide-proof cell. Two days after he arrives in Oklahoma City, Kenneth Trenadue at 3:00 in the morning is found tortured, bloodied, and supposedly hanging in his cell. His suicide-proof cell. He's dead. He's dead 2 days after getting to Oklahoma City. Um Okay, so it sounds like he was murdered. Yes, it does. What was the condition of his body? Brutalized. Brutalized. Um bloody, uh stun gun-like injuries on his feet, um bruises, lacerations, all the signs of a terrible beating. So he was beaten to death by the feds, it sounds like. It does. However, if I could just complete the picture here of how the family found out about this death, it came as a phone call to uh Mrs. Trinedad, his mother, and it was the associate warden to tell her that her son, Vance Paul Brockway, had killed himself. Well, this wasn't even a name she knew. She said, "I don't have a son named Vance Paul Brockway. I do have a son named Kenneth Trinedad who is in your facility." Once sorted out, um the warden reinforced that this was her son, he was dead, he killed himself, and made a very bizarre offer of free cremation. And Kenneth Trinedad's mother said, "Well, I will have to speak to his wife about that." And the warden said, "Oh, well, he doesn't have a wife." And Mrs. Trinedue said, "Yes, he definitely has a wife. And he has a brother, too, who's a lawyer." So, eventually, this is how Jesse Trinedue comes in to the picture. >> Kenneth's brother. The lawyer. >> Who, unfortunately for the feds, is a high-performing, high-intelligence, very motivated lawyer who wants to find out what happened to his brother. Absolutely. And this is the X factor in this whole story because 99% of the prisoners who run afoul either of each other or the institution do not have families with high-powered lawyers who are intent on finding out what happened. And to your question, Tucker, about what was the state of the body when Jesse called the prison to find out himself what had happened, he the one of the first things he said was, "Do not cremate the body. Send it home. Send Kenneth home for burial." When the casket arrived several days later and the family had the funeral home take the coroner's makeup off Kenneth, that's when they found these injuries. They were concealed uh with under heavy makeup. And that's when the family had to see this for the first time. His throat was slashed, the stun gun-like burns on his feet, the bruising, the lacerations, they discovered it in the funeral home. And Jesse, being a lawyer, hard as that had to have been, took photographs and videotape of the body for evidence. It's very obvious it wasn't a suicide. Very obvious. So, it sounds like what happened was it was a case of mistaken identity. And this guy just got swept into this hysteria, into an FBI investigation, and the feds beat him to death, maybe accidentally, who knows, during questioning. And then try to cover it up. You think that's what happened? I think that's a reasonable assumption. Do you think there's any chance he was John Doe number two? No. No. No, it sounds like. So, um this that's the really the reason that most people know about this story is because of his brother Jesse Trentadue, who just launches into like a multi-year crusade to bring justice. Absolutely. >> Right. And he's the reason there was a FOIA filed to get the videotape of the actual bombings so we could find out who was in the truck with Tim McVeigh. Is that correct? >> Exactly. And how long has that been ongoing? That has been ongoing uh the FOIA was filed in 2008. It went all the way to trial in 2014. The trial was fully finished until its star witness, who an FBI whistleblower, we haven't talked about him yet, um but bailed out of the trial, leading to a long uh and still ongoing conflict over Jesse's allegation of witness tampering against the the FBI. So, bottom line in 30 years, despite lawsuits and trial, the FBI the federal government has never produced this video tape. That's correct. And they're now claiming they they they just don't have it somehow. Right. Yeah, they just don't have it. Right. Right. Yeah. The central piece of evidence in the biggest terror attack, uh they just they just don't have it. Just like they don't they don't actually have the original moon landing footage. They just taped over it cuz they needed the Betamax tapes. They're just out of space. Yeah, you wonder how like why not try harder with the lies? Do you ever wonder about that? If you're going to lie, like at least make them inventive so you don't patronize the person you're lying to. Absolutely. >> Yeah. Um wow. Uh Who do you think John Doe John Doe number two was? I believe John Doe number two was one of the neo-Nazi bank robbers uh that Timothy McVeigh was associated with. Uh that the FBI was chasing him for from the very beginning, though somewhat off the books. They weren't telling the public they were looking for this neo-Nazi bank robbery gang, but they were looking at them. They These investigations were connected. The uh they didn't know who had been robbing the the the bank robbers. To an earlier point of yours, Tucker, about following the money. These The Aryan Republican Army, also known as the Midwest Bank Robbers to the FBI, robbed $250,000 from 22 banks in 1994-95. That would be roughly twice that much in today's dollars. None of the money was ever found by the FBI once they arrested these bank robbers and they got them, you know, deposed them or the they uh um still didn't learn where where the money went, but the one of the leaders of the bank robbery gang did say that he had contributed heavily to white power causes. So, this was um a heavy-duty operation and they were intending to overth- to to to have an insurrection. That was their intent. So, they were they were arrested basically in early 19 uh '96, but no one no one ever connected the dots back to >> I'm a little confused or even more confused because white supremacists, whatever those are, uh were the number one priority of the FBI, have been for decades, decades and decades. They hate them on many levels. And so, you're saying that John Doe number Doe number two was one of these guys, one of these neo-Nazi types? But, they just sort of stopped looking for him and they don't care enough to keep the investigation going into who this person was? Yeah, it just it doesn't uh it doesn't stack. I agree. And um but there there has been a concerted effort to basically wind down the various tentacles of this investigation rather than keeping them going. I would I would say that's fair. >> So, from spending my life in DC, I know that when investigations pull back before achieving their goal, it's 100% of the time because the investigation is revealing wrongdoing on the part of the government. Yes. I mean that I mean that's why That's why it happened. >> That's why they haven't released the tapes from January 6th and never will. Etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. Um so, what do you think the government's wrongdoing in this case might have been? Well, here and and just to backtrack a moment, you asked me who do I think it was? I'm There are I The names are known of this group of, you know, five or six members of the Aryan Republican Army. They're well known. I One of the most remarkable moments of this the Jesse Trinedad investigation comes in uh well, the it begins in 2001 and if this if this is solved, it will be partly owing to Timothy McVeigh who sent Jesse Trinedad who who McVeigh himself was uh engrossed in the Kenneth Trinedad murder because of course, this was a cause célèbre in federal prison, right? Uh this is every prisoner's worst nightmare and the prison slang for it came to be getting Trinedad. That's when the SWAT team comes into your cell in the middle of the night and brutalizes you and kills you. So, that is what is understood in prison as getting Trinitude. Timothy McVeigh and hit from his prison wrote letters to a journalist about the Trinitude case. And so he was obviously interested in it. A few years later, he actually met up with a prisoner um who has played a key role in Jesse's case, who landed on death row with Timothy McVeigh and interviewed him for a book that he published from death row. But the part of the story that's relevant here is that Timothy McVeigh in 2001 asked this death row prisoner, who he knew knew Jesse, "Please tell Jesse Trinitude, this is what happened to Kenneth Trinitude. The FBI mistook him for Richard Guthrie." Richard Guthrie was the co-leader of the Aryan Republican Army gang. So that would be one answer. Did they look alike, Guthrie and Trinitude? >> dead ringer look alike. >> happened to Guthrie? Gu- Guthrie amazingly wound up dead in his federal prison cell. He was prisoner number two. It was uh days after days before he was going to give testimony in another of the bank robbers' trials. It was shortly after he unloaded everything he knew about the insurrection they were planning to the federal prosecutors. So, he had and he told his family that he was looking forward to the future. He was going to give a an interview um reportedly to the LA Times. He had He said he had written a book or and he was writing a a tell-all and all of a sudden from his jail cell in Kentucky he wound up hanging. So, he's the second uh hanging very suspicious hanging death of the second federal prisoner in this story. And there is a third, by the way. Can we just pause on Guthrie for a second? Um it sounds like you don't believe that he he killed himself. Uh why would he have been killed? I mean, the clear motive would be his former compatriots who were mad about his upcoming testimony. Well, he was a federal high-value federal prisoner. He was under the watch of the United States Marshal Service before he and his compatriots went to trial. So, it's hard to imagine and he too was in solitary confinement. So, it's hard to imagine reportedly the the FBI knew was threatening Richard Guthrie with charging him in the bombing. So, they were reportedly very close either either knew or were close to knowing his role in the bombing. Do you I mean, based on your reporting, do you think he was John Doe number two? I think based on my reporting, I think it's either him or another member of the gang who also is a look-alike for I mean, look, we know how these composite sketches goes. They are approximations. Both Guthrie >> just looks like Hollywood thug. You know what I mean? It's like dude. But you can see a bodybuilder type in this, you know, you you you get So, when you ask me, do I think it was Richard Guthrie? I believe that witnesses on the ground that morning saw the men who were with Timothy McVeigh. I believe based on my reporting that those men were members of the Aryan Republican Army. So, I believe Richard Guthrie was there. Um but there was another member of that gang who was reported to be a look-alike for John Doe two. As much of a look-alike as Richard Guthrie. So, it could have been him. But what Again, I just refer back to the government's behavior. They have been intentionally opaque on the subject. They've lied about it. I understand they killed a guy in a case of mistaken identity. I get why they wouldn't want to cop to that. I understand that. Um but why the lack of transparency otherwise? I just don't understand why it wouldn't Like what are they What are they hiding? Well, they're >> pretending there was not a John Doe number two. >> It's a good question and my reporting if I could take us on one one quick detail because it is so incredible here that there is a third prisoner in this situation who winds up in the same death scenario as Guthrie and Kenneth Trina Dew. And that um is a man named Alden Gilles Baker. Baker came forward to Jessie two two or three years after Kenneth's death. Jessie mounted a huge wrongful death lawsuit against the federal government which went to trial in the year 2000. And he was his family was awarded a million dollars by uh it's a civil trial by a judge who couldn't didn't wouldn't um call this a murder. He called he again lack of evidence but he awarded the money based on the wrong the the abuses against the family after the death of the way that the whole Right. death thing was handled. But Kenneth but Alden Gilles Baker while Jessie was preparing for that lawsuit came forward. He was now in a different prison. He was on the cell block with Kenneth Trina Dew. >> is he? Was he an Indian guy too? He no he's he was a suspected serial killer psychotic criminal. He had been in the federal prison system for seven or eight years. Um so he's a a dangerous guy. Uh he he came forward to Jessie and said after what that he said he had witnessed the murder. He said he described the SWAT team coming into Kenneth's cell. He said uh his death lasted about 30 minutes. He heard, you know, struggling, shouting, moaning, and then nothing." And they left the cell, the SWAT team. Returning some hours later, said Baker, to and he could hear It didn't see what happened, but he was hearing. And he heard them tearing up bed sheets, which he took to be they were basically uh staging a hanging. Baker came forward to Jesse a couple of years after while he was preparing for the wrongful death trial, and he was in a new facility. He said, "They loaded me up on drugs and shipped me to a new facility. I want to tell what happened." And Jesse's, in as part of the wrongful death trial, took a deposition of Alden Gillis Baker with what I've told you here from from his account. And he would have been a a star witness at this trial. Uh he started receiving threats. He was in a California prison. He started receiving threats from fellow inmates. He He begged the prosecutor to protect him. And um the prosecutor refused. And Jesse uh petitioned the court for a protective order for Alden Baker, which was never answered. And in August of 2000, 2 months before the trial opened, Alden Gillis Baker was found hanged in his cell. So, that's how Jesse lost the star witness to Kenneth Trina Dew's murder. That's unbelievable. Um can I just go back to Tim McVeigh for a moment and clear something up that I have read, don't know if it's true. So, there was um a psychiatrist, a contract employee of the CIA for many decades called Louis Jolyon West Jolly West um who was you know, one of the people who conducted experiments with LSD and other drugs on unsuspecting civilians. One of the darkest people in the 20th century American history. Also the person who declared um who declared Lee Harvey Oswald's assassin uh Jack Ruby Jack Ruby mentally ill, visited him in the in in lockup in Dallas, etc. etc. Clearly sent to do that. So, he's a super dark guy. I have read that he visited Tim McVeigh in jail. Is that true? >> You know, Tucker, I've seen that reference, too, but no more than you do I know. I I don't know that it's true or not. Okay, cuz if we ever find out that's true then it's just it is worth overthrowing the US government at that point cuz it's just like they're not even trying to hide it from us at the Um okay, so you don't know if that's true. I don't know. To your point, uh I did take us on that detour, but I think you'll agree it was an amazing detour, but a lot of suicides in this case. Yes, three three prisoner uh unexplained deaths, let's say. Um but you had asked Well, the kind of people who commit violent crimes don't typically kill themselves, I'm just saying. Like I think there's there's data on this. Um you know, the kind of people who kill themselves are like you know, sad women, accountants whose wives leave them. That's more the profile. It's not, you know, bodybuilders who are also rapists. They They kill other people, not themselves. So, uh it's even more unusual, I think, among that population. Just saying. Right? Absolutely. And as And we might add as a curiosity to the Trinedude hanging suicide. Hangings are generally bloodless affairs or nearly so. But the orderly who found Kenneth Trinedude and had to clean up the cell, not found him, was assigned to clean up the cell, described it as a bloodbath. He had to clean up the blood with a mop. Yeah. What do we know about Tim McVeigh's contact with uh the federal government? Like he obviously served US Army. Um but I seem to recall a letter that he wrote his sister in which he refers to contact with the intel services. Yes. Yes. And you would I'm I did lead us astray and you would asked, you know, what what was going on here with with McVeigh and the federal government. McVeigh told the story at least three places. One being the the letter to the sister. He told the story of It's a shocking um claim. So, I'll I'll pause a moment here. But Timothy McVeigh, while in on death row, being interviewed by that death row prisoner who I mentioned, Timothy McVeigh claimed that he operated in the Oklahoma City bombing not as a terrorist, but as an undercover federal operative. That he was basically recruited during his military service in Iraq. Um, he told the story slightly different ways, but to the death row inmate who wrote the memoir and published this story, um, McVeigh said that he was recruited into an unspecified defense department operation, domestic surveillance operation. He gave I interviewed three prisoners. That was, you know, once I became involved in in this investigation for Jesse's FOIA case, not the not the, um, videotapes case, but the a previous FOIA. I interviewed David Hammer, Terry Nichols, and Peter Langan, who is the co-leader of the Aryan Republican Army. So, uh, but back to what McVeigh told He told the death row inmate that he was undercover for a an unspecified defense department operation. He told Terry Nichols. This is what Nichols told Jesse and me on in Supermax. He told us that Timothy McVeigh let slip that he was undercover for the FBI. He told his sister that he had been recruited for, um, he had been recruited during that uh tryout for the special operations. Essentially, that scenario would be he didn't wash out of special operations. He basically joined this new uh unit. But, he he told her that he was going to be doing domestic operations. And as a matter of fact, in 1998, the New York Times published that letter not with much context, but yes, McVeigh made these claims after his trial. Never mentioned them at trial. Never mentioned them at trial. No. This is speculation, but what why would what would Tim Mc- Timothy McVeigh's motive be for you know, carrying out this terror attack at the behest of the feds? Their motive would be a little bit clearer, which would be like prove that there really is a domestic terror threat from white right-wingers. Um something they've been working on for a long time. But, what would his motive be in staying quiet about that? Like, why wouldn't he say, "Yeah, I was part of this at trial and like I'm not going to, you know, I'm not going down for this. I was asked to do it." Well, one explanation might be that he became radicalized during just like a lot of people during Ruby Ridge, Waco, um you know, that he was a he was at the at the point of this operation deeply conflicted over what it was he was doing. Yeah. add one more source, No, that's fair. It radicalizes me hearing about it. Got to be honest, it does. Well, there's one more source which I haven't seen. This story does have uh three or four just superb researchers who have dedicated decades to trying to figure out what happened here. And one of them wrote a book. She researched through the Texas University of Texas library that has the McVeigh's attorney, Stephen Jones, uh donated his papers to. And she has uncovered um documents from his original attorneys. He was given a public defender, McVeigh was, right away. And they've immediately started trying to get out of that case because they were so conflicted. I mean, their friends had been, you know, injured. Their the courthouse was damaged. They were freaked out. But he did have a brief period with them until they could find, you know, hand him off to Stephen Jones, in which um he told them that he had been working This would have been his first representation to his first lawyer. >> Before trial? >> Significant Yeah, before and before the preliminary hearing. I mean, in within hours and days of the bombing. And he told his first lawyers that he had been a government operative. And he said that um he was shocked at the damage done by the bomb. As if he had been there to uh create a demonstration it with his truck in the road, not destroy the whole building. I say as if I don't know that, but his What I do know is that he told them he was shocked at the level of damage that was done. Wow. Do you think it's plausible that he was telling the truth? I Well, let's go back to another question of yours, which is, you know, what was going on here? Why why is the government covering this up? And I can just tell you that it appears, based on other revelations that have come to to Jesse Trinidad, cuz he's been the engine of this investigation. This whole investigation, Jesse, um, that you know, there's there's evidence that the government had Timothy McVeigh under surveillance before this attack. And this evidence comes from an FBI whistleblower. There are a lot of Marines in this story, by the way, and there's a lot of Marines do or die in this story. Um, Jesse being one, and John Matthews, who is this FBI whistleblower, being another. And that, you know, uh, brotherhood kind of clearly motivated Matthews to come forward to Jesse in 2011 in Salt Lake City and tell the story. It's It's an untold story because it's been suppressed first by the defense by the Justice Department bearing down on Newsweek magazine, which was going to publish the story of Matthews work for the FBI in a undercover program called PATCON, short for Patriot Conspiracy, in the 1990s, before before and after covering before and after the Oklahoma City bombing, which was a sweeping infiltration program. Matthews was a Vietnam vet and went to Nicaragua with the, you know, the Iran-Contra operation. I mean, to train the and um now found himself in PATCON. And it was, as he told Jesse on the phone, much bigger and uglier than you can imagine. I want to tell you about this. He was alienated by this program because he said it was inciting the violence that it was supposed to be preventing. So, he and he was with PATCON for like 8 years. So, long answer to your question, what could have been going on here? Uh Matthews believe So, from his knowledge of PATCON, Matthews told Jesse first that he believed PATCON was um he believed Oklahoma City was a PATCON operation. He denied working the operation. He was based in Arizona, but Arizona is another lobe of the McVeigh, the run-up to the bombing. McVeigh stayed and lived in Kingman, Oklahoma Kingman, Arizona, and Michael Fortier lived in Kingman, Arizona. Uh but but back to what John Matthews knew. The whistleblower. The whistleblower and the potential here for the FBI having had McVeigh under surveillance is that Matthews told Jesse that he saw Timothy McVeigh with another member of this uh let's say at least satellite member of this Aryan Republican Army group. Not a member of the gang, but uh one of them. Uh he saw the McVeigh together with that guy at a military training in San Saba, Texas in 1994. He was working Pat Con surveillance at the time. So, we know that Pat Con surveilled McVeigh months before the bombing. And there are many other So, why didn't they stop it? They They didn't stop it. They tried to stop it. The feds? Yeah. Yeah. >> How did they try and stop it? >> Well, they Uh all the evidence the best evidence and I have to just say best evidence um is that they had McVeigh under surveillance. That there was a transponder on the bomb truck. Something happened. Some >> transponder on the bomb truck? >> There's evidence of that, yes. Um Like a federal transponder? Like they were following him? Yes. Tracking him? >> Yes. Uh that's best evidence that they I'm sure the government will say no, we didn't, but um a member of this I haven't said the words Elohim City, but this is the location where the Aryan Republican Army hung out, hid out in eastern Oklahoma. Um one of those um guys who may very well be I've I've given you a lot of names today, Tucker, so I'm trying to to to winnow the names. Uh but he may well have been an another informant. I I His name is Andreas Strassmeir. He's a German national. He was in the country illegally on an expired visa. He's got a lot of uh heavy German political pedigree and intelligence training and was out front fomenting this let's blow up federal buildings out of this enclave called Elohim City in eastern Oklahoma. S- After the bombing, he went back to Germany, and since then he has been had the odd practice of basically issuing insider knowledge about how the bombing really went down. He was one who said, "Yes, the truck had a trans-" He seems to know the truck had a transponder on it. >> been charged? Never been charged. Andreas Strassmeir is in Elohim City, which is where all these Aryan would-be terrorists supposedly are planning the bombing of various federal buildings including the OKC one. And the bombing comes off, biggest manhunt in history, and he just goes back to Germany and he's fine and no one ever goes after him legally? That's right. How does that work? >> Imagine how many leads I think it was I don't know, 25,000 or something uh that the FBI was pursuing during the biggest manhunt in history. And you know which led them to like elementary school teachers of Timothy McVeigh and others. >> It's exactly >> somehow Andreas Strassmeir was never interviewed. And there are there are markings and it's and it can be reasonably assumed that Andreas Strassmeir may have been an undercover informant. So >> Well, I mean, I'm you know, don't want to speculate or anything, but it seems entirely possible. Coming from his you know political pedigree in Germany, the intelligence training, um his uh patron in Washington D.C., an Air Force colonel who was believed to have, you know, worked for the CIA. Um he he has all of those uh all of those traits. And and which I'm I must introduce one more character here. It turns out during a couple of years after the bombing and and as a matter of fact on the eve of Timothy McVeigh's trial this you know, let's remember one of the lessons of this story is just the uncuriosity of the national news media. They were taking their spoon-fed story from the DOJ in Washington, D.C. while this Oklahoma news reporter was beating the bushes and he found his name is J.D. Cash. He's one of the heroes of this story and became very close to Jessie. Um he found an undercover informant whose name was Carol Howe who was embedded inside the bomb plot for eight months in the run-up to the Oklahoma City bomb. >> plot. Correct. This she was embedded at Elohim City in Eastern Oklahoma, the hideout of the Aryan Republican Army where Andreas Strassmeir was the militia leader the paramilitary trainer and she told the FBI afterward Well, she told her handlers during the run-up before the bombing. This is why the the the survivors of the victims who know about this are so outraged. She told of his you know, in late September, October Strassmeir said, "It's time to stop talking and start blowing up federal buildings. And he took and she went along on at least one and maybe as many as three these apparently scouting missions to Oklahoma City. Oklahoma City was on the short list of targets. One you know, as well as two buildings in Tulsa. But um yes, she told them that he was planning this you know, that that that there was going to be a bombing and it might be the federal building in Oklahoma City. So and they knew this the FBI now she was an informant for the ATF, not the FBI. But the FBI debriefed her right after the bombing. >> And she was never charged? She was charged not she was charged in reprisal basically for going public about this afterwards. What would she have been uh she what were you thinking she would be charged with? Well, I mean she was an accessory to the to the bombing it sounds like. >> She was an informant. Yes, but she was also of course she was she was but I mean like strictly speaking she was part of the plotting, correct? She no, she was she was an observer. She was an observer. Uh I have a theory of this case and I want to throw it out um to you against your superior knowledge. But before I do that, can we just pull back and assess the political effects of all of this for a second? Yes. So Oklahoma City happens in April of 1995. Clinton is totally focused on his re-election at that point. Um things are about to get super crazy things are about to get really crazy in his life with the Monica Lewinsky stuff and there's just a lot going on in America at this point and Clinton's worried about it. He's unpopular. Oklahoma City happens. What happens to Bill Clinton's political career? This saved his political career. He was, you know, I mean everybody remembers him as the great comforter in chief going to Oklahoma City and in a, you know, almost ministerial way. >> Right. You know, uh comforting the victims and um then uh it was possible to, you know, pass in Washington they could pass new legislation. The FBI's budget was increased to, you know, uh prevent to, you know, yeah, prevent terrorist attacks. I mean, it was, you know, it was the beginning of uh it wasn't we saw this after 9/11. Um but yes, it it was a great boon for the the Clinton presidency. >> And as you said, it was a great boon for federal law enforcement who got more money and more power. Yes. But the irony is just just like the FBI and CIA got more money and more power after 9/11 which they allowed to happen, obviously. I mean, they whether they allowed it to happen or not on purpose, but it happened on their watch. They were paid to prevent it from happening. It happened anyway, but they got richer and more powerful as a result. Their screw-up helped them. Absolutely. And that's true here as well. Absolutely. Amazing. So, here's my theory. My theory is that the federal various agencies, ATF, FBI, maybe maybe others were um fully aware that this plot was in progress. They may or may not have wanted it to happen, probably not at the scale it actually did happen, who knows. Um they weren't fully in charge of it, but they knew that it was going on, and they thought they could kind of fine-tune it. They couldn't. Um it went off, it killed a lot of people, and then they just kind of made the best of it from there, hid their own involvement in it, wound up murdering a guy, hid that. Um their number one goal was to protect themselves, their number two goal was to infiltrate white supremacist groups. Um and none of this has come out really to the public, despite a number of books, first and foremost yours, and the efforts of Jesse Trentadue, because the American news media is totally vested in denying any of this, and pretending that the real threat is these fringe groups. That's my theory. Absolutely, Tucker. You think that's right? >> I do. I do. And um this story is such it's so much about the failure of the news media, and and and how they had 30 years to ask the hard questions about Oklahoma City, and instead, they actually helped bury this story along with the victims of the bombing. I just a couple of instances of this, and I mean uh in the in the cuz it's been a long investigation, but literally, in 1997, on the eve of the Timothy McVeigh trial, at this time when the Oklahoma journalist discovered the informant, ABC deployed uh a a team to to get that story, to get the Carole Howe story. And they did. With the help of JD Cash, the Oklahoma journalist, they got it in the can. And the day of air, the the Department of Justice bore down on the ABC network, and they killed the story. Was it a Jackie Judd story, do you know? No, it was a um Tom Jarriel. Wow. Yeah. And Tom Jarriel afterwards told the producer, who's one of Jesse's crew, um another Marine, told him that in all his career, he had never seen anything like this, that they were totally blindsided. And Roger, being a Marine, his producing partner knew that he was tight with Colonel David Hackworth, who is was Newsweek's military affairs correspondent. He said, "Call Hack. See if you can get yourself on the Don Imus show." So, this story that was rolled by ABC News was broken by Roger on Don Imus's radio show in New York City. >> Right, which is a great way to bury and discredit true things. Roll them out on Don Imus, you know, no one will pay you know, people sort of what? And then move on to something else. But then again, uh however many years later, uh 13, 14 years later, they had this another chance to bring this to the national media when Jesse set John Matthews up with the whistleblower. The whistleblower, John Matthews, up with Newsweek for a cover story. And at the time, and I I'm sure you know John Solomon, John Solomon was the editor on that story. And they got everything in the can, including their reporting confirmed that Andreas Strassmeir, the German that the FBI never interviewed, that he was a an undercover operative working for Pat Con. So, Did that Did that run? No. Uh none of that information ran. Because just as back in 1997, the Department of Justice bore down on Newsweek magazine and its editor Tina Brown, and the night before the story aired, every detail, including uh as I told you, the sighting by John Matthews in San Saba, Texas, all gone, all removed. >> Why did Tina Brown make that decision, so far as you know? As far I I >> Somebody at the publication made that decision. Why would >> edit. >> Right. If it was Tina Brown, I don't I used to work for Tina Brown. I I would be sad to hear that. That's pretty craven. I would not be surprised in the slightest, but I would be sad. I don't know that, but it sounds like somebody made that decision. So, why would a news organization cave to the DOJ on something like that? I don't really understand. Well, perhaps by threats. I mean, the I didn't hear any >> profanity comes immediately to mind. I mean, if I got a call from DOJ saying, "You can't say that." Um >> In In the first case, I did hear an explanation from Roger Charles who worked on that story that was killed. And he said, um that the principals were calling. This is what uh you know, uh the the network and what was said was, "If this story runs, it will be the end of the ATF and there will be machine guns on every corner." And that was enough for the executives in New York to say, "We can't go there." >> Right. So, it's going to get in the way of gun control. So, don't do it. There's there's a there's a a larger goal here. Which is disarming the population. Okay, whatever you want. Right. No, it's it's uh I Yeah, I mean, we could do hours cuz you spend a life in the media as I have and just the corruption of it is just be it's beyond belief. Um but everyone knows that. I guess what I would say is that by not covering stories like this, you allow new ones to occur. So, this was 1995, then you have 2001, 9/11. You have 20 21, January 6th. Both you know, filled those stories the stories we were presented on television are just not true. And um and the government involved in really sinister ways in both. And a lot of others. I mean, in between. The Gretchen Whitmer assassination attack where like everybody involved seemed to be a fed. That's a huge alignment to that story and I would mention one more, Tucker. Um which was new to me as I researched is that uh the Boston Marathon bombing has spun out uh a whole spiral of possibilities that the older brother, the one who was killed, um was an FBI undercover operative and um there's a a book written about that and Dana Rohrabacher, the same congressman who tried to look >> County, California. Yes. Yes. Uh he pressed with a house investigation into the Oklahoma City bombing and the possible German connections. I mean, looking among other things at Andreas Strassmeir, he continued to look at this same picture after the Boston Marathon bombing and um just faced stonewalling from some of the same people. I mean, Janet Napolitano, who was involved in the Oklahoma City bombing case, was was one of the ones stonewalling him. Um and uh Robert Mueller, who uh of course was involved in, you know, Jesse's case, um trying to get justice for Kenneth on Capitol Hill. That's another whole story. But um yes, to your point about what has happened since the bombing because since the Oklahoma City bombing because we don't know what really happened and the potential for this creeping surveillance cancer that seems to, you know, attach to so many of these terrible events where we still don't fully understand what happened. Just one last question. So, now Pam Bondi's the Attorney General, Kash Patel runs FBI, then Bunch you know, right beneath him. I mean, there people who say they're reform-minded. I think Bunch you know, is reform-minded for the record. But um but you know, there are people of good faith, I think, in positions of authority in federal law enforcement now. What should they immediately declassify, disclose, stop efforts to hide about the Oklahoma City bombing 30 years ago that could resolve all these questions? Like, what should we know that we don't? Release the videotapes of the bombing. Let America see this movie. Um as well, and maybe just as important, maybe more important, and Jesse has a letter on Attorney General Bondi's desk as of March, which says, "Stop the DOJ resistance to unsealing the FBI whistleblowers deposition." Uh this is where potentially he laid out the entire scope of the PATCON program, which nobody knows about. On the record, the FBI will say, "Oh, PATCON was just this little operation we had. Just lasted for 2 years, and it was just targeting three uh extremist right-wing groups." No, John Matthews, their top spy, says, "I worked PATCON for 8 years, and I infiltrated 22 groups." And he says PATCON was run out of the White House, and PATCON was even involved in Waco, and PATCON was a precursor to Fast and Furious that included uh gun walking, illegal ammunition and gun sales. Uh you know, it was a it was an octopus of a surveillance program. And that was 19 that was the 1990s and the lid has been kept on it while all these other things happened that we are talking about and perhaps might have been prevented. It'd be interesting on what's going on now. I mean, as someone who's been in you know, around right-wingers his whole life, I don't know a lot of potential bombers, you know, not kind of that that sort of right-winger, but you wonder how many people I mean, if the government has decided that everyone to the right of Chuck Schumer is a security risk like and they have. Anyone who opposes our program is a security risk. Anyone who's on on board with totally destroying the country is our enemy. And that's their view for sure. Then you wonder how many people they are collecting information from, how many people they are sending money to, how many people are in effect federal informants at some level at some time in their lives. I did some research on this for the last chapter of the book and I'm >> I can think of a few, by the way. I've always wondered, people I know personally. Like what is what is that person? >> It's a staggering prospect and the the the latest stats that I heard was that on any given day the FBI has 15,000 informants out there working um and they're spending like over 40 million dollars a year on this and and think about what it is their their frontline jobs bad enough like betraying their families, friends, and work associates, but then to complete their projects, they're committing crimes and sometime and their managers are looking the other way and nobody seems to be keeping tabs on this, which has definitely uh increased exponentially since 9/11. >> Has there been any reform at all in the past 6 months that you've noticed? Cuz I haven't noticed any reform at all. >> No. And we we both know that again, it's the slow walk, the allegation uh from the January 6th detainees is that that that there was a heavy uh infiltration by the federal government and this has been batted around Capitol Hill now. >> we get an answer? Uh Chuck Grassley and uh someone else have have a letter now on the desk of >> Why should they have a letter? I mean, Republicans control the Department of Justice, so I don't understand what the motive is uh here. I mean, you know. Well, this could be >> info How many federal law enforcement officials and or informants were in the crowd on on January 6th? Simple question. Like Why can't we get that answered? I don't understand it. It's not enough to pardon people. It's like, what the hell just happened? And what are they doing now? And why can't I know? I live here. I'm a citizen. No? Do you feel the frustration? >> Absolutely. And maybe this is the answer to your question. What can Attorney General Bondi's Department of Justice do right now? Well, answer that question. Yep. I really appreciate you taking all this time. It's an amazing story. If you had told me 2 years ago that there was something weird behind Oklahoma City A, I would have been really surprised, but it turns out everything about it was weird. Tucker, thank you. >> murdered a guy and got away with it. At least one. Thank you very much. My pleasure. So, it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising, that's what they do, but on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics, with the wars on the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it, that's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google, or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So, we hope that you'll do that.