Good morning, welcome. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night, all day. Pleasure to meet you. I've really enjoyed your conversations online. I love your perspective. And it's really a real pleasure to have you in here. Well, I really am happy to be here with you. Thank you. My pleasure. This book, The Myth of Normal. This is your book. Yeah, it's called The Myth of Normal. Toronto, illness, and healing in a toxic culture. And it kind of sums up everything I've ever learned. What exactly is toxic about our culture? Is that a too big question? No, it's the central question. If you imagine your microbiologist in a laboratory growing microorganisms in a petri dish, that's called a culture. You put in a brew with the right nutrients, and the microorganisms thrive in my multiply. But if a lot of them start getting sick, and a lot of them start dying, you'd say this is a toxic culture. Now, if you look at what happening in North America now, there's an article in the New York Times, 10 days before we speak, of a teenager being on 10 different psychiatric medications, 10 different psychiatric medications. More and more kids are being diagnosed with ADHD, with anxiety, with depression, the rate of childhood suicide is going up, and they're being saying, what's going on here? Why is this going on? More and more people getting autoimmune disease, mental health issues, the overdose crisis in the states, over 100,000 people died of overdoses. Either we assume that these are all accidents and sort of blows of misfortune, or we get that there's nothing about this culture that's fermenting so much illness. 70% of American adults are on at least one medication. 70, 70, yeah. 50% 40% are on about two at least. That's a toxic culture. There's all kinds of, now I could talk about what makes it that way, but when I talk, I talk to a culture, I'm talking about its impact on the people who inhabit it. So this toxic culture, are you just talking about the overall way human beings communicate? Is it the way we're being raised? Is it the foods we eat? Is it everything? It's all done. It's all. And salient amongst them, how do you raise our kids? What about how we raise our kids? Well, if you look at how human beings evolved over millions, really, of years, and hundreds of thousands of years, and even our own species has been on the earth for about 150, 200,000 years. For all that time, until the blink of an eye will, we lived out in nature in small band hunter-gatherer groups with kids who raised the community. So that wasn't just an isolated nuclear family, or isolated mother of father, who was grandparent and uncle's and aunts and a whole community. It takes a village as the same goes. It takes a whole community. Now, children also were picked up when they cried. In fact, they were never even put down. They slept with the parents. They were breastfed for three or four years. In today's society, and I could start even before that, already we know that stress is on a pregnant woman who has a negative impact on the infant. Physical impact on the infant's brain development. It's not even controversial. In our society, we don't pay attention to women's emotional needs of an pregnant, and we don't pay attention to the child's emotional needs. So the child needs to be held and accepted unconditionally. Now, in our society, we actually tell parents not to pick up the kids when they're crying. Yeah. And that is an insult and a trauma to the child. And that has a impact on the child's trust in the world, sense of safety, sense of belonging, how they feel about themselves. You know, in a book I talk about my mom, and I talk about my own infancy in Budapest, Hungary, as a Jewish infant other than Nazis. So you can imagine how stressed my mom was. But forget the Nazis for a minute. I read her diary and she writes, this is when I'm two weeks of age. And we're in the maternity hospital. And she says, my poor little guy, or my heart is breaking for you, because you want to be fed and you're hungry. But I promise the doctor I would only feed you every four hours. And you've been crying for the last hour and a half. What's it like for an infant to lie there next to their mom and not be picked up and fed for an hour and a half? Now, try telling a mother baboon or a mother cat or a mother bear to ignore the child's distress for an hour and a half. So the very advice that give you a gift a lot of parents these days already damages the child. Where was that advice coming from? Like who are the experts that thought it was a good idea to not pick up children when they're crying? It's been going on for about 100 years. It may be even longer. Dr. Spock, I don't know if you remember the name Benjamin Spock. His book was just the most influential, parenting Bible for decades, to the 50s and the 60s and the 70s. And he talked about the tyranny of the baby and he wants to be picked up. He says, well, how you deal with that is you walk out and you shut the door and you don't go back. In other words, you isolate the infant. Now, look at how hunter-gatherers, raise their shoulders, they carry their babies everywhere. And I know three woman months who told me in our community, kids weren't even allowed to touch the ground for two years. They're just held all the time. So it's modern life. It's the pressure and stresses of modern life acting on parents. That makes it so difficult for them to really be there for their kids. Now, my mother's heart was breaking. She went against their own instincts to follow the doctor's advice. Again, you tell a mother rat or a mother baboon. Do you know where the baby cries? And you find out what mother rage is all about. And what does this effect of not holding babies and not comforting them when they cry? What does this have on the child? Well, let's see. You're my friend. And you come to me for help. As an adult, and I ignore you, what's the impact on you? What are you going to believe? I don't know. I mean, if you ignore me, I'm going to take into account what the rest of the world says. You might, but what would you believe what my attitude towards you? I would think you're ambivalent. Yeah. And I don't care. Exactly. That's exactly the impact on the child. Not consciously, but unconsciously, the child makes the assumption that there's something wrong with me. I'm not lovable. The world is an unsafe place. Because we learn about our worlds through how we interact with our caregivers. That's the template. I mean, if you have raised a puppy dog, you know that how you treat that little infant animal has a huge impact on what kind of a creature they're going to develop into, well, human beings are the same. In fact, even more so. Because we're more dependent and more helpless than the average animal is. So we need that care and that connection even more powerfully. So when we're lacking it, the infant assumes unconsciously that there's something wrong with them. Then I love all the world is not the trusting place. Then we spend our lives acting out from that unconscious belief. So the majority or a large portion of our culture develops as a child with this problem. In this world, yes. In this world very much. So then there is the, like if you look at what the, what a psychologist friend of mine calls, the irreducible needs of children. Irreducible meaning that if you don't meet these needs, this is going to be negative consequences. The first one is unconditional loving acceptance. Just a sense of belonging, attachment. It's called connection. The infant needs that. You know how baby elephant is born? When the mother elephant goes into labor, all the mother elephants stand around in the circle. When the infant plops on the ground, they already shot their trunks and they stroke the infant. That's natural instinct. You belong to us. You're welcome here. Now, the human infant needs that at least as much as the baby elephant. Now, so the first need is this unconditional loving welcome in the world. The second need of the child is that the child should not have to work to be loved, to be accepted. I shouldn't have been pretty, smart, successful, compliant, good, nice, anything. I'm just, I shouldn't have to work for what is my birthright, which is to be accepted as a person with value and worth and loveable in their own rights. That's the second, another third need is the freedom to experience all our emotions. Okay, all our emotions. Now, our brains have emotional circuits for rage, which we need to protect ourselves. For lust, which we need to reproduce, for seeking curiosity to explore and get to the lower world. One of the, and this other emotional circuits as well, for care, so that we can look after each other. These are circuits that were nature, evolution as a virus, but this has been studied. Now, so one of the needs we have is the freedom to experience all our emotions, all our emotions, our gut feelings and everything else. A lot of parenting experts will tell you an angry child should be made to sit by themselves so they come back to normal. According to a very famous person here, a psychologist who said this in his book, an angry child should be made to sit by themselves so that they come back to normal. No, what's the message to the child? Anger is not normal. If you wanna belong to us, you have to suppress your anger. Now, the suppress in the anger is at trauma because anger is given to us by nature as a natural boundary defense. If I enter your space in a way that threatens you, you better get anger with me, get out. That's healthy anger. If I suppress that, if I depress it, push it down. 30 is later, your diagnosis with this disease called depression. It's not a disease. It was your response to the stupid advice of the parenting experts that your mothers and your fathers believed they should follow. It's a coping mechanism. You push on the anger to be accepted by your environment, but later on that causes your problems, mental health issues and physical health issues. So when I'm talking about irreducible needs, I'm talking about real needs in the society. Parents are told to keep ignoring their own parenting instincts, to make the child behave the way they expect them to behave and the result is a lot of kids are hurt without pant, meaning to hurt them. They love their kids, they do their best. But because of this culture, they actually end up hurting the kids. So this is standard in America. Pretty much. And you feel like this is the base of this host of psychological problems. Well, I wouldn't want to put everything down to just one dynamic, but it certainly what happens to children in the first three years is a huge template for problems later on. And once a child develops and becomes an adult and has all these issues that are connected to the way they were raised, what can be done then? Well, that's where the process of healing has to begin. And by the way, okay, let me deal with the question. What can be done then? Well, the first thing we have to do is to recognize what's going on. That would happen to me. Like if I can talk about my own example. Okay. So medical doctor, I mean my 40s successful physician, newspaper columnist respected good income and all that. But I'm a workaholic. I have to be working. If I'm not working, I'm kind of depressed and alienated. Which is how my family experiences me, including my young kids. But why am I that way? Because as a Jewish infant under the Nazis, the measure that God is that the world didn't want me. Now, not because the Nazis directly affected me as an infant, although we lived under Nazi occupation in my first year of life. So my mother was, her life was on the daily threat. In the book, there's a painting of my mother and I with her around the yellow star. When I was 11 months old, she handed me the complete stranger in the street to save my life. Embooded a pest. I stood on that very pavement, just a couple of months ago when I visited my birth city. So she gives me the total stranger to convey me to some relatives in hiding because she thinks where we're living, I'm not going to survive another day. So she does this to save my life. But what message do I get? I don't know that there are Nazis. I don't know that members passing me on to a stranger to save my life. What sense do I get? I'm being abandoned. I'm not wanted. I'm not lovable. Well, if you're not lovable, if you're not wanted, one of the things you can do is to go to medical school, because now they're going to want you all the time. And every day you get to prove to yourself how important you are and how much they want you, and how essentially you are to everybody's life. What message do my kids get? When that is not around all the time. Or when he's around, he's kind of in withdrawal from alcoholism. They get the same message. So we pass it on. This is what trauma is we pass it on on waiting me for one generation to the next. And we don't even know what we're doing it. I didn't know what it was doing it. So when you say how do we, at some point you have to say, so there I'm in the successful doctor, calmness and so on, but I'm depressed. At some point I have to start asking, and my kids are afraid of me. I have to start asking myself, what's going on here? Why is this tension in my family? Why are my wife and I, I believe in together at this point, 54 years coming this November, but when our kids were small, we had a very tense marriage. And I have to start asking myself, what's going on? And that's when you start looking for the answers. So the first thing is we have to recognize that the way it is, is not working, and maybe it doesn't have to be this way. So how did you go about shifting the way you think about your life and the world, and being a workaholic, and becoming what you feel? Like, do you feel like now you're a healthy person? You should ask me that relatively. You should ask me that on my deathbed, okay? Because then I'll give you the final answer. But, well right now, I feel right now. I've come a long way. I'm much more balanced. I'm not 100% there, I'm not. Like what's missing? Every once in a while when I get triggered, I still can behave like I had never learned anything at all. You know, sometimes when you're triggered, you're the circuits in your brain that can regulate you and guide you, ground you, go offline. I can still go offline sometimes. But much less than I ever used to, and I come back to granted and that's much more rapidly. I also have learned how to take care of myself. You know, but I've done a lot of work to sort out all the traumas that I experienced as a child. So it's been taken a lot of work. And what kind of thing really triggers you? Hmm. When I'm not understood, when I'm not understood, when I'm not seeing, when I'm, when I perceive as myself as not being respected for who I am. And I don't mean respect for what I do. I mean, respect it for, because I mean, people can disagree with what I do. And I don't take that as a sign of disrespect. It's just disagreement. But when I'm not respected just for who I am, as a person, as a human being. So if someone insults you or someone dismisses you or treats you like shit. Very often they can see that as their problem. They're projecting something on me. I'm sure you've had the same extra. In fact, I know you had, because I saw you into you with Lex Friedman. Mm-hmm. And he talked about how you handled the negative vibes that come your way sometimes. So sometimes I can see that as their issue. But if I'm politically vulnerable, maybe stressed, maybe I hadn't taken care of myself. Maybe I haven't swamped for a few days. So my nervous system is on edge. Then maybe I can take it personally. And then I can get triggered. That seems like one of the best forms of medicine. Some sort of rigorous exercise. You don't want to talk to me if I haven't swamped for a couple of days. Swimming is your thing. That's my thing. That's a great one. Yeah. It's a great one, because it's physically exhausting. It's the muscles, the cardiovascular system. The mind gets in that meditative state of constantly stroking, constantly kicking. And you have to breathe, don't you? It's like a... Yeah. And so I do that 50 minutes an hour a day. And that makes a huge difference for me. And when you do that, do you do it with the intent of enjoying it? Or do you do it saying that this is the necessary work I have to do? Or is it a combination of both? From its enjoyable. I love, I look forward to stretching what my body in the pool and just getting that rhythm as you say, going, getting the breathing going. And just notice the thoughts. Oh, next week I'm going to be on Joel Rogan. And notice that those thoughts come and go. But not stay with them. Just watch the video in my mind as I swim. Yeah. So you recognized at... How old were you when you recognized that you really had a problem? I would say I was in my early 40s. Early to mid 40s, I would say. So what were the first steps that you did to try to come out of that? And just evolve your process. Yeah. I will answer that. But I have to tell you as well that this is not separate from my medical work either. Because in my medical practice, I began to notice that who got sick and who didn't was an accidental. There were certain traumatic imprints in people who got physically ill and mentally ill, who got addicted and so on. So what I saw in medical practice kind of melded with what I experienced in my own life. So my steps were both to start talking to my patients and to find out about their lives. And I began to see the commonalities amongst people, including myself and my patients, doesn't matter how addicted or how ill they were. There was always something about them that I could recognize in myself. And I began to go to therapy. And I began to really research the child developmental and trauma literature and the more I date, the more I learn. So then eventually like you, I got into psychedelic workers or all that didn't happen till much later. But it was all that. And what psychedelic work did you do? And how did that help you? How did that happen? So my book on addiction in the realm of hungry ghosts, close encounters with addiction, was published in 2009 in Canada and in 2010 in the States. In which I point out that addiction is always, always, always rooted in trauma. Always. What about genetics? Do they play a factor? Or is the genetics just related also to trauma? Well, here's the interesting thing about genetics. You know what the best letterway I received was? For a small woman, it was 48. And she wrote me from somewhere in the States. She sent me an email. The thank me for the birth of her over 44-year-old child. She said, we just celebrated my daughter's four-year birthday. Thanks to you. She said, because my husband used to be an alcoholic and used to believe that his alcoholism was genetically determined. So he didn't know what I'm in a child, because he didn't want to pass on the alcoholism gene, because he was, he had suffered so badly. But then he read your book. And he realized it wasn't genetics at all. It was trauma as a result. And I was just at the edge of the child bearing years. I was 44. So now he's this four-year-old child. Thank you. And I thought this is the best praise I've ever got, because I've been thanked quite often for saving people's lives, but never for causing one, long distance. So go back to your question about genetics. There's no gene for addictions. I don't care what they tell you. What they are, there are some genes that make it more likely that you might become addicted, but they don't cause addiction as such. In fact, the addictions have nothing to do with, sorry, the genes have nothing to do with addictions at all. Now you say, well, how can't my father was an alcoholic? My grandfather's an alcoholic is not the gene that's best on. It's the trauma that's best on, because what's it like to grow up in a home with alcoholism? Now, there are some genes that make some kids more prone to mental health conditions and addictions and so on. But there's no gene that causes any specific illness, or sorry, any specific mental health illness, any specific addiction. What there are is a large group of genes but the more them you have, the more likely you are to have any mental health conditions, including addictions. But you can have those same genes and be a perfectly happy, successful, joyful, creative person, depending on the environment, acts on those genes, which means that the genes are not for disease, therefore sensitivity. And the more sensitive you are, when things go well, the happier you are. When things go badly, the more unhappy you are, the more pain you have, the more you have to run away from pain and that's where the addiction comes in. So the genes are not for addiction as such and most of my profession gets this completely wrong. So yes, there's the genetic position, the position not to addiction as such, but to either joy or suffering, depending on what the environment does when it acts on you. So I forgot where this conversation began, but this is where we are now. What we're just talking about addiction and genetics and whether or not, when you hear about families that have a history of alcoholism, we just assume based on what we're told, that that's because this is, yeah, and it's probably the part of the world, your ancestors are from and whether or not they had a history of abusing alcohol and there's genetic pre-determining factors. Okay, there's a great example to refute that right here in the United States. So prior to colonization, the native people that no problem with addiction at all and they even had some alcohol in New Mexico area. There was no, yeah, apparently so. Those are all these other plants around, by the way. There was no addiction. Then you traumatize that population, you subject them to the extermination and the destruction of their ways of life and their culture, like in Canada, we have a terrible problem. When I worked with addictions and Vancouver is down to on his side, 30% of my clients were indigenous people. They make a 5% of the population. 30% of the people of the men in jail in Canada, 50% of the women in jail in Canada are indigenous people. They have much more addiction, child abuse, mental health issues, suicide, violence, maybe heard about the stabings up in Canada right now. It was in an indigenous community. Why? Because they were so traumatized by what happened to them. And for 100 years, their children were abducted from their homes by the state and the church, sent to these residential schools, where they were sexually, physically, emotionally abused. I had a, I met a woman, by the way, remember where we started talking about it. You were asking about psychedelic works. I'll come back to that, you know. I was in a psychedelic ceremony with some indigenous people in Canada, maybe about eight years ago now. I met a woman who was taken from her family by law, abducted by the police, taken the residential school, the parents weren't even allowed to visit these kids. They were, her first day in school is a four-year-old. She spoke her tribal language. You know what the punishment was? They stuck a pin through her tongue. This was in the 1960s in Canada, 1950s. I'm sorry, late 1950s. For a whole hour, this little girl couldn't put her needle, couldn't put her tongue back in her mouth for fear of cutting her lips. That's before the sexual abuse began. But the time she was nine-year-old, she was in alcoholic. But then she was 20 years old, she was her own addict. Not her grandchildren are her own addicts. What's being passed on here is the trauma. Not the addiction. Now, the reason I began to talk about addiction is after that book came out, showing the relationship between addiction and trauma, I would travel and I'd be speaking and people would ask me, what do you know about ayahuasca and the healing of addiction? I'd say I know nothing. Next city. Who do you know about addiction and the healing of trauma? Nothing. Funny got sick of it. I've just been in the book. I've just spent three years already going to go, okay, keep asking about the one thing I don't know anything about. But you know what? The universe is the way of knocking at our doors. And somebody said to me, did you know you could actually do this up here in Vancouver? I said, okay, this is a message. I gotta do it. I did the ayahuasca and in half an hour I got, why did I be asked that question? I just got it. Because with the ayahuasca and the chanting, I had these tears of love flowing down my cheeks. Not love for any one particular person. Just openheartedness. It was amazing. And I understood something. How close they had been to love all my life, even to my spouse and to my children and to the world. Why was my heart so close? Because it had been bruised so early. And so because then our hearts, we don't even know what they're gonna love. So with this plant that opened up and I also got the pain of what happens to us when the clothes are hearts. All of us human beings, it really hurts. And then we have to protect ourselves from that pain. But drugs and behaviors and sex and gambling and work and everything else. So I got that if we can both feel the pain that we've been running from all our lives, but also maybe experience the love that's underneath all that pain, we don't have to keep running. No, it's not that simple. And it's not like overnight I was a changed person. But even though I wasn't, but at least I saw the possibilities. And then I decided, I'm gonna work with this plant. I'm gonna help others with this plant. I'm gonna help myself with this plant. So that's how I got into psychedelic work. So this one experience, you have this revelation, you feel this love and you understand that you have been closed off to this your whole life. Yeah. Do you need subsequent experiences? Do you just internalize and reflect and try to sort things out? And then, or like how, what is the process for you? Well, what you said should have been the process, but I didn't know that yet. You know, I had this thing and then, now the Buddha, just What you said should have been the process, but I didn't know that yet. You know, I had this thing and then, now the Buddha has got this terrifying story that he tells. That's one of the metaphor stories that he tells of this two strong men, dragging a third man towards an abyss that can throw him into the pit. And he resists, but he's not strong enough to resist. The Buddha, the two strong men, he called it, are habit energies, they're ingrained habits, beliefs, subconscious emotions, everything that's driving us. And if you want to overcome those habit energies, we have to do what Jesus said, integrate, work on it, reflect, hang out with it. I didn't do that. I just plunged back into my work callers. I'm not going to save the world using this plant, and I started leading retreats, and I did a great job helping others. But I didn't go for enough with myself. So that's something I had to learn. How did you recognize that? Well, I can tell you a story. Sure. So it's in the book. 2019, this is like three years ago now in June. I flew to Peru to lead an Iowska retreat for physicians and the healers and psychiatrists and psychologists, counselors from around the world. And by that time, I had a worldwide reputation. My books had been published in 30 languages. And so people, healers came from all over the world to work with me. Any Amazon jungle at this Iowska center. Now, I don't lead the ceremony as a not a shaman. So my role is not to pour the, to give the, the brew or to lead the ceremony, but to help people formulate their intention. And after they experience, they help them integrate it, to help them understand what happened to them. I am adept at doing that. So we do the first ceremony. And there are six shamans, my stores and my stores, three men, three women. These beautiful, short little people stand up to my, to my eyebrows. And there's a first ceremony in the Malacca, the tent like building in which the ceremony is held. And they chant. Each of them chant, there's 24 of us. There's 23 participants that came out of the world, all from all over the world, four continents to work with me in the jungle. And there's me when the shamans come to chant to me, all six of them in turn. I'm sitting there thinking, you can do your best, but this brain is too thick. You're not going to get to this call is too thick. Try and break through this one. And not much happens. Next morning, they send the delegation to me. And they say, we can't have you in ceremony. We're not. Because we think that you have such dark dance energy that affects everybody else in the room and it interferes with our capacity to help the others. And because of this dark energy that you're carrying, our e-corros are a chance, can't penetrate you. What is, like, what's causing them to have this reaction? Like, what are you doing? Well, it's not what I'm doing. It's, it's my fixed belief. And how do they know about this fixed belief? How's it manifesting? Because they're shamans. They just feel it. They sense it. They're highly trained people. They pick up on energies. I don't say anything. And they don't know who the heck I am. They're not impressed with my reputation and my international standing or the books that I published. They don't want to think of that. They just pick it up. That's what shamans do. That's what a good shaman does. So they said, our, our chance can't penetrate it, but worse than that, it's affecting the others. So we want to help the others. We can't have you in the room and further more. They said, we think you have worked with so many traumatized people in your life. And you've absorbed their traumas and you haven't cleared it out of yourself. And furthermore, they said, and you're very small, we think you're the big scare and you haven't got over it yet. This is me at 875. Wow. Now, in the book, I can, I'll show you a painting. If I may, this is from the first chapter. This is a painting that my wife did from a photograph. The photograph is in the upper left hand corner of the painting of my mother and I at three months of age. You'll notice she's going to yellow star that you set to her under the Nazis. What you see in the expression of traumatized baby. Yeah. These people picked that up 75 years later. And so what they did is they assigned one shaman to work with me alone. And I had my own ceremonies over 10 days every second night. Wow. And they were, and the other five worked with the rest of the group. And so they fired me from my own retreat. Now my ego didn't like that very much. But you know, these people came over the world to work with me. And now you're telling me I can't do this. Yeah, we're telling you, you can't do this. I said, yeah, I get it. Do you recognize that they were correct? Like do you see what you were? You were right away, they were correct. And I accepted it. And so this guy worked with me for five nights. And by the fifth night, I had the big breakthrough experience. Yeah. So what I'm saying is that what was the big breakthrough? I won't. I described it in some detail in the book. But you've had those experiences. And as far as I can tell, it's very difficult to describe them in language. Because they'd like beyond those. But the download I got was yes, my grandparents died in Auschwitz when I was. five months of age. Yes, my mother was terrorized and stressed. Yes, I was a very scary little infant. Yes, the world was a terrible place to be born into. In that place at that time. But that doesn't have to define who I am. It doesn't have to define how I trust the world or how I don't. It doesn't have to make me defensive and scared anymore. Because there's also love and there's also acceptance and there's also a reality. That's much bigger than the trauma that happened to me. So it kind of liberated me from having to drag that or experience around in my soul the way I really had. So you feel like up until that point you couldn't accept the fact that there was love in the world. There was good things to focus on. You were too consumed by your own personal trauma. You know, everything works in layers. In many ways that did accept it. And if you had asked me, I would have said yes, the world can't be a beautiful loving accepting place. But in some deep emotional level, I couldn't allow myself to feel it. So you had perhaps developed a pattern of thinking that was insurmountable. And then even though you had had psychedelic experiences and even though you thought you were doing a great thing by bringing people to the ceremonies and exposing them to the mother and all of the that comes with it, you had not changed the way you really viewed the world. Well again, that's true in a very deep sense. But again, it's sort of relative because I've seen a lot of people heal. I had guided them to healing. Right. I've seen miracles. But you know, that sometimes people do that. They concentrate on others instead of concentrating on themselves because it's kind of easier to fix other people's problems. That's exactly the case. Yeah. I was one of those. And, but also because one of the impacts of trauma is that you feel so alone with it. So it's everybody thinks that they're uniquely traumatized. Right. So even though I knew intellectually that wasn't the case, and I know how to work with people who had terrible experiences, I mean, which were some mine. I just couldn't allow that to penetrate me very deeply as deeply as it needed to. What these shamans helped me to do is to kind of help remove another skin of the onion. Let me put it down. It's more like the skin of the onion. It's not one layer. It's different layers. And so I've been to many layers. It's very important. But what I can tell you is that since that experience, people who've seen me before, they say there's a more lightness about me than they used to be. You know, so people pick up on it. I wish I made you before. When I was really dark and dark, I'd like to see what the difference is. Because I've met people that have changed because of psychedelic experiences. You know, and I certainly have changed. So I would have liked to have met me. So how would you summarize your experience with them? I don't mean that different experiences, but in terms of the transformation that you've experienced. Much kinder. Just I grew up in competition. And most of my teenage years were spent competing in martial arts competitions. Well, I know I read somewhere about you that you said that you hated the idea of losing. Yeah. I hated the idea of weakness. Yeah. I didn't even like the fact that I enjoyed sex. Because sex, to me, seemed like pleasure. And pleasure seemed like a lazy, weak way to approach life. Wow. But I was very dedicated to winning. You know, I was very dedicated to being the best. And that mindset is very ruthless. And it takes a long time to get that out of your system. So when you say dedicated to being the best, it's two ways you can be the best. You can be the best version of ourselves. Mm-hmm. Or we can be better than any videos. Which best were you thinking about? I was trying to be the measurable best at a specific form of competition. Yeah. When you're just essentially trying to take one over. Yeah. Yeah. So the problem with that is it's to be the best. You have to be insanely dedicated to this one thing. And you have to be pretty ruthless. Yeah. I understand. You know, and it took a while for me to realize what that was. Yeah. That was a while for me to realize that my desire to do that was not a healthy desire. And that it was a desire based on trying to acquire love and respect and the appreciation of others. And that was trying to do it through accomplishments. And are you aware of the trauma that led you to believe those things? Yeah. No. My path is pretty clear. I mean, my childhood was very fucked up. Yeah. My father was very physically abusive. And my mother left him when I was five years old. And it was there's a lot. Yeah. There's a lot there. I get it. Yeah. Now I don't want to, by the way, create the impression of some kind of a psychedelic evangelist. I think this I think psychedelics have a low role, but it's somewhat of a limited role overall in healing. And then when it comes to social issues and even individual healing. So it's not like I don't just don't care to impact it. It's not the only thing. It's not the only thing. And certainly in my experience, it's relatively small part of what I do, but it's a very cherished part of what I do. Well, the experiences are so profound and so significant, but they are just a day. And then whatever more you do, but there's a lot of days. And so it's very easy to go back to baseline. It's very easy to slip back into your old way of thinking. the ways that I describe psychedelic experiences, like a real DMT experiences, that it's like control, all delete for your brain. So your brain reboots and then you're left with an empty desktop, but with one folder. That folder is labeled my old bullshit. And you can either choose to approach life, approach life with a completely new perspective because you've had this experience or you can comfortably and easily slip back into that your old mild bullshit folder. And most people do that. And that's true for me as well. But the learning continues. But overall, there's so many issues and so many problems in this culture and the second example, never be the answer. It's not the answer, but it's one of the answers. And I think it's also having the option. And having people know that there is some sort of a deeply profound transformative option. This thing that happens that brings you into this other dimension, which is truly feels like another dimension. I don't exactly know what's going on, but whether it is or isn't a dimension, another dimension. It has the feel of another dimension. I think it opens up a part of our brain and consciousness that's usually not accessible to us. Don't get there with us. Like, don't they? They have these holotropic breathing or just deep meditation for some people. But that's also igniting and dodgeness. I mean, if you look at, yeah, yeah, that's what I'm saying. So it's in our brain, that capacity. Yeah. The second I was going to get us there much quicker. But you know, sometimes it's even very frustrating because the person who drive me, drove me this morning to your studio. He's a vet. And he's got friends with severe PTSD. And we know specifically there's a plant called the boga. It began. It's been shown by experience. First of all, it's got this amazing quality that it can get people of heroin overnight. Yeah. And I've seen that personally. I've done it myself. It's not for the faint hearted, by the way. What did an idol gain do for you? You know what I'm going to forget what I'm saying. Okay. Yeah. We'll go back to that. So this man was driving and was talking about, and I was saying, you know what? There's actually a plant called the boga. He's a bogey in that e-booga is the plant that is really good for PTSD. And there's people working with the south of the border here. But they can't work with it in the US because the US is illegal, which is insanity. It's insanity. And he said, actually, this friend of mine with severe PTSD is actually gone south of the border. And working with one of the universities who was doing a study on it, I said, oh, good. And he says, the driver, he says, there's already been such profound changes in my friend. No, what the hell are we doing? Making that illegal instead of embracing it and researching it. Yeah. It's not harming people. The thing about Ibogaine is it's not an addictive substance. It's almost impossible to be addicted to it. But you wouldn't want to do it anyway. Well, I have never done it. So I'm just going on other people's experiences. But it doesn't seem like something that you would ever want to do a lot. What was it like for you? Yeah. It was a toughest experience. One of the toughest experiences in my life because it's just, you saw it, you saw loose control. And felt pretty dark and heavy at times. Afterwards, I felt very clear. Dark and heavy, how so? Sorry. Dark and heavy, how so? How did it feel dark and heavy? In the body and there's nothing you can do to change it? But if you feel uncomfortable in your body and there's nothing you can do to change it, it feels pretty scary. No, even though I know that this experience will end, now again, I have to say that I'm more resistant to psychedelic stammer people. I have a pretty thick skull as I told you before and it takes a lot to get through to me. I keep getting worried that we keep talking about psychedelic sense and there's so much more that I want to see. No, it's a plenty of time. Don't worry about it. Okay, great. So in March of this year, I did a mushroom ceremony with some indigenous Canadians on their land and it was one of the deepest experiences of my whole life. But the doors that I took was triple or quadruple, the doors that most people take just because it takes a lot to us. What was the doors? 16 grams. That's going deep. And it took me deep. It was beautiful. It was great. It was a great experience of my life. How long did it last? I have about seven, eight hours, something like that and you know what, brains and then I sat outside with one of my indigenous friends who I never met before but we were blood butters right away and this is beautiful mountain and bison grazing in the field and the sunset and oh my god, the beauty of it all. And the lovingness of it all and the companionship and camaraderie of it all and these people have really suffered and their suffering was right there. So they asked me to participate to help them with the trauma part. So it was one of the most poignant but also most beautiful experiences of my life. But it took a lot to get me there. The North American indigenous cultures and I think you could say the same about Australia and some of these other countries that have been occupied. It's one of the most devastating things in modern times and it's not discussed. We have relegated them to reservations and they're kind of removed from the cultural conversation as far as like people in this country that are troubled. We think often of slavery which is also horrific. We think often of immigrants from other countries that are disparaged and experienced racism but we don't think about the native indigenous people that were here that had everything taken away from them. That's the colonial mindset. The indigenous people, they don't matter. I read this book about corner parker. Do you know that name? Yeah sure. Was it the Empire, the summer moon? Summer moon, yeah, beautiful book. We have a photograph of corner parker outside. Was that him out there? Yeah. And I quote him in this book and I do talk a lot about it. Not just indigenous experience but also the wisdom they had and they have. If you're only willing to learn what they have to teach, not that we have to give up our science and our medicine and our technological achievements but my God if you could infuse some of that with the wisdom that they have to offer us but we're so bloody arrogant. Primitive we have nothing to learn from them. And yet they have so much to teach. They do. I mean and they most certainly had an incredible way of living with nature. They were also incredibly ruthless and also to other North American tribes. I mean the way they lived their life was absolutely savage and barbaric. Sort of like the white man though. Sort of. There's certainly parallels to all sorts of conquerors in the way they treat their victims. Yeah. It seems to be a human characteristic of cruelty and I think part of that is based on the fear of being conquered yourself or the fear of being captured and killed and being have others someone else's will and posed upon you so they impose it upon others. I know there are quite capable of terrible cruelty. I wouldn't put them any different from anybody else on that level. I mean when I think of all the tortures and massacres and cruelty, you know that people are human characters. Well it's human characteristic on the certain conditions. Yes. Yeah for sure. Well unfortunately it's more common like the human cruelty, you know that whether or not it exists in cultures is more common than not. The certain stage of history that's true. Yeah. I might give you an argument that it needs to be that way and in small band hunter-gatherer groups they don't seem to be quite like that. Until they're invaded. Until they're invaded. Or until they go too large and the territory gets a matter of competition. So I do think that and I do discuss this as well. I do think that very very much creatures or environment. And so that what shows up is human nature is very often human nature as it is determined or influenced by a certain culture or a certain set of circumstances. Yeah. It's what when you think about the way human beings evolved it seems like we have a brain and a body that really is designed for these small groups of humans like 200 people. That's right. That seems like that's a design. Yeah. That seems like when we're in symbiosis, when we're in harmony, when everything is working and it works well, that's when it works well. Exactly. When you get to Los Angeles, you know this indifferent mass of human beings that's impossible to scale, when you look at the numbers of like New York City people stacked on top of each other and the indifference they show towards each other and the disdain they have for other people because other people instead of becoming a valuable part of the community to become a detriment to your ability to move around. That's all true. And then the question is can we somehow learn what we've lost and mailed that with modern civilization? That's a real question. Now in this culture where the general belief is that greed and competition and aggressive interaction, no, I'm good. Thank you. And selfishness and aggression are the way to make it. It's very difficult for people to get to the place of communal kindness. But when you talk about human nature, I mean you talked about the kindness that you think you've attained or found that you've attained through psychedelic work, for example. I don't know if you can answer this question, but I'd be curious. Which feels more like yourself? This kinder state of being or kind of the aggressive, aggressive, I gotta be the biggest MF on the block. Which are they both equally you or? No. Which one feels more like you? The kind part. Yeah, the other part is just a means to an end. It's trying to accomplish a goal, trying to fill a hole that can never be filled. Exactly. And that's the workaholic. That's, you know. But that's also the thing that we cherish in this society, we cherish the outlier, the overperformer, the one person who can push the boundaries past and above and beyond all others. But sometimes they have the expensive others. Yes. Many, most of the times, I believe at the expense of others and certainly at the expense of their own peace. Exactly. And we rarely find a workaholic, supremely motivated, conqueror type person who's truly happy. But that's the whole point. And that's what I talk about, the myth of normal. That what will be assumed is normal in the society. It's completely unnatural and healthy for human beings. It's a myth that it's normal. You know? You can't sit down to your book. Yeah. That's the title of the book. Yeah. So that kindness then is actually much closer to who we are as human beings than all that other stuff. Yeah. What certainly when you feel the best, you don't feel the best when you're dominating people. You feel the best when you're in sync with people. Because they're happy and you're having friends. Like my favorite moments in life is laughing with my family or laughing with my friends. That's my favorite moments in life. Just having a good time. And who's isn't? Yeah. Everybody says that's what we're really supposed to do. But then there's also this sort of inherent desire to achieve success. And what is that success? Problem solving, accomplishing goals, creating things. There's this desire that human beings sort of inherently have to do these things. That's part of our nature as well. Yeah. That's why we've created some of the amazing things within science or technology or art or music or anything else. But that doesn't have to be at the expense of everybody else. Right. It should be morally and ethically pursued. That's also why we hate fraud. Right. When someone is stealing money and they have all the success, but it turns out that what they've done is like done something illegal. Yeah. Like pyramid schemes or something where someone's using this sort of desire to succeed as a justification to victimize others. Yeah. But you just described the corporate world. Yes. Narcissism. Yeah. It's nice to see the corporate narcissism. Yeah. Yeah. Well, somebody calls it social apathy. We live in a world where like you talked about sugar, for example. Well, there was this book, I think, a few years ago called Sot sugar and fat or something like that. That was the title of it by the American journalist who shows that the food corporations quite deliberately set out to find the what they call the sweet spot. Just the right combination of sugar salt and fat that's going to make people addictive to their products, which is going to kill them. Yeah. So these corporations are quite willing to make people sick. And so I was talking to a colleague of mine, Rob Lustig, who wrote a book called the hacking of the American mind. And it's how about the corporations deliberately create products that make people addicted at the risk of making them sick. And so what kind of minds would deliberately set up to sell products and advertise them and to manipulate the market. That will actually kill people. And this is respectable corporations with philanthropists that the heads of their boards and so on. Yes. That's the world we live in. Yeah, that's very dark. And that's also pharmaceutical companies. I'll just watch this very disturbing commercial. Yeah. Yesterday with children and it was talking about ADHD and it showed a kid that was not paying attention in class. And it showed these kids like playing around and doing things that weren't supposed to be doing. And then they introduced this medication. And then you have the child raising their hand and then you have everyone clapping. Oh my god. And you have the child with a big smile on their face and you've medicated your child to be a successful and integrated person in society. Shall I spot off about ADHD for this? Yes, please. That was my first book on ADHD. The American scattered or scattered minds depending on which edition you got. And that was after I was diagnosed with it myself in my 50s. What does it mean? ADHD? What is it exactly? Is it real? Oh, it's real. But what does it mean? Well, if someone has ADHD, it's not like you have herpes, right? Like you can say, oh, you got a disease. What is it? Well, that's the whole point. That the medical profession, a lot of the so-called experts think about it as a disease. Another one of these inherited diseases. In fact, they say it's the most irritable mental illness there is. And I say it's neither an illness nor is it irritable. So the hallmark are difficulty paying attention when you're not motivated. Yeah. So kind of tuning out like that kid in the commercial. Like me. Okay. Poor impulse control. So that you tend to act out whatever emotion arises. And sometimes the hyperactivity difficulty sitting still and then to fidget and all that. And that described me to a T. And but as soon as I learned about the diagnosis, I knew something. This is not a disease and it's not irritable despite the fact that some of my kids were diagnosed there. and you something. This is not a disease and it's not irritable despite the fact that some of my kids were diagnosed with it. What is it? So tuning out is not a disease. So let me ask you a question if I may. Okay. If I were to stress you right now, create stress emotional difficulty or attention for you right now, what would be your options of dealing with that, of dealing with me? What would be your options? I could get upset or I could leave. Exactly. You could fight back, flight or fight. But what if you didn't have those options? Yeah, then you're stuck. And now what does the brain do when you're stuck like that? It gets distracted. It gets tunes out. Yeah, tunes out. You want to do other things. Think about other things? In other words, it's a coping mechanism. Yeah. It's normal. I mean, the idea that your child who is an eight, nine year old ball of energy filled with hormones and life thoughts and things they enjoy and then you make them sit down all day in this unnatural state in a classroom with fluorescent lights and stare at a teacher that's unmotivated and underpaid and is teaching something in a very boring and non entertaining way. And then if this kid doesn't lock in like a zombie, we need to medicate them. Yeah. Well, the other part of it is that if you look at my infancy and it sounds like yours, we spent our first year or two under very difficult circumstances. A lot of stress. Infants can't help but absorb the stress of their parents. Right. They can't help it. What does an infant do? Could I have escaped or fought back? Could you have all we could do is tune out? Yeah. So when is this tuning out happening? When our brain is being developed and our brain, this is the part that nobody taught me in medical school, but it turns out that brain science now teaches us that the human brain develops under the impact of the environment. So the most salient feature of the environment that shapes the circuits of the human brain is actually the relationship with the parents. And if the parents are present and emotionally attuned and available child brains develop properly, but the parents are stressed, the child absorbs the stress. What can they do with it? They tune out and that tuning out thing is programmed into the brain and then 10 years later or 50 years later, we say, you got this disease. No, you don't. You've got a coping mechanism that's no longer working for you. But it had a function met first came along to this whole idea and by the way, if a family comes to me with the ADHD child, I'll say to them, what you got here is a very sensitive child. That sensitive child is picking up on all the vibes, energies and stresses in your family. When I help this child deal with the whole family, look at the parental relationship. Look at how what stresses there in your life. Look at how you react to the child. Look at you understand the child's behavior or the emotions that the child is having or you just turn a control to child's behaviors. Look at all that. And very often parents will tell me after they've read that book on ADHD, as they've totally changed their relationship to their child, the child changes. What a surprise. But you go to the most doctors. You got this disease. Here's the pill. And by the way, I took those medications and they helped me for a while. You know, so I'm not anti-maj. When you were in your 50s. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm not anti-maj. Which ones did you take? I took Ritalin, which I can tell you the story. Sure. So, you know, one of the hallmarks of ADHD is poor impulse control, right? So, I found out about ADHD. And even before I was diagnosed, I took Ritalin. And why did you take it before you were diagnosed? Because I'm a doctor and I could, hey? Oh, so you diagnosed yourself? Well, they did. And so you at least assumed that you had that. Yeah, I knew I had it. And but not only that, also because I had poor impulse control, I never practiced medicine now. If you came to me for any problem, my first impulse would never be to write your prescription. Unless it was obvious that you needed it for an infection or something. I'd sit down with you and talk to you about what's going on here. But not me, poor impulse regulation. So, I went to a colleague of mine, medical colleague. I said, hey, babe, I think I've got ADHD. Can you give me some ritlins? So, she writes me a prescription. Then I took it in the higher than recommended initial dose. And because I mean, if a little bit is good, then more and more speaking better. And again, it's not high practice medicine. Right. But I came to myself. That's a totally different ball game. So I felt immediately present and calm and grounded and real. And it's a stimulant. And I went, what comes the ADHD brain? Then I go home and my wife says, you look stoned. Because you come. Because I, yeah, well, because I got this glass here at expression. And within a couple days, the different, the ritlin made me very depressed. That's one of its potential side effects. So I did see psychiatrists. I was formally diagnosed and they gave me a deck screen. And I took that for a while. That's an amphetamine. Yeah. It's an amphetamine. It's another stimulant. And it did help me. I became a much more efficient workaholic. And I could do even, it didn't change any of my emotional issues. But it made me more focused and so on. It helped me write my first book. But I haven't taken them for decades. But because also, I know that the brain can change if you treat it right. So this reliance on medications that we have is a real poverty of the spirit, the real poverty of imagination, a poverty of medical education. So that was Dr. Never learns this stuff. The average physician never gets a single lecture on brain development or the brain develops in interaction with their environment. So when you see and let alone do they hear about trauma, they don't hardly at all. So when they see an adult with ADHD or depression or addiction or bipolar conditions or for that matter, autoimmune illness or anything else, they don't think of trauma. They just think of this disease. And they think that the diagnosis explains everything. But the diagnosis don't explain anything. Because think about it. Let's say a gob or a joke goes to a doctor and the diagnosis of ADHD. Why is what are the homics of ADHD? Well, tuning out poor impulse regulation may be hyperactivity. What does gob or have poor impulse control, hyperactivity and tuning out? Because he's got ADHD. How do we know he's got ADHD? Because he's got poor impulse control and turns out and he's hyperactive. Why is he hyperactive? Turns out have poor impulse control. He's got ADHD. How do we know he's got ADHD? Because it doesn't, it's circular, it doesn't explain it, doesn't explain anything. Diagnosis describe things and that they can be helpful that way, but they don't explain. Yeah. One of the things that people get, they get treated for and they get diagnosed with is anxiety. And that one drives me nuts. It drives me nuts because people pretend that anxiety is a disease. Yeah, it's not. And I'm like, my God, the world should make you anxious if you're a sensitive, introspective person. If you're just looking at the world itself and you don't put it in perspective, like the world's filled with anxiety, the anxiety is, it's future problem solving. You're thinking about all the things that can go wrong. You're thinking about your life in a, you know, potentially, devastating way. And that's on a disease. That's just a way you look at the world and people getting diagnosed with it. Well, I won't quite agree with you on the one. In what way? I've felt anxious at times. The world is the same. If I, the world is the same, but the way you look at it is not the same. Right. So, yeah, that's what I'm saying. So, that world is giving you anxiety. No, the world is not giving me anxiety. Right. You're giving yourself anxiety, looking at the world. Right. And by how I look at the world. Yeah. Because I look at, I can look at the same world one day and feel grounded and connected. And I may have all kinds of concerns about what's happening in the world. But my nervousness that won't be on edge, my doing what I'm exploring, I won't be anxious. That's my point is that it's not a disease. It isn't a disease. Right. So, remember I talked about those brain circuits of lust and care and rage and seeking and so on. One of the brain circuits that we have is described by a very prominent late neuroscientist, yeah, a concept is for panic and grief. Tiny can grieve, but the normal responses of the young human being or the young animal when care isn't available. So, when the parents are stressed, distracted, economically or politically, or because of their own unresolved trauma, or whatever is going on in our lives. And they don't respond to the child's distress. They don't pick up the child when they're crying. They make the child be alone when the child is upset. The child's panic circuits get activated as they should be because when the child's panic circuits get activated, they cry for help. That's so necessary for survival. A young animal should feel panic when the adult is unavailable. In a rational world, in a sane world, that child will be responded to. But when children as in our society are not responded to in their distress, the panic becomes built into their nervous system. And now you have a lot of anxious people. And that's why more and more kids are being diagnosed. You're right. It's not a disease. It's a response to the environment. And the thought process of like leaving a child alone when the child's crying is that to toughen the kid up is the thought process that you don't want to encourage this sort of behavior because then they'll do it all the time. And then you'll develop an indulgent child, like what is the thought process? The thought process is that the child behaviors the problem. And so we have to fix the behavior by controlling it. Now actually, the opposite is true. Because if you pick up the child when a child has distress, physical and emotional distress, you're teaching a child that the world is safe and they don't have to be anxious about it. And they can just ask for help. And it doesn't entrench kind of crying manipulator behavior. How it works, Dr. Daniel Siegel, who's a psychiatrist at UCLA in a very prolific author and mind-wise researcher, he says in his book, The Developing Mind, that the child uses the mature circuits of the adult brain to regulate its own immature unregulated circuits. So when the adult show up in a calm, loving way, that the child downloads that into his own nervous system and then he goes, he doesn't, he's not going to be an infant forever. Some point he's going to be immature at all to know sort of take care of themselves. That's a natural process. We don't have to teach kids to be independent. Independent is nature's agenda because the parents are going to die. At some point the mother bear is going to disappear. That bear cup has to be able to look after themselves in a mature, confident way. That's nature's natural agenda. What the mother, what the mother bear needs to do is to meet the needs of that infant bear so the infant banker matures. So if we meet the child's needs, they're going to mature out of that helpless state with a sense of self-regulation and calm confidence in their own capacity. When you don't pick kids up, what you teach them is that the world is not available that they're alone and that they're helpless. Talk about a formula for anxiety. What about the concept of coddling children? And what about the concept of creating, what someone would call a mama's boy, someone who is scared of the outside world and just wants comfort and attention and just wants to be sheltered from stress and anxiety all the time. They just want to be alone with their mother and their parents. Yeah, it happens. But why does it happen? Why does it happen? So there's a study that I quote in the book where they looked at thousands or several hundred women, new mothers and how they related to their infants. And most of them related very well. Some were not that available. And some were extra doting and extra coddling you might say with their infants. They looked at the adults 35 years later. The people that were the most independent and successful and self-actualized with the ones that were super loved by their mothers. Okay. Now, and the conclusion of the researchers was you can't love children too much. Not the case that you described is not too much loving, but loving that comes from a very anxious place. So these mothers that coddle their kids when the kids doesn't need coddling, they're not doing it because the child needs it. They're doing because they need it. They're doing it because they were not coddled enough. They're anxious and they pass that anxiety onto the child. You don't create those dependent kids by loving them. You create them by imposing your own agenda on them, your own anxieties on them. So those are the mommas boys, you want to call them that. But the mommas boys are just a very anxious person who downloaded his parents or her parents' anxieties. That makes sense because the kids that I know that grew up like that their mothers were terrified of everything. Yeah. Yeah. And so they boy, but how do you get out of that if you're, you know, you've developed this, these patterns of thinking that are based on a mother that is incredibly anxious and scared of the world. And then you sort of adopted these thoughts and, you know, they call you a mommas boy and that you're coddled. Like how does someone break out of that? Well, there was a Greek playwright, Aeschylus, who wrote about drama about 25 years ago. And in one of his plays, the Agamemnon, he says that the way Zeus or the way the master, the God created us, was that we have to suffer, suffer into truth. And with most people I find that at some point, like me and perhaps like yourself, some suffering happens. That says, okay, you're not going in the right direction. So gain is gotta begin with this understanding that what I'm going through is creating suffering for myself and people around me. And maybe it doesn't have to be this way. There's gotta be that recognition. Now, once you get that recognition, the sky's the limit because now there's all kinds of therapies and possibilities. Now, you can, I mean, I think I wonder if I don't like this phrase, mama's boy, but it describes maybe a certain kind of personality. What if they did martial arts? What if they worked out? What if they developed some confidence in their own bodies to start with? Because they don't have confidence in their bodies. That's what, you know, some, this all kinds of things they could do. Once you get that there's an issue, you know, let alone, you can go for therapy, you can do the trauma work, like whatever, you can do the psychedelics, you can do MDR, you can do somatic experience, you can do any number of, you can do the therapy, that I teach, compassionate, and inquiry, you can do the martial arts, you can meditate, you can do yoga, you can go into nature. But you need to do something, but you gotta do something. Yeah. And that is the problem in some of these people, unfortunately, they turn to drugs. Because because they're so overwhelmed, they want a complete escape from the moment. Yeah. Well, and they turn to drugs, so they turn to eating, or they turn to shopping, like I did, or shopping. Oh yeah, what was your thing? I had a significant shopping addiction. Really? Oh yeah. I shop for, I talk about this in my book on addiction. I, I, I, I, I would shop for classical compact discs. You laugh, but some days I spend thousands of dollars, literally thousands of dollars a day. Did you have the money? Well, that was a doctor, hey? Yeah. So you could afford these compact discs. And you know how the addicted mind works. It's brilliant. It justifies one addiction by another. I'd say, but I'm working so hard, I deserve to pleasure myself. Right. So one addiction justified the other, you see, but once I I left a woman in labor to get a symphony from the downtown store. And I, and I missed the delivery. Oh my God. That's how addicted I was to shopping. But did you think that that classical disc was going to go away? Like, why did you go? Does the aniotic think? Wow, that's a weird addiction. I've never even heard of anybody being addicted to compact discs. Well, there are people addicted to shopping. Yeah. And, and, and, and, and the addiction is not to the object that you're buying, because if it was to the object, you would just go and enjoy it. Right. The addiction is to the acquisition. Now what happens when you're looking for something and you're excited? Yeah. You know what happens? The level of dopamine, which is one of these brain chemicals, elevates in the brain, which is just like taking an amphetamine. So it's the thrill. It's the thrill. And so the gambler, the workaholic, the shopaholic, the sexaholic, any addict, substance addict, then not after the actual, there is much as after that thrill that's seeking, that dopamine hit, the pornography. You know, there have to that dopamine hit. Right. No, the, not dopamine, which is the seeking chemical in our brain. The one that makes life vital and, an interesting and, and, and, and, and, you know, makes us explore novel objects or seek a sexual partner or seek food. Those dopamine circuits develop or don't develop based on what happens to you very early in life. And so that children that don't get the proper experiences, they might be lacking dopamine. Not they have to seek the thrill of the stimulant drug or the, or the exciting activity, or the dangerous rock climbing or the, so they can feel really present and grounded. Oh, wow. Or, or the, or the, or the shopping or the compactness. And it's always about the next thing, because you're looking after that dopamine hit. I was just watching this documentary, the alpionist. Oh, yeah. I've heard about it. Yeah. It's about a young man who was a free solo climber. And did he die? Who died? Yeah. He died in a avalanche. Yeah. He was constantly pushing the boundaries of like what, what he could get away with. And he was free soloing these rock faces. And then that wasn't dangerous enough. So he moved to ice climbing. Yes. And so he's with no rope. And just these axes climbing, these picks, climbing up glaciers, climbing up in one scene. There was this ice that was detached from the face of the cliff. Yes. So it was separated by several feet. You could see the gap in between the ice and the face of the cliff. And he's climbing the ice. Could break off at any second. It's not permanent. And he's just digging in his pick and pulling himself up this and then apparently he had gone to the top with this other guy and on the way down, they died in an avalanche. No, I bet if you interviewed him. And I've seen interviews with these people. Yeah. The three divers on the fake lines and all this. What's happening to an experience? I'm totally present. Yes. I'm at one with life. You know, there's no separation. I'm grounded. Yeah. Totally focused. I'm fully alive. Why? Because it triggers the dopamine in their brain. So you feel like people like that probably have something happen when they were younger, where their body doesn't develop dopamine properly under normal circumstance. I'm convinced of it. Well, that makes sense. I've had Alex Honald on several times and he is the guy from, what is the document? Is it free solo? Yeah. The document is free solo. And he's very famous for climbing like El Capitan and just sticking his hands, these cracks of the walls and climbing up with no ropes. And he's a very calm guy. It's very interesting. He's like sort of calm and mellow. And you know, when you talk to him about climbing and he's like, no, it's like you're pretty relaxed. It's pretty chilled out. And they're clearly addicted to that. They're doing it constantly. They travel around the world to do it. And risk in their lives. Yeah. Risking their lives. Can I you read your quote? Yeah, sure, please. If I take a moment to watch. Yeah, yeah, sure, sure. It's on my cell phone. I carry so many quotes on my cell phone because I'm always trying to teach myself stuff. So this is a free diving. I mean, you just look for free diving, free diving, not do thing diving. This is something that you saved on your phone? Yeah. Yeah, I have a thousand things saved on my phone. I have old books that I've dictated to myself done on my book on my phone. Isn't that amazing? Because the store that in this whole tiny thing you keep in your pocket? It's incredible. And I keep trying to teach my stuff. I think if I just dictate it, maybe I'll learn it, but guess what? Next time I read it, why wasn't this here before? Of course it was. Yeah, of course it was. This is a woman called Natalia Mocha Nova. She died at age 53 in August, 2015, free diving. She is one of the world's leading free diver. And here's what she says about the experience. Free diving is not only a sport, it's a way to understand who you are. When you go, when we go down, if we don't think, we understand we are whole. If we don't think so, the mind just gets out of the way. We understand that we are whole. We are one with the world. When we think, we are separate. On the surface, it's natural to think. And we have many information inside. We need to reset some time. Free diving helps to do that. In other words, free diving gave her this experience of unity and oneness, the quietness of the mind. The question is, why do we have to do with such extreme limits? The Supreme Stream lengths to find that state. When I read that quote to a couple of friends of mine who are fierce meditators on the way that I'm not, they said, that's what we get when we meditate. But these people are serious meditators. But that state of oneness, that's just the high state we can experience, isn't it? When we get that we're not these separate individuals in this society, creates this. What Dan Siegel calls the myth of the soul itself, the religious individual separate little creatures struggling to make it against competition and in a fearful race with everybody else. And so that we are separated from ourselves, which is the essence of trauma. And we get separated from each other. And then we have these peak experiences and we keep seeking these peak experiences because we don't know how to make it it really in our own lives. One of the things you find out in competition is that the real competition is with yourself. You are competing against other people, but you're competing with yourself to improve upon your performance against other people. You're not really competing with other people. And once you realize that it's a real revelation, you realize like, oh, I'm fighting my own demons. These people are just, this is a mechanism for me to be able to find that in me. Yes, which also means that there's no real loss. Is there? Right. I mean, if you've done your best, well, maybe you can do better, but there's no failure is what I mean. There is, but in failure, there are lessons. It's beneficial. Even though failure feels bad because you didn't accomplish what you wanted to accomplish. That the motivation that you get from that and the revelations and the knowledge that you get from that are crucial to your development as a human being and in whatever your chosen pursuit is. Well, let me argue with you again. If I may, please. So I mean, you work out and I know you talk about you have this brutal physical workout program and all that. Yeah, I don't do weights and you can see in the relative size of our arms as to which amongst which of the two of us does resistance training. I just swear my don't do it. Now, if you're not head of wrestling match right now, and or even a take on don't match which I've never studied, but I did my best to show up as alert and as powerful as I could. And you defeated me. Would I be a failure? Well, it's not fair. Okay. And competition. One of the things that you learned about competition is that you need to scale it. But that's true. You know, that's why we have divisions. We have weak classes. Yeah. And we also have belt rankings. So you would assume that someone who is a white belt is a relative beginner. That's one of the reasons why when we're talking about people who cheat, sandbagging is one of the most reprehensible things amongst competitors. And what it's sandbanging would be is imagine if you had a black belt in judo. And you played somebody who is. And no, and then you entered into a jujitsu competition. You would technically be a white belt in jujitsu. Yeah. But you would be very experienced in grappling and submissions. And you'd be dominant. And you would just tear through the field of people that were also white belts. And people would be angry at you justifiably so because you're violating the rules of this scalable competition. And through the scalable competition, you're supposed to be met with surmountable challenges, things that you can overcome, things and lessons you can learn. And even if you get dominated by someone, what you learn is that that potential is within a human being. You know, one of my most profound experiences that I talked about many times is when I first started doing jujitsu, I got dominated by this guy who was, you know, he's like an intermediate jujitsu player. But the overwhelming control that he have had over me and the dominance over me was so eye opening because I didn't know that a person could do that to me. And now learning that I knew that that potential was in a human being he wasn't like physically gifted. He wasn't much stronger than me or bigger than me. He was just much better at this thing that we were both doing. Right. And I realized that on the path, he was many miles ahead of me and that I could go down that path and achieve what he is doing. And that was very it was very enlightening. Fair enough. When you talk about sand bagging, you do mind me of just pulling human movie called the Hustler. Yes. You know, the big John, you think this boy's a hustler? Yeah, yeah. I've seen that movie a hundred times. Yeah, it's a wonderful film. Yeah, I play pool. So that that, okay, that is a big part of pool playing as people pretending they're not as good as they are. Yeah. But that's a desperation thing and a gambling thing. There's a lot involved in that too. But to go back to the idea of failure, so let me ask you this question. Usain bold. If you line up at the hundred meter race, so the 200 meter race against the same bold. Right. And you come in second, are you failure? Well, you didn't beat him. But are you failure? Well, it depends on where your performance threshold lies. But nobody's going to be as good as him. That's not true. Someone will be as good as essentially. Yes. And that's the whole purpose of doing that. But the whole purpose of record, yeah, but not. But you're chasing a very specific thing there though. You're chasing extreme excellence. Yeah, yeah. And if you choose to be that person that chases extreme excellence in a very narrow and rigid discipline, there's a very narrow and rigid discipline. It's very comprehensive, but it's very narrow and rigid. That's running in a straight line as fast as you can. Someone has to be the best. And if you choose to do that thing and you are not physically gifted, then you have a problem. Because there are some things that are dependent upon your physiology. They're dependent upon the size of your limbs, the length of your limbs, for sure. Your genetics. And some people, for some people, that threshold is insurmountable. Well, and this is Virginia. That's coming to it. I mean, we have certain capabilities. But all I'm saying is in my mind, coming in second to that guy is no failure. As long as I've done my best, as long as the person in the next lane is doing their best, sure. They've succeeded. coming in second to that guy's no failure as long as I've done my best as long as the person In the next lane is doing their best sure they've succeeded they have succeeded in the way There's a there's a there's a great quote that I remember one my early years of talk window where my instructor said that Marshall arts are a vehicle for developing your human potential And that through overcoming these difficult obstacles and the fear of competition and and learning that With discipline and focus you can get better it can elevate your ability to do everything. It isn't so much of that also I get that and and isn't so much are also completely present and focused. Yeah and connected to your body and and grounded and Responsive to what's happening in the moment. Yes, you have to be in the moment. You can't be thinking too much You know you rely on your training and your focus and the ability to maintain this mindset Yeah, which is so missing from our lives in general. Yeah, well, it's also one of the things that's missing from our lives is Physically difficult pursuits. Yeah, which I think we have We've categorized things in into two ways things that are Intellectually difficult which we praise and things that are physically difficult which we think of as being like base and You know less consequential to your overall development as a human being but I don't think that's the case because I think that physical difficulties stress the mind in a way that we don't appreciate don't be value or athletes and our Athletics and our The people that can do show we do but we also dismiss them as being intellectually inferior Huh one of the ways that people justify that an athlete is better than them at this thing is by categorizing them as a dumb jock Oh gosh, I read sometimes the blog of Kareem Abdul Jabbar. He's no intellectual Midget, you know, of course not you know, it'd be great at something Yeah, I mean whether or not he applies that to the rest of his life as well. That's what's that's where it gets interesting Yeah, because some people don't they only focus on being the greatest at whatever where it's basketball or golf And they don't think about their life in general as being a project as well They think about this one thing only and you know what I might say that That certainly could have been set of me at a certain point that of me at a certain point where I would be refocused on Being very good at a certain task or a certain area of endeavor which is to say medicine and healing But I wasn't applying the lessons to my own life right and I think a lot of us get compound but not compound my Tyla's doubt yes, you know, yes, we don't take our our wisdom Interon lives I think a lot of us need mentors and We need people who have already gone down the path a little further than they have to tell them Hey, this is what's going to come up and this is how I've dealt with it And this is what you can learn from my mistakes without having to repeat them. I think one of the Significant losses as the study that we've sustained is the loss of elders Mm-hmm. I mean traditional cultures were of elders and yes, we don't talk about elders We talk about the elderly right we define them in terms of their age But but if you look at traditional cultures the elders have Huge status. Yes, and they should and as they ought to their experience It also means they don't get shunted to the side and get made to be useless and develop dementia, you know, right because they're active and involved in the community and We've lost so much with the loss of the elder and the Passions of tradition. Yeah We're so focused on progress, which is a broad incredible advances That again, we let we sort of cut off from one part of ourselves Which is rooted in tradition and rooted in wisdom? So what if we could have both? What if we could have both wisdom and and and and progress at the same time? I think it's possible It's certainly possible I mean I've always had that about the idea of an ethical moral capitalism Yeah, is that the competition of capitalism is in the problem the competition is the end all Be all like only win only get ahead greed is good the Gordon Gekko. Yeah, in mantra I think that people get lost in the achievement of the goal as being the ultimate thing that's going to bring them happiness And it's never the case well, no you have the corporations we talked about before and What's it a Milton Friedman this Nobel Prize winning economist? And he said that the only legitimate business of corporation is to make a profit. Yes, and that's how they look at it And that's one of the reasons why they can justify horrific acts Yeah, and it's also one of the reasons why a person inside of that corporation feel separate from the actual horrific acts So there's a diffusion of responsibility and being attached to a group You know, I am just one of these people. I am just a manager of this region And that's all I do. I mean I have to buy by my shell shareholders needs in the book I enter you a guy who used to be vice-president for human relations for Ikea and He Funded out about my work about 10 11 years ago and he said I'm gonna talk to you and he called me at home And I thought he was just strange to get with an accent You know when you get known a little bit about a bunch of people want a piece of you, you know, and I thought he's another But anyway, he came out to Vancouver from back east and we had had a signal with lunch at my house and my wife is there and Ray says Ray my wife says to him his name is wolf and he says all for what is it that you do? And those says all I Work with this company may be heard about it called Ikea and my wife just about Jumped off her seat because she's just been to Ikea that morning buying so furniture But all says that for decades all he lived for was to be successful within the company And he totally lost himself. He had he had no value. He said that it wasn't associated with his success Right, it was an executive and he says it was an empty existence and he says he was driving he was making self sick So he gave it up, you know, but he he talked about what it's like inside that world and he's uniquely He's a gifted photographer So he started doing photography and he's you know, it's Very healthy man, but he had to really learn after decades that Everything he'd been done had been done for some external and and in his culture were so driven to validate our existence by impressing others by by trying to make ourselves successful By the standards that are laid down for us by external forces that have nothing to do with our real needs and who we actually are assuming beings That it's it's almost impossible not to fall into that trap It's very very difficult not to fall to that trap particularly if you're Invested in a career path and you've achieved a certain amount of success and then you have responsibilities and you have bills You know you have mortgages and not not only that you also have the whole world telling you how great you are. Yeah so so when my wife would walk into a department store or Anyway with the credit card and he said, you know, are you the why are you the wife of? Oh, isn't it wonderful and she was just gridding her teeth Because it's the same wonderful guy who's such a success out there Is not like that at home in fact it's it's expensive the home that he's success is in some ways achieved so that does that So not only do we have bills to pay we also even get all this validation for the way that we Abandon ourselves, you know, yeah oftentimes you don't concern yourself with the Appreciation of your loved ones because you get it no matter what you're expecting them You get it expected and but you Concentrate so hard on this thing that you're pursuing whether it's climbing the corporate ladder becoming a physician and you know Working so hard constantly day in day out and that's the only way you get any measure of this feeling of a value That's right. It's when you try and get that sense of value From the outside which which if you had been valued Just we existing yeah from the moment you were born you wouldn't have to keep doing you wouldn't have to keep doing it but The thing is like so many people from that terrible childhood Have developed this ability to pursue excellence and then they have a shaped and Enhanced and influenced so many other people's lives because of their work whether it's their art or whether it's their sport or whatever Something that they've done some way they've accomplished things has been an incredibly influential to other people yet They came from this horrific trauma well, that's true and the question is can I balance that with more self-awareness right and and a more expansive Experience of life where they narrowly focused Let me tell you a story and let me ask you what you think about it. Okay If I told you about a four-year-old girl Who is bullied by neighborhood kids you've got daughters. Yeah So I imagine you're four-year-old daughter Being bullied by neighborhood kids and one of them runs into the house to their mom and say for protection and the mom said to her There's no room for cards in this house. No you get out and deal with it. Yeah, how would you see that? Well, it's abusive. Okay You're setting the kid up to be Not protected and that you don't care and and also this is a There's a horrific aspect of human nature that desire to Gang up on kids the group of people gang up on people and bully them so Speaking of that you would see that interaction with the mom is abusive and traumatizing. Yes, okay This story was told on public television in the United States in a phone of a cheering audience millions of people watching on television At the Democratic convention in 2016 when Hillary Clinton was nominated And she told and it was the voice of God Morgan Freeman who actually narrated this Document bio documentary about her and this has presented as a wonderful example of resilience building And so I'm saying trauma is so Normalized in this culture that even when this Horrific incident is being depicted on television in front of millions of people People think this is wonderful and nobody nobody nobody Comment in our now 65 years later or 60 years later the same candidate develops pneumonia During the campaign. I don't even remember that when she got her. Yeah, you know what she did Wow, she sucked it up. She didn't tell anybody about it to she collapsed in the street with dehydration No The supposed lesson was this thought me strengthened resilience and independence and self-reliance So a lot of the success that we sometimes perceive in the society comes at a huge human cost And we don't even recognize it. It's so normal. We don't even recognize it. I'm not talking about politics now I'm not well. I'm talking about politics. These are very often our politicians by the way But I'm talking about nothing about policies of whether I support her or somebody else I'm talking about the human experience that's being depicted and totally normalized in this culture Yeah, and that example Is that that is a problem that people do think that that's a way to handle a situation like that where child's being bullied to tell the child to go out there and face those bullies Yeah, a four-year-old. Yeah, and then you look at the end result. You have this extremely unlikable woman You know who was I was God She's built a defense around ourselves. We don't like the ability that people pick up on the unreliability Is this hard shell that he had to develop to protect herself? Yeah, it's a simple trauma response. Yes, you know and When you look at it that way You just see a suffering human being uh-huh, and it's It's even sadder because she's old. Yeah, and she doesn't recognize This pathway she doesn't recognize where she is and why well her father used to beat the kids and She doesn't see that as trauma Yeah, no, I'm not picking her up. It's a different by the way. I'm sorry. I'm not I know you're saying you're not picking on her Not picking and I'm just giving a public example of what happens the Child abuse the beating of the kids. Yeah, was standard. Yeah, that's that's it's really crazy It's like if you go back to the 1960s and 1950s Beating kids for doing something wrong was normal. It was what everybody did Yeah, well, I mean how much I went affected that I don't have on people well that There was a study this week just about that What how traumatizing spanking kids is yeah? I had a conversation with someone the other day when they were just like talking about how they spanked their kids and I'm like I didn't know what to do. I wasn't sure that I should just put my foot down. So you hey, you should never do that You know, why'd you do that? I shouldn't I didn't want to admonish them You might ask them if they were put to an opinion. Yeah, well, it was just one of those things But it's so difficult isn't it because people get so defensive But I'm telling you the studies have been done over and over and over again. Yeah, so about spanking and it's a fact It's a fact can be as bad More severe form of abuse. Yeah, I could I can completely see how that would be the case I just don't think it's ever required You know, I just I wasn't really spanked. I mean, maybe a couple of times when I was really young But it was nothing serious But you know, I'm saying like it wasn't like I wasn't held down and beaten Wait a minute now who's saying that nothing serious me as an adult me now Yeah, but but think of your kids yes, but let's say one let's see did that the one of your children Would you ever say to her this is nothing serious? No, I wouldn't about never do that. I mean, you wouldn't do it I don't do it and I don't even I wouldn't ever even consider it I try to have conversations with my kids and I have since they were really young conversation with them that I talked to them like I would talk to you. Yeah, and although I'm much more You know expressive and lenient and kind and and I tell them how much I love them and The only reason why I'm having this conversation with you is because this is just an issue that people have And one of the things that I always bring up with my kids is whatever you've done I've done it So if you've lied if like when I caught my kid lying to me once one of my daughters and I said I Sliding my parents all the time. It's totally normal But what I'm telling you is you don't have to lie to me and it's better for you if you don't lie If you just address things that you've done that were wrong or incorrect or You know unwise Let's just talk about them. I'm not gonna judge you on a mistake because you're a human being And you're 12 and human beings make mistakes But what's important to know is that I will praise you for telling me the truth if it's difficult It's very good because I think it's it's it's a very valuable lesson for a kid Because otherwise you pretend you think you got away with it and then you live with that lie of course Yeah, well, there's the the German philosopher Nietzsche Right somewhere that people lie there. We are reality when they be in hurt by reality And so there's certain politicians were known for lying. Yes Well, we know about their childhoods Really traumatic reabusive. Well, childhood did Biden have There was an article in the New York, New York or magazine about the Biden family. Yeah, generations of alcoholism well, that makes sense and and other forms of manipulation and so on and and so when you look at Hunter Biden Right and Hunter has actually mentioned my work because his own addiction see he came to some understanding about the traumatic basis of his addiction problem but that Addiction and Hunter's park is just the downloading of multiple generations of family suffering So it's not anybody's fault. You're not pointing fingers at anybody but there's trauma in that family and There's no American president in recent memory that didn't have significant trauma in their childhoods and it's affected of course how they conduct politics You know when it shows up. I mean I don't know if you know the name Bessel van der Kolk is a psychiatrist There's a perennial bestseller in the New York Times called the body keeps the score Which is about trauma and this is a book about trauma that's It's been bestseller enough for five years in every week in the New York Times and Bessel told me that Donald Trump is a poster board for trauma which he is in a certain way because even Often many people say that he's lying but by the way this Trump supporters here I'm not arguing politics here I'm just talking about human being I'm talking about human being When they say that he's lying I don't think he's lying consciously much of the time His by his the guy who wrote the art of the deal with him a guy called Tony Schwartz once said that this man doesn't know the difference with that truth and like Because if you want something to be true, he'll believe it Now what other class of human beings will believe when they want something to be true children Yes, no he had Trump at a terrible childhood and his His his niece Mary Trump was a psychologist Whose father drank himself to death was Trump's brother And he drank himself to death so traumatized was he in the Trump family of origin Well one of Trump's responses to that Well first of all poor attention This is attention is all over the place. That's a typical ADHD response. I'm not diagnosing him I'm just saying I recognize it as a response to trauma But the other is difficult to tell him truth from reality sometimes because he wants something to be so true Because his death because his early years were so difficult he couldn't face the truth of it Yeah, and so what we're seeing in our politics very often are highly traumatized people You know who didn't have to act out their trauma on the public level. I don't get which party you're talking about Not being partisan here. I'm just saying how I see it Well, it's one of the more difficult aspects of Modern politics is that the people that choose to pursue that level of Agilation and attention and power. Yeah other people that should never have it. That's the whole point. Yeah, that's why it's so crazy It's this wild pursuit and every four years we hope for a new leader Someone to rise who's gonna make sense of it all and fix it all and yeah, it just doesn't happen Which kind of which is true? And it also points the real dynamic and political life that we're on a On a political level we're much more immature than we might be as individuals So we like we're looking to the mother figure with the father figure to fix it all for us Instead of us asking well, what's going on here? What's going on in social level or cultural level? Hard to be all play a role in someone making it better We say let's just elect the right daddy at the right mummy and they're gonna make it okay And there's also the pleasure and then four years later we're disappointed Yeah, so they're gonna elect another mummy or daddy and we're also locked into this tribal ideological thinking where you can justify the lies of the person on your side because they're on your team That's right. And so you say well better him than them you saw that with In your politics American politics because The kind of sexual Adventurism that Bill Clinton engaged in was never excoriated and and criticized as harshly as state Trump Now Trump was more egregious about it. I mean he's talking about grabbing people with a pussy because I can get away with it I mean that's yeah, but he was caught on I am only microphone saying that I guarantee you Clinton has had similar conversations point But the point I'm really making is that I have to say not that I'm defending Trump here Does nothing to defend is to me. It's kind of dysfunction. Right But he was criticized for it far more severely Than Clinton ever was for the very same behavior Mm-hmm. You know so that and it works both ways that people tend to criticize in the others In the other side that which will the completely excuse in their own side Yes, which makes political debates So toxic well no one's being honest. It's uh and we just we decide what team we like and that's our tribe and that's a also a negative consequence of our Development how we all evolved in these small tribal groups is that the outsiders are threatening But you are protected by whatever group you align with and you see that with the blue no matter who or red till dead You see that from either ideological position they would support whoever's on their side, you know, there's Psychologist not to name university. She's retired now. Her name is Darshia Narvaz And she studied hunter-gatherer groups It might be interesting for you to talk to her once she studied them internationally studied me historically and I don't want to speak in her behalf, but she could give you a very interesting What's her name again? I'll write it down for you afterwards. It starts here Narvaz and now she she's written a new book Which when it comes out you really might want to talk to her? I wrote she asked me to write the forward for it and the book is called Evolved Nest and it'll be published next year by North Atlantic books and I'm happy to give you her name Okay, yeah, and she's she's got a huge body of work. She's written many wonderful books She could really she could be conducts really she can talk really Maybe I'm talking fast. It must be all the caffeine Talking to fast. It's great. Oh, that's good. Oh, well Anyway, Darcy I could really tell you about Her studies of hunter-gatherer groups and not only about that, but a hot-bout huffs Horror evolution has mirrored and parallel devolution of other mammals and how much we have in common with other animals When it comes to rearing the young and interacting with each other and so on. It's very she's a very fascinating Person to talk with well, I wouldn't be surprised that our evolution mirrors other mammals Yeah, it's like we are mammals. We are animals. No wonder what we think or ourselves. We're just this weird Mammal that happens to be At least amongst the ones walking on earth the most intelligent Yes, and unfortunately Once that intelligence becomes disconnected from our emotional lives It becomes a dangerous weapon which is largely what's happened. And I'm talking about our Really emotional lives Darcy's got this concept called She says she says that we are species species atypical which means that We actually only species That is capable of creating environments that actually hurt us Mmm. Most species will seek out and cultivate and mallet beavers We'll create environments that'll support the protection and nurturing of the young they build these dams they build They create ponds they make you know, we create environments that actually hurt us Yeah, so she's a species atypical That's true right. I mean we create ghettos and we create horrible toxic air quality because of the way we Developed power in our cities and yeah Yeah, and then we justify it By whatever pursuit were involved in that you know you have to break a few eggs to make an omelet We're also the main look. I mean I As a Jewish kid growing up in Eastern Europe With the awareness of what had happened, you know, I had some awareness of what had happened My grandfather was 40 54 and he was a Wonderful doctor in a town and he was taking the wash with some died at the same day, you know So I grew up with this huge question in my mind of just how can people do this and Human beings are the only ones that will go chootously and for no practical reason Turn on each other and they do this habitually It's not even like Conquest and war. I mean that experience Didn't survey anybody's needs It had no purpose other than they Acting out of pure hatred and insanity By one people against another, you know, but this happens all the time in human life and so My quest as an individual and as a physician and just as an observer Why why do we do this and what do we have to learn about ourselves? so that we can break this chain of trauma I think people need to hear it discussed in a way that They it it makes sense in their mind like they they're like what you're saying here today I think it's going to radically impact a lot of people that are listening to this because Your you're saying things that resonate it works in their mind like oh Ha, oh that makes sense. Okay. Now I understand it Then once you've intellectualized that once you've you you have these ideas in your head now when confronted by what would be Typical behavior the pattern that you had fallen into Then you can recognize and say oh this is why I'm doing this and then the process of change is gradual and slow What I think psychedelics What the one of the ways they help and I agree with you that they're only a small part of this process of change But they allow you to completely detach from the normal patterns of life In a way that is Inescapable like when you're having a DMT experience or a syllabi experience It's and one of the weird things is that the most profound of these experiences are many the most profound Mimic human neuro chemistry It's the whole point. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that's what cilasibin does. That's what dimethyl trip to mean does It's all these things. Maybe have even kind of boyfriend receptors in our brains for yes. Yes. Yes and you know there's Undeniable benefits for some people with these things, but it's not a panacea It's not as simple as like take this you'll be fine. Well, I mean two things occurred to me when you said that what was the first thing? Oh, yeah When you're talking about people recognizing I think what's really important here that when people look at their lives and Where they've lied or they've let themselves down or others that they examine their experience compassionately but not with self judgment of Moral condemnation of themselves, but hmm. Why did they do that? Yeah, what made me do that not as a way of excusing it But the way of understanding is so enough to do it again, you know, so that's the first point You talked about using natural chemistry. So let's look at opiate addiction. It's really interesting example So people are addicted to heroin, you know, and I worked with a lot of heroin addicts in Vancouver's downtown inside Which is North America's most Considered area of drug use. I mean if you're never being there. It's an eye opener. You're first horrible. Yeah That's what was physician there for 12 years And I was the doctor at North America's at that time only supervised injection site Or people would bring that drugs and inject themselves at heroin But clean needles stir a water and if they all those did you resuscitate it? So opiate addictions and what you said about natural human chemistry so why did you get people? sterile water and if they overdose they'd be resuscitated. So opiate addictions and what you said about natural human chemistry. So why did people get hooked on opiates? Well, opium works in the human brain because we have receptors for it. But why do we have receptors from a plant that comes from Afghanistan? Well, we don't. We have, as you said, receptors, I should say, are an internal opiate system. This is our own natural chemical. Why do we have opiates? Well, if you want to stand opiate addiction yet to look at what do our natural opiates? You should call it endorphins and endorphins are, it means endogenous morphine like substance. So why do we have endorphins? What do endorphins do? What the first thing they do is they're pain relievers and they believe not only physical pain, body-emotional pain. So people have this natural painkiller, which is good. If I bang my knee, then these endorphins, by the way, when people cut themselves, that's what they're doing. They're looking after the endorphin. Now, so they're pain relievers, physical and emotional pain relievers. That's the first thing they do. The second thing they do is they make possible the experience of pleasure and reward, enjoy any relation. So those are important experiences because life is tough. What would our life be like if you had no joy, elation and pleasure? The endorphins help with that experience. The third thing they do is the most important thing. Then you possible this little thing got a love. Endorphins promote the loving contact between mother or father and infant. So when mother and dad or mother or dad are looking to the infant's eyes, and infant is smiling up at them, both the infant and the parent gets an endorphin head. Now without that, now if you take infant mice and you knock out the endorphins, and your receptors, these little mice will not cry for their mothers and separation. What would that mean in the wild? Death. Death. That's an important thing to the endorphins are. No, if you take human beings who didn't have those early experiences that promoted the proper development of endorphin circuits, you got a sitting dog for opiate addiction. When they do heroin, they feel normal for the first time in their lives, as many people have told me. Also, Bran told me about this experience of love that he had when he did endorphin. When he had heroin, he had when I was working in detox at that facility I told you about. This big, muscled guy. Imagine your body in a 6 foot 4 guy and earring and tattoos and shaved head and just tough looking as anything. And he was coming in for detox from heroin. I said, what does it do for you? And he said, dog, I don't know how to tell you this, but it's like you're sick and you're ill with a fever and your mother wraps you in a warm blanket, sits you in her lap and gives you a warm chicken soup. That's what their own feels like. Love. Love, yeah. And when somebody told me this sex-trayed worker with HIV, I said, what's it do for you? She said, when I first did heroin, it felt like a warm, soft hug. In other words, mother, father, love, parenting. Why do people who are addicted to heroin? Because they didn't have those experiences very often they had really negative and abusive experiences. And then we punish these people. We ostracize them. We cast them out of society. It's still a struggle in the United States to establish safe injection sites where people can use clean water so they don't pass each other with HIV. And I mean, with that backward. Yeah. And then there's the illigilization of Ebola. Ebola gained and also so aside, and I was going to have been shown to help people to addiction and to have some sort of a center where you have trained experts that can guide people through these things. Exactly. And then there's the problem with these guys, these experts because they become a subject to all of the human flawed instincts of the guru mentality and then they become this revered person because they've introduced this person into this world of psychedelics. And there you go, grows and they feed off the adulation and attention. And then they get lost. I've seen psychedelic shamans even abuse sexually abuse their clients, not that I've seen it. Yeah, I've heard of it as well. I've heard of it as well and some of these retreats where you go to these other countries and things. So you have to really have some due diligence before you go to the place. And this happens, of course, in the spiritual leadership work, all the Buddhist masters that have abused their clients or exported their clients, the other Catholic priests who have the support. It's a power thing, right? The psychiatrist you have, the doctors who have the politicians who have. It's just once you have power and you don't know yourself. Right. It doesn't matter how good you are and how much you know and how much wisdom you might even have. But if you're not integrated, you might very fall into the trap of using your power for selfish purposes. And that's what these people do. Yeah, that's a weird instinct that human beings have because it never ends well. It's mapped out. There's been so many instances of these cult-like situations or cult leaders. Yeah. It never ends well. No, it doesn't ever. And yet people still go down that path because in that moment when they're in control of their flock and when they're getting all this adulation and they're doing whatever they want to do, they feel like they're superior. They're invincible. They're significant. They're something special. Yeah. Yeah. And once he's at all the time, you see it in athletics. Yeah. There's so many athletes that I know that were abused by coaches and experts in very famous case, the infamous case of Larry Nassar, the doctor who abused all these young women in the acrobatic acrobats. Yeah. You got to wait with it for years and years and years because it's again, it's part of what the system does is it drops people of their internal power and they surrender to others and they don't even think to complain. Right. Yeah. Yeah. They don't think that they have the ability to complain. There's just so many people that have power over them and they're also holding this position of a spot on the Olympic team and you're going to compete represent the United States and gymnastics. Yeah. And so you just deal with it. Yeah. Yeah. The power dynamic of human beings having power over other human beings in that way, specifically in regards to psychedelics is one of the more disturbing things to me because I've seen this abusive thing happen in people that should know better. They should know better. They mean they're supposedly on this journey and yet they're involved in this thing where they're clearly they're extracting enormous amount of adulation out of these people and they're using it in this very transparent way. And when you hear them talk, it's so obvious and anyone who doesn't know any better or doesn't know them rather and they want like what do you think's going on here? What is that a cult? Yeah. Like immediately. Yeah. Like, I mean, because it's got that aspect of it. Right. It's like, where can become? Yeah. The people that's a weird instinct too is because we were always leaning towards a tribal leader. That's part of our heritage of developing in these tribes. Dorci and Nervesca talk to you about that. Yeah. Because the tribal leaders weren't all powerful looters, rulers, they were servants. Mm. They may have been good at leading a war party, but that didn't give them authority to rule, to go here over the others. Right. But that's more logical. What we can say is that human beings are incredibly complex beings and we got this incredible intellect. And the more we come, again, you talked about the kindness that you found in yourself and that you recognize is closer to you to nature than your previous persona. Yeah. When we developed the power or we developed the intellect or any aspects of ourselves, but we get cut off from the heart, people become very dangerous creatures. And no, it's not strictly speaking. We think of the brain as sort of the ruler of everything. We actually have three brains, at least three brains. We have a brain up here. Then there's a brain in the heart. There's a nervous system in the heart that has got important, predictive and knowledge. So is the gut. Ideally, the gut and the heart and the nervous system up here will be all connected. And if we are, we're very grounded and present and wise. And if we're not, if we cut off anyone from the others, and that's what trauma does, is it cuts us into little parts. So we're no longer this whole. And when we, that means that certain parts of ourselves can then take over and rule the roots to the detriment of ourselves and to others. And that's the essence of trauma, this connection from our whole selves. Essentially, human beings are this incredibly complex, almost organic machine that doesn't come with an operating system. Doesn't come with a, yeah, it doesn't come with a, what comes with an operating system. An operating manual. That's exactly right. It doesn't come with a programming. So it's how that operating system gets programmed by the environment that depends, that determines so much of what we behave like and what we love, what we hate, what we accept, what we deny, you know, and again, that's the essence of trauma. And so the subtitle is trauma, illness and healing in toxic cultures. It's hard to be get back to that wholeness. That's my whole, not just mine, but it's one of my, that's the essential question. And so you're trying to, with this book, provide people with the tools and the understanding to recognize these inherent flaws that human beings have and these traps that they fall into and give them an understanding of how to lead their life in a way that's more harmonious. That's as good a summation of the book as I could give you. Yeah. That's a very valuable thing to do for people because there's so many people that they just don't know what to do and they don't have any outlet other than psychiatrists. And psychiatrists oftentimes immediately put them on drugs. Well, so again, I talk about that in the book. So there's this modern trend of what's called biological psychiatry, which is all about, let's change the biology of your brain by giving you this pill. But they're not trained in a stone to stand is that the biology of the brain is determined by the environment. So the brain develops an interaction with the environment and is in a lifelong interactive relationship with it, both the internal environment and the external environment. So rather than blaming the biology of the brain, let's look at what shapes the biology. So in a book I talk about, I don't know if you're committing, do you know who Darryl Hammond was? Sure. Yeah. Yeah. So Darryl had a documentary about his life called cracked up, which is what Netflix is still available in Netflix. And Darryl in his 20s developed a mental health condition. And over the next two decades or more, he was seen by 40 different psychiatrists. What kind of mental health condition? Well, they called it psychosis. They called it bipolar on the sips, given a whole lot of diagnoses, typically, and all these medications. Until finally, one psychiatrist in New York said to him, I don't recall what you have a disease, something terrible happened to you. Now Darryl was abused severely by his mother through a disjointed. And he says there was a hallelujah moment for me, but it had taken him decades and three dozen psychiatrists to a phone sign he said to him, something happened to you. And what you're experiencing is a response to what happened to you. So I interviewed Darryl for the book, you know, and he's gone a long way towards having that with his trauma. But nobody for all those decades is all about take this pill or take that pill. This diagnosis, that diagnosis, it's so typical. Has Darryl had psychedelics for instance? First of all, even if I knew I couldn't tell you. Oh, because you're a doctor? No, because it's somebody's private life that I'm not right. Well, if he's talked about it publicly. But I don't know that he has. So I haven't heard him heard him. I haven't heard him talk about psychedelics. I have no knowledge. So if he had talked about publicly and if I'd heard about it, that would naturally say yes. Right. But I just don't know. Yeah. It's all based on pain. I mean, it seems like everything that we're talking about all these problems are coming out of trauma. So there's a lot of physical illness. Yeah. Like when you do the research, the more adversity that is a childhood, more risk you are for addiction, for mental health issues, for relational issues, and also for autoimmune disease and malignancy. So for example, there was a study out of Harvard University, I think three years ago, women with severe PTSD have doubled the risk of a very incancer. Really? Yeah. Double. Double. What about other cancers? In my experience, and I worked in palliative care for a while as well, looking up to two million people. And I've done the research. A lot of malignancy is related to trauma. Because what's the mechanism? Is the effects your immune system because you're severely stressed? Well, let me give you an example. So let's see a child that's sexually abused. The natural reaction would be rage. Can they afford to be rageful if they were rageful? What would happen to them? At the hands of the abuser? They'd get punished even further. Exactly. Therefore, the defense mechanism is the suppressed of rage. That's just a natural defense of the organism. Now, scientifically speaking, I'll tell you a secret that most physicians never hear about, despite decades of research and thousands of research papers and elegant science, the mind and the body are not separable. What happens in the mind, hand is in the body and vice versa. They're one unit. In fact, one great researcher can this per it call it body mind. It's a one unit. So our emotional system is partly parcel of the same apparatus as governs or immune system and our nervous system and our hormonal apparatus. It's all one system. It's not separate. They're different manifestations of the same system. No, what is the role of a healthy anger? Like we've already talked about is to protect your boundaries. What is the role of emotions in general? It's to let in what's healthy and nurturing and welcome and to keep up what is not. Is that clear enough? Is that okay? What is the role of the immune system? Fight off intruders. And to let in what's nurturing and healthy. If you take vitamins, you don't want your immune system attacking that. So it's to let in what's nurturing and healthy, keep up what is dangerous and toxic. The immune system and the emotional system have the same role. Because they're one unit, when you repress anger, you're also suppressing your immune system. That's being demonstrated in the laboratory. Now, when you do that, your defense against malignancy goes down. Because your immune system is supposed to recognize the malignant transformation, which happens in our bodies all the time, by the way, as an accident in nature. But a healthy immune system will say, well, that's a foreigner that's hell on the destroyed. When you repressed healthy anger, because you're programmed to do so, cause some parenting expert told your parents that an angry child should be banished from your presence. Or because the child was abused and to survive the abused, they had to repress their healthy self defense. They also suppress, then they learn to suppress their anger all their lives. That repressed the immune system, not the immune system turns against you. Or it cannot fight off malignancy. The physiology straightforward, it's elegant, it's been worked out. Most physicians never hear this. Now, there was a study out of Massachusetts, I think, which I caught in the book. I think 2000 women were followed over 10 years, followed over 10 years. Those who were happily married and didn't expect their emotions were four times as likely to die as those who were happily married. But they did talk about their feelings. You can't see it. Four times. Four times. Yeah. You can't separate your emotional life from your physiological life. So when you look at the question of why do women have 80% to 80% of autoimmune disease, they have much more likely to get rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, lupus, chronic fatigue and so on and so forth. It's because women in this society are particularly acculturated, not to be angry. It's also why black people have a moralness to society because they can't be angry. For black person to be angry is to core danger. And so if you look at the biological markers, they're different, not because of race, but because of racism. And none of that has to do with diet. Well, yes, in a certain sense it does, but it's not purely the diet. It's part of a whole mix of influences. So for example, diet is a factor. That's absolutely a factor. And that's the emotion. So as you know, for example, women who are, because I've heard you talk about it, people who are obese are more likely to get COVID, right? Yes. But who gets obese? People who are abused. Yeah. And why are they eating too much? To cover up their feelings. Exactly. So it's all connected. So the obesity epidemic in our society is an epidemic worldwide, by the way, as globalized capitalism extends its influence internationally. Obesity is a huge problem in China now. It didn't used to be. It's a huge problem in Mexico. It didn't used to be. It's happening worldwide. It's an epidemic. But what's happening is that number one, people are more and more isolated, more and more stressed. Now they eat to suit the stress. And then in the goodness of their hearts, the sugar companies will come along and say, we'll have this food. You'll make your food better. That's sweet salt fat combination. So the system looks elegantly. Who, boy, and it's just exploiting these openings? Well, it creates the problem in the stress place. And then it explores the openings that it creates. And you couldn't design the better system if you wanted to ace stress people and be profit off the stress. Do you have hope that we can sort this system out and that we can develop a better system? Do you think that that's... I believe in human beings. I believe that your experience, your experience healing, your experience, an opening of kindness in yourself, I have... I don't claim to be perfect. I don't think you do. But we would say that we've come a long way. Now if we can, why can't anybody? So I think that human beings... I have a lot of belief in the human potential. I just think we have to work recognize what the problem is and move towards conditions that will support that potential rather than inhibit it. So yeah, I believe in the possibilities of human beings. That's why I get so excited about these conversations and about your work in general is because it does give people a viable field of study and an option to understand and to look into all of the things that bother them and what is actually happening. What are the underlying factors that are leading me to these bad decisions? What are the underlying factors that lead me to this general feeling of distress and being upset? Well I think people need a map to themselves and I think my work and the work of others that I highly respect is to offer people a map to understand themselves so that they can navigate their lives with some information, rather than blindly. Yeah. Yeah. And that's all we can do. All you can do is give people another viable option and give people an understanding of why the current options are so unsatisfactory and what caused them and why they're there and how you could avoid these problems. Yes. How you can get better? Yes. Shall we end it right there? We can end right here. I couldn't take it for a better way to end it. It's a good way to end it. Well thank you again. Thank you for being here and thank you again for all your work. You've really done some amazing stuff and it's like just to have someone with your ability to express yourself, put that kind of information out there is incredibly valuable to people. So thank you. Well thank you for giving me the opportunity. Please, let's do it again sometime. And the myth of normal is this how currently is it out right now? September 13th. September 13th. So that's like two days. That's right. Five days. What's the day? Seven. I don't know what's going on. Eight. It's just five days. Yeah. Okay. So in five days. So thank you very much. Did you an audio version of this as well? This is an audio version which I got to mention. My co-writers, my brilliant son Daniel. And he also inherits the audio version because he's every talented actor and voice person and award winning narrator of books. So Daniel did the audio version which will be available the same date as the book is. Beautiful. Shout out to Daniel. Alright. Thank you. Appreciate you. Good job. Bye everybody.