Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Hey nice to meet you sir. Stimulated mind. A future proof for your brain. Is that possible? Freech future proof? Why can't I say that? I already already have dementia. Future proof your brain from dementia and stay sharp at any age. What first of all what prompted you to write this? So I've spent a long time working in a whole range of different spheres related to the brain. How to treat newborn brain injury, how to treat and maybe even prevent certain traumatic brain injuries and concussions. Looking at what effect long term cognitive decline in dementia as well as working with elite professional athletes, particularly formula one drivers, trying to help them stay on top of their game for as long as possible. And I saw across all those different areas. There are these core things that the brain seems to thrive on that are required either for development or maintenance of cognitive function. And these are things that people can apply to themselves on a day to day basis improve their focus and well being now. And then long term that translates to a lot of risk of dementia. So is dementia and is it a genetic thing or is it a function of atrophy? Is it a combination of those things? It's a combination of those things. Certainly there's a genetic component. So maybe I will zoom out to start with and just think about like what is dementia? Dementia is the clinical diagnosis of losing so much cognitive function that you're not able to take care of yourself on a day to day basis. There are several different types of dementia. The most common is Alzheimer's disease. That's something like 60 to 80% of cases of dementia. The next most common is vascular dementia, something like 10 to 20%. And there are others like front to temporal dementia, lewie body dementia, dementia you get with Parkinson's disease. But those first two, something like 70 to 90% of dementia's. They are directly tied to lifestyle and the environment. And right now it's estimated that somewhere between 45 and maybe even 70 or more percent of dementia's are preventable. And most of those fall into those two categories. There is a genetic component. So Alzheimer's disease has two broad types. There's early onset Alzheimer's disease that's caused by a single mutation in a single gene, something like the amyloprecar or protein gene or one of the presynetin genes. Those people get Alzheimer's in their 30s to 50s. It's a very predictable and quite rapid decline sometimes. But that's maybe 1% of Alzheimer's. The vast majority, like when we think about Alzheimer's we think about an age related dementia. And this is much more related to the environment. So there is a genetic component. You might have heard of ApoE4. Yeah. So you can have three different flavors of ApoE, ApoE, protein E, two, three, and four. You get two copies. Which is the one that makes you more likely to get CTE. So two. So that's four as well. Yeah. So four essentially has an effect of amplifying certain inflammatory effects in the brain. So that's probably why it makes CTE worse and more likely for you to get CTE because if you're getting repetitive impacts or repetitive injuries, then it sort of exacerbates or makes that inflammatory response worse. But when you think about that in terms of Alzheimer's, if you have one copy of ApoE4, your risk of Alzheimer's is increased by sort of two to six times. If you have two copies, it's six to 20 times depending on how you look at it. But all the data suggests that ApoE4 is a risk multiplier. Right. So it's not that if you have a copy of ApoE4, you're definitely going to get dementia. It's that in the setting, particularly of the modern environment, risks of dementia or risk practice for dementia are amplified like excessive alcohol intake, physical activity, low quality diet. So that also means that if you have, if you then address those risk factors, you have greater benefit, right? Because you're offsetting some of that additional risk. So however you look at dementia from a genetic standpoint and it can also be family history, right? If you have a family history of dementia, you have an increased risk of dementia. But a lot of what comes with family history is shared environment and shared lifestyle, right? You eat and sleep and move like a parent did. And so if they had a lifestyle that might increase their risk of dementia, you get that as well. So even if you do have an increased genetic risk, you can offset a large part of that through lifestyle and other environmental factors. Okay. So for some people, there's an increased genetic risk, but do some people do not have this increased genetic risk? Do they still have a possibility of getting dementia just from atrophy or just from sedentary lifestyle, no stimulation whatsoever? Yes. So the kind of the way we would say is that not everybody who has apoep4 gets Alzheimer's and most people who have Alzheimer's do not have apoep4. So absolutely. Okay. So is it just like everything else, like your muscles atrophy, your bones weaken when you don't put load on them? Is that what it is? Yeah. So that's like the core thesis of my book, right? It's called the stimulated mind. For that reason, I think that in the, and the title is slightly provocative. because in the modern world, we are hyperstimulated. Overstimulated and nonsense. Exactly. So we're overstimulated and understimulated at the same time. Right. We're getting a lot of input, but we're not doing any calculations. Yeah. We're not formulating new ideas. We're not being creative. We're not problem solving. Exactly. We're just being inundated with nonsense. Exactly. Yeah. So the function of any tissue in the body, right, you mentioned the muscles, the bones, the liver, the immune system, their function is dependent on the stimulus you apply to them. And so the brain is exactly the same. And if you want functions and networks in the brain to perform well, you need to challenge them in order to enhance capacity. And then do you think you need to keep your liver working healthy by drinking every normal? So it's the example of, yes, if you drink a lot of alcohol, your liver gets better at metabolizing alcohol. Right. So it kind of, it proves the point that doesn't necessarily mean that the alcohol is there to keep your liver healthy. Probably not. And they used to do that with people that had, if they had lung problems, they would give them cigarettes. Yeah. Like people with asthma? Yeah. And that didn't turn out so great. But the theory was okay. I think they should have just been breathing heavy. That would have been a better application of that, right? Because you don't want it to, your lungs aren't a filter to like torture you. Yeah. So when you start studying this, do you have someone close to you that has Alzheimer's? Or is it just a filter study that you're interested in? Yeah. There's two different things. One, I focused initially on the brain early in life and then you'll elite level cognitive performance in athletes. And you kind of see that these things sort of tie together. Like what happens early in life? What happens during life affects what happens later in life? But I also had my grandfather died of dementia. He was an alcoholic and he had a combination of alcoholic, alcohol-induced brain atrophy plus vascular dementia. I really wonder about people today. And this is one of the reasons why I was so interested in this because what we were just talking about before, that people are being oversaturated with nonsense but not stimulated in any way the challenge is your mind. Yeah. I mean, this is a constant state today. And then on top of that, you've got a lot of people that are using AI throughout their day to solve all their problems where they don't think at all. And there's been some studies on that that show that it's a decreasing cognitive function. Like when they ask them to actually use their brain, the brain works less well than it did before they started. So you're not getting educated by chat CBT or any of these. What you're doing is you're letting it think for you. Absolutely. One, maybe one of the studies you're thinking of was a study that did at MIT and they had students write essays and they could either just write it using whatever they had in the head already or using Google or using an LLM. And what they showed was that as you increase the amount of like outside support, you've got Google and then I think it was chat GPT, then there was less activity in the brain networks associated with actually doing the task and students remembered less well afterwards. So I mean, this isn't surprising. No, you're not using your brain. Therefore, it doesn't engage in the task. But what's interesting is that they found a version. So like some of the students who had previously written an essay just for themselves, then they asked them to go back and use chat GPT on top. And what they found was that the final output was better. So the way that we can use these tools, rather than just asking it to do all the stuff for us, which is what most people are doing. And I think we'll cause skills and maybe even parts of the brain to atrophy because they're not being used is we use them as orthotics like they can expand our capacities, right? You try writing it all first and then you say, hey, what did I miss? What am I not thinking about? And you can kind of build on it from there. And that might perhaps actually stimulate your mind. Exactly. Why didn't I think it that? Next time I'm writing a paragraph, I'll consider these options. Yeah, exactly. So you actually have to be like fully engaged your brain in that process. But then they might, the end result might be better. Well, it's just such uncharted territory for us. All this, especially social media. I mean, completely uncharted territory that people are staring at their hand for eight hours of that. That's really what you're doing. You're staring at your hand and you're hoping usually unsuccessfully to get something that really excites you. And something that's really unique and changes your perspective on things. I mean, I think maybe when I was using social media every day, maybe once a day, I would get something that was really interested in that I would say. I'd go, oh, that's actually interesting. And I would think, okay, that would be a good subject to bring up on the podcast. But the rest of the time, it was just horseshit. Well, part of the algorithm and this, you know, I'm not an expert in training algorithms to do this, but part of the goal of the algorithm is that you don't get everything that is perfect or the will that immediately capture your attention up front, right? Because you want it to be random. And there's like method in the randomness that keeps you scrolling. Because eventually you'll get those small bumps that then keep you going. But what's particularly interesting about social media is it leverages the fact that we are social beings. So we prioritize information that is called the acronym is prime, prestigious in group moral and emotional. And this is even greater in social context, right? Because we are trying to learn about our social environment so that we can survive our group and be fitter. And so social media makes us think that we will get that information whilst at the same time offering us the exact opposite, which is essentially isolation. But it leverages that desire of the human brain to find this social information and this social connection whilst not giving us any of that. Also without it getting any feedback from another human being while you're communicating ideas. So you could say the most horrible shit to people in a comment or a text message. And you don't think about it because there's not a person there. Not right in front of you. Yeah. And so design for like it's like an anti human device. Very weird. But I mean if your goal is to capture attention, they're doing a great job of it. Well not just that they're acquiring enormous wealth and also enormous influence over the just all sorts of things. Politics, economics. I mean some of the richest corporations in the world, they gather a thing that we never thought of was valuable, which is data. Yeah. I mean when people first started using these things, when people first started using the internet, nobody really thought that data was going to be one of the biggest commodities in the world. Yeah but now if they know what caps is your attention and what you'll spend money on and right that's a perfect way to get as much out of you as possible. So the concept is future proofing your brain. What are the things that you think people should be doing to try to future proof the other than avoiding social media and avoiding a lot of the stuff that we're talking about here? So I think every tool has a possible use. So like for instance social media, if you have crafted a social media that allows you to maintain connections that you wouldn't have otherwise, like the original version of Facebook as it existed 25 years ago was just like posting pictures and you could like chat with some family members. Right. Right. So if you use social media like that and there are studies that show that if you're using online tools, including social media and it increases communication and connection beyond what you would have had otherwise, that can be a net benefit. If it's all you use and it's replacing in person human connection, then it's a net negative. So there can be ways that it could be beneficial. And you know, if your Instagram feed is just like cute dogs running around in the snow, which is what most of mine is right now, right? That can be a nice five minute break in between like cognitively demanding tasks. That's fine. But when you think about future proofing your brain, this idea that there is some unknowable future, right? We don't know what the future is going to look like. If we want to exist in that future, we're going to need good processing speed, good decision making skills, good working memory, good emotional and social skills, right? And so in order to maintain those, we need to challenge and stimulate them. So the, I think the most important thing most people can do is think about new challenging and often creative skills. And there's a lot of evidence for creative arts, music. What they do is they improve the function of networks in the brain that are at risk during the process of aging, particularly because they're important for attention and social connection. And so if we really invest time in doing these things that we suck at and get better at, but get better at them. We maintain these broad cognitive skills that we're going to need in the future regardless of what happens. And some of that is also personal. So I, like the goal is to build as much cognitive capacity as possible, right? I have this idea of headroom, which is the difference between what you what you need on a day to day basis versus what you're truly capable of. It's the difference between like on a day to day basis, your legs need to be strong enough to like get you up off the toilet, right? But your maximum capacity is like what's your max back squat? The difference between those is your headroom. And then that gives you capacity to perform when you're injured or sick or you need to like lift your car off your buddy because it got flipped in a car accident like all those things like when you need to draw on greater resources, you want those resources to be there. Because we are going to be stressed, sleep deprived, sick and we still want our brains to function. So investing in like really challenging tasks and skills builds that capacity so that we have access to it when we need it. What is the function and like what what does the effect on the brain when you learn a new skill like sucking at something, which I always tell people is one of the best things you can do a lot of people don't enjoy it because there you go. They don't like being frustrated that they're terrible at something. But there's something about not being good at something and dedicating yourself to it and and seeing market improvement that stimulates all sorts of areas of your mind, which I find really interesting. So most people don't realize that the process of learning which in itself is like the core process of neuroplasticity, right? The brain making new connections and cementing new connections. That whole process is driven by failure essentially and making mistakes because your brain is a prediction machine. It's constantly predicting what's going to happen next based on the world around you and what you're trying to do. And so imagine that you're trying to do some kind of new move in Jiu-Jitsu or something and you have no idea how to do it. You're going to try it and there's going to be this big gap between your expectation and reality. That's going to be frustrating, right? That's the feeling of failure. But that's what diverts resources in the brain to say, hey, we need to close the gap between what we hoped would happen and what actually happened. And that's what drives neuroplasticity. And this is also then what drives the cementing and function of these networks in the brain associated with that. So the idea that you start sucking at something and you get better at it over time, that is exactly the thing that the brain needs in order to improve and maintain its function. Think you know what's going to happen during the big game? Call it with DraftKame's predictions, a new app or you can predict outcomes on football's biggest game. Take real money predictions on the big game and put your money where your knowledge is. Pick a topic, make your prediction. What will the total score be? Will the underdog cover which team will be lifting the trophy at the end? Then see will your big game smarts pay off? DraftKame's prediction is new, simple to use with big game trading available in California, Texas, Florida and more download now. New DraftKame's predictions customers get up to a $75 first trade bonus with promo code Rogan. Don't just feel it, predict it, with DraftKame's predictions, the crown is yours. DraftKame's predictions is a CFTC registered introducing broker, event contract trading involves substantial risk of loss. One for new customer opt in required, non with drawable predictions dollars expire in one year. And February 8th, 2026, market availability varies, eligibility restrictions apply. Many terms at dkng.co slash predictions promo. How many of those things should you take on it once though? This is my issue. I have a problem. I wish I could have four lives, but I could run simultaneously. I would do four, I'd have four different occupations. So I try to smash as many things into a day as possible. But there's many times where I think boy, I think I'm doing too many different things that I'm trying to get good at. And maybe it would be better if I just concentrated on one. So there's a few different ways to look at this. I think that a broad base and a broad range of different skills is probably something that we should all hope to have. Like talent stacking. Yeah, yeah, exactly. And if you think about one of my favorite books is range by David Epstein, which talks about the broad range of skills that people who then really succeed in academia or sports have, right? They didn't specialize really early. They had a broad base of talents that they can then draw upon as they specialize later in life. And I think that's something that we can all aspire to. But equally, what's probably more common is that we try something and we do it for a little while and then we just kind of like give up on it and we try something else. And yeah, there's like a little bit of benefit to that. But when you look at some of the studies that are really examined the effect of learning some of these creative skills and they've done it with tango dancers and painters and video gamers, when you compare an expert to an amateur and where you're seeing the benefits of expertise in terms of the function of some of these networks in the brain, it really is the development of some level of expertise. It is probably required to see the maximum benefit. Obviously, the learning curve is steepest at the beginning, right? When you're learning beginning to learn something, that's when you'll learn the fastest. But there is also some benefit to expertise. So some of that, just to say that pick one or two things that you're actually excited to continue getting better at for a long period of time. And so there maybe you do have to try a bunch of different things until you find the thing that really gets you going. But across all those different skills, they have similar core effects on the brain. So you don't have to do one or both. You can just pick the one that you enjoy the most. So it's just about the struggle of trying to get better at something essentially. And my wife is learning a new language right now and she's been so excited about it. It's really interesting because she starts talking around the house in French. And it's one of those things where you're like, I'm watching her do it. She wasn't doing it and then she's been doing it over the last couple of months. And I'm seeing this excitement and this new project. And we were talking about it about how that is one of the things that's very difficult to do. But it's more complex than learning because it's learning and interacting. It's not just learning. You're learning, but you have to, it requires like this back and forth with another person. You have to understand sentence structure. You know, it's just like calm and especially French is so different than English. There's so much weird shit involved in it. But you could see, like I could see in her that like this is very stimulating to her mind. And it made me go, Oh, man, I should learn a language. I'm like, fuck, where do you have the time to learn a language? But then I thought about like when I was on social media all the time, I would look down on my phone some days and it would say screen use today six hours. I'm like, fucking six hours. That's what your time is. Right. Six hours just learning Spanish. How you'd be fluent. I'd be able to go to Takarean order in Spanish. You know, it's like we spend so much time doing nonsense that anything that you can do that requires your brain to be in that uncomfortable state of what is this? Oh, it's this. Is that this? Got it. You know, that that dance that firing of the synapses and forcing the synapses and forcing your brain to figure this puzzle out. So many people don't have that. And I see it in people that get stagnant where they're doing the same thing every day. Their job is fairly mundane and kind of boring. And maybe they like it, but there's nothing stimulating about it. They're talking the same boring ass people. They don't exercise. They go home. They watch TV and then they shut off and they do it all again. And then you talk to them like five, 10 years later. It's almost like they're slipping. Yeah. Like you see it, you can see it in people that have mundane existences. Like their stimulation is so low that their ability to be stimulated as low. I think that that thing you describe is so baked into our society that we've started to believe that it's normal. Right. So when you look at the trajectory of cognitive function over the, over like your entire life, imagine like a graph. Or on the one side, you have cognitive function. And it could be something basic like processing speed. How quickly do you, do you bring process information on the bottom is age. Right. It tends to peak some time around our sort of mid 20s to early 30s. It's usually the peak on average tends to be higher and later. The more time we spend in education. So the more time we spend, essentially as professional learners, the more we can build that kind of final capacity. So that is just sort of like an average decrease downwards. And a colleague of mine, Josh Turkner and I, his neurologist, we wrote a paper a couple of years ago where we theorize that the reason why we see that decline in at the population level in cognitive function from about that age is because we go to work. We do the same thing again and again and again. And then everything else that life gets in the way. And we never spend that same time investing in building our cognitive capacities, the way we did when we were kids and when we were in school. And so the decline is partly because we just stop doing that. So the part, one of the theories of aging is that it's just the continuation of development, like process of development. And most of the processes of development in the brain are refining connections based on the environment and the stimulus the brain receives. So if you start removing stimuli because you're no longer engaging in these like cognitive challenging things, the brain is going to start removing connections. Hey, I don't need that. Right. I'm not using this part of my brain. And as a result, you start to see decline. And so there are studies that show if you have a very stimulating job. It's very complex problem solving skills, lots of social interactions. You have a slower rate of cognitive decline as an adult and a lower risk of dementia. You see in individuals who continue to engage in reading, reading, writing, lectures, dancing, you know, a whole bunch of hobbies. Again, you see a slowed rate of decline. So some of what we just expect to happen with age is because of the way we stop engaging with the world and we stop challenging ourselves. Well, it completely makes sense, right? Like, if you think about physical activity, it goes along the same kind of path. Exactly. You see, I have friends, I'm 58, which is crazy to say. It sounds so old. But I have friends that are 58 that are basically, they're skeletons with like meat hanging around various parts of it. But my physical ability is very similar to what it was when I was in my 30s. The only way that I could really test it was like physical competition and I'm not really interested in that. I don't want to get hurt. But my capacity for work is very similar. And I know that because I force it. You know, I make myself do it. And I would imagine the same thing is true with the mind. I mean, it has to be. I think it's all together. It's a use it or lose it. If your mind doesn't have a need to be constantly intrigued and stimulated, like you think for survival, right? One of the things that speculated me, I can ask you about this because this is one of, I think about this a lot. Like what is ADHD? And whether or not it's actually a problem, I think it's a superpower because I'm pretty sure I have it. Yet I can folk. I'm very functional. I can focus on things. And as long as I tire myself out from activity, I can relax and I can concentrate on things. And I'm very interested in certain things. And I can lock into them and concentrate. But if I was forced to be in a classroom with a very boring teacher teaching a subject, I'm not that interested in. And I was a child. If I had the wrong parents, luckily I didn't, I would be medicated. Yeah. I think that that is this ability to focus on certain things like hyper focus was probably a function of a persistent hunter, right? Because if you wanted to catch an animal, you couldn't be a person that gives up quick. You had to be a person that you keep looking for tracks. You keep trying to find sign. You're trying to figure out a way like I've got keep pushing one more hour. We've got 20 minutes of daylight left. I've got to figure this out. Right? That thing had to be in you in order to be a successful hunter. So I'm sure that that's part of it. The current picture of ADHD, I think is quite complicated. So I have family members with ADHD. When they then started on medication, they were like, oh, actually all of a sudden, my brain works. Right. So medication is at a role. If I took at a role, I would say the same fucking thing. I don't need a stimulant. But if I took a stimulant right now, I'd be like, dude, I'm so much better. So no, but you know what happens in the session. Same fucking thing. I don't need a stimulant. Yeah, but if I took a stimulant right now, I'd like dude I'm so much better. So no, but you know what happens in in certain individuals with ADHD when you give them stimulants They calm down. They calm down right. So I think there's a combination of multiple things some is Yes, like these can be very beneficial traits in in the right settings, but you also have to consider that we're layering on a modern environment that's like bright lights at night a whole bunch of caffeine and stimulants, right? And yeah, of course some of it is I think Right the teacher is boring and they're like they're just not engaged because The majority of people with ADHD can still focus right on things that they're interested in focusing in yes Or on even without any kind of medication Yeah, so but there's like a sliding scale And I think there's a whole bunch of different reasons why for one individual they might experience Sensitive ADHD or not. So I think I think it's complicated Can I ask you before you go any further? Yeah, I ask you how much of that has depended on physical activity? Like do we study ADHD based on whether someone is physically active or not? Because look if I'm not physically active. I'm a mess Like if for something if something happened and for some reason like I got a court order You're not allowed to exercise for six months or you go to jail like oh god I would probably be a fucking complete basket case, right? Yeah, and maybe I would have full on ADHD Maybe I wouldn't be able to concentrate on anything my brain be bouncing all over the place like how much of it is a Biological requirement that your body has to release energy so I think you can I would expand that out even further than that because Physical activity is a core requirement of our biology and physiology right There's a nice quote by in ego Simon on Milan who's a you know well known exercise physiologist who says that Exus physical activity is baked into our evolutionary Development so much so that now we've had to invent exercise in order to like Like to prevent what happens when we don't move. Yeah, so it's the lack of movement is a disease causing Pro-aging Sent like situation. So to stop you there. Yeah, what if I mean or do they? When they treat kids with ADHD do they take that into consideration? so As I'm not an ADHD researcher so I genuinely don't know, but I would think that before you would give someone a stimulant Maybe track and field You know what I mean? Yeah, and maybe play bad men do something where you've got to run around Yeah, where you like who boy I can focus now. I think I think that that's Again, I would say that that's needed for all kids regardless of any potential diagnosis. So of course We need I think that should be taken into consideration whether that's gonna be enough For every kid you know hard to say but We know that all humans require significant amounts of physical activity just for their biology to work properly Right, so certainly if that's not being taken into account or it's not available or it's not encouraged There are whole host of conditions where that's gonna be a problem well just only makes sense right and We mean this has been talked about forever the Stoics used to talk about it. There's a quieting the mind I mean samarise who's talked about it like that physical activity So what you know one of the main benefits that Chinese used for Kung Fu thousands of years ago quieting the mind and The propensity that we have in the society this Direction of almost immediately prescribing a medication for something when it seems like what you're doing is you're dulling a biological requirement You're dulling the impact of this biological requirement that you're not meeting Why wouldn't we prescribe exercise first and then think about those things like for instance like hormone replacement? if you have a good doctor An ethical doctor that is working with someone and they they find out you have low testosterone One of the first things they do is adjust your diet They say well you have so much food in your diet that causes inflammation you have a very high rate of complex carbohydrates You have a lot of sugar in your diet. You drink too much alcohol. You smoke cigarettes. Let's remove those things first and Then let's see what happens and then you increase your protein and you start drinking water and you go Oh, look your hormone levels are going up naturally Well because you're fucking poisoning yourself, right? So wouldn't you I mean why don't they prescribe exercise for kids other than the fact that you can't make money off of it wouldn't it be a good idea? um So I think that all kids should absolutely get You know several hours ideally of movement and physical activity of different kinds every day um part of the problem it's not that Scientists or doctors don't think that's important right now The systems that we have make it very difficult for those things To be put in place right so making sure that every kid has the time and the resources to be able to exercise and Like the right kind of people so that they know what they're doing and they're supervised um and you know it's the same with uh so say with testosterone placement if your testosterone is low like most The primary cause or one of the most common cause of low testosterone in men is right that combination of metabolic disease being sedentary Poor quality diet like we know that but Creating the systems that allow people to change those things and then supporting them to do that is really hard Nobody nobody has solved the behavior change problem right if we think about if we think about the modern environment um And we think about what that drives us to do and not do But we know we have all this information right we know how to prevent these diseases We know how to reverse many of them and a lot of it is driven by lifestyle of the environment but supporting people to change those behaviors and make sure they have the resources and time to do it That's really hard. I nobody solved that problem yet Boy that seems like a problem that's easy to solve It's just based on personal responsibility No, but it's not but if you can tell someone this is your requirement for the day I want you to run one mile By what you do a hundred push-ups and a hundred sit-ups and write it down But how are you so first of all But you're saying something you're saying it like it's impossible I'm not saying very different I'm not saying it's impossible. I think that those of us for whom This has become a part of our personality and our lives like you and me Of course, it's been like of course you just do that. Like you just go for the run. You do the hundred push-ups But for people who Like have never had anything like this and it's never been a part of their environment It's never been a part of who they are Changing that actually requires a ton of work And coaching and it's actually really difficult when I say it's difficult But it's totally doable physically It's not like I'm asking to breathe underwater Like people have done it and you can draw inspiration from like my friend Jelly Roll I mean, you know, Jelly Roll the musician. Yeah, Jelly Roll was 500 pounds And he's lost 300 pounds And he did it with no zempeck no GLP ones He just started walking and started cutting sugar out of his diet and slowly but not even slowly Over the course of just a couple of years He shrunk to like a normal size human. It's fucking amazing But he drew inspiration from a lot of other people You know, one of them is he's good friends with my good friend Cam Haynes Who's a ultra marathon runner and endurance athlete And so, you know, he's taken him on runs and worked out with them and helped him and just watching YouTube videos Just all he started doing was just walking You know, where he couldn't walk up hills and he would just walk around his block and walk up the hill When he didn't want to do it and he did it. It's like it's not You can do it. You just have to start doing it And I think the starting doing it is the most difficult I don't think it's difficult to do it once you gather momentum Because there's a there's a thing that happens with people when they start doing something They get excited and then they look forward to doing it again As long as you don't like you don't take a guy's 500 pounds and say today We're gonna do 100 push-ups 100 sit-ups. We're gonna do kettlebells And then we're gonna do laps around the block. You can't do it. It's not possible Yeah, but you could just go for a walk and then tomorrow We're gonna go for a walk a little bit further and then in two weeks We're gonna double that walk and then in three weeks We know we're gonna incorporate some light body weight squats and all along the way We're gonna adjust your diet and then write these things down like this is it's not impossible So it's just they need motivation. So I agree is it's not impossible But you know, I've worked with several digital health companies who are working in the behavior change space and People don't need more information like they know that they need to to walk more and they know that they could eat better And they know that they could sleep better But the the process of trying to first of all understand like how should I do that? What should I do that? When should you know when when should I do that and then right? Some people may absolutely not have the time or the environment maybe they live somewhere where Actually, she's not what they don't want to be walking around outside right right? That's that's relatively common or They don't have a kitchen right so then how do you cook food like? How'd you navigate that that food environment? So I agree like I completely agree with you all of this is doable It's just that different people are going to need different levels of support To do that initially right gain that momentum understand understand how how that feels how it changes them and Right now the majority of people don't have access to that that kind of support and I Absolutely hope that that changes right the food environment changes so that it's much easier to change the way that you eat and that the Built environment changes so it's much easier to go out and have a walk And do a lot of that So I think we just have to consider that it's both right there's there's an individual component right But there's also like a societal component where we have to make this as easy for people as possible and sort of like build it into their lives Such as they are okay, so let's consider this societal aspect of it. Let's consider the like how would you implement something like let's imagine That you get appointed to some committee that's in charge of Trying to facilitate this growth and improvement in people. What would you do? So I think you need a few a few different parts to it one Great part would be so say through You know if you could dramatically improve quality and access of like education at all levels and make physical activity just be a regular part of that that has been slowly removed from many Educational curriculums around the world over time right so bring some of that back and it just becomes part of day-to-day life and Then you would also teach people The skills involved in some of these these other things so like teach teach people how to cook and and how to do that within the bounds of what they have access to They you know cultural preferences dietary preferences You know financial you know financial abilities that kind of stuff. Well, there should be a part of a school curriculum Yeah, absolutely just like you should teach kids about taxes and all these other things and so I think if you start early on and you do this with Sort of curiosity and skill building Then you release people out into the what you know that that that I think that's that's the place to start because When you get out into the real world and you're working Three jobs and you live somewhere where you don't want to go for a walk outside and like you can barely get six hours of sleep every night And you know you've got three kids that you're trying to look after Saying oh, hey, you should do a hundred push-ups every day. But that's not gonna happen like other things are gonna happen that are more important um So so I think there's that part maybe the skill building part then it's thinking about like how people have opportunities to do those things um, and then I would think about you know access to high quality you know health care Like these things that's like some sometimes people need help help that they can't get access to or it's expensive or whatever So I think giving more of that so that they get support when they need it is definitely it would definitely help as well I think one great way would be to Device a website make like maybe like even a government website where you Put in like your body weight. When was your last physical activity? What this that the other thing all the what's your diet and then they implement a program and you could follow online With a bunch of other people that are doing the same thing and post your results. Yeah, so you have a community aspect to it You have a dedicated program that you can follow so you don't have to think about oh I don't want to do that. I don't want to do this. I'll just tell you just do this just do this Oh, you weigh 400 pounds your 39 years old. You haven't worked out in 10 years. Okay. Here's here's day one Yeah, and follow along post your weight post what you're eating I mean that I mean and with AI I mean, that's one of the good things about an LLM right with AI you could ask it to formulate adjustments Yeah, and you could say okay, what nutrients should I be consuming? What how much protein do I actually need? How much how much how many calories do I need? How many calories are in this and that and you know What is a how much protein do I get from you know 20 ounces of broccoli or whatever the fuck it is? You know what I mean? Yeah, so when you look at some of the most successful Trials of behavior change and most of them are based around weight loss studies, right? That's that's a very typical way to do it When you see when you want somebody to change Their behavior and feel feel good about it um one of the sort of Constructors self-determination theory probably heard of right humans need three things autonomy Competence and relatedness so autonomy is the like I am in charge of my life and I'm in charge of my decisions So what are the things that I want to work on today? I have some choice there Competence like how do I Help somebody feel like they know what they're doing like a lot of the hurdles with Exercise or diet is like I don't know what I'm doing and like this guy says that I need to do sprints And this guy says I need to lift weights and this guy says I need to do Ex amounts of zone two, but I like what does that even mean like right? Do I even know I'm supposed to like so? How do you build competence in people and then relatedness? That's the point that you are making right you have a group like You support each other. Maybe you do stuff you do stuff together. So um One of the most successful weight loss trials of all time was called the broad study And one of the things they did so they they lost a lot of weight and they kept it off with and so most weight loss studies people We get regained afterwards is they they met several times a week. They did like potlucks group activities like they helped each other Community. Yeah community The one downside of that is that there are there was there was an app I can't remember the name of it that were that tried to build that for exercise So like you'd have these buddies and they'd be your accountability buddies But what happened was that when people started to slip They left the platform much faster because they were like I don't want my buddies to know that I'm not doing what they are supposed to be helping me do So you kind of have to like build in multiple buffers in different ways to help people depending on what it is that motivates them or not I mean we have public education right we have Universities we have public high schools and middle schools. Why don't we have public gyms? Why don't I mean how much money would it cost to have community gyms set up where you don't have to have money to join Where it's paid for by your taxes you're not talking about something that's outside of You know like the Financially they wouldn't be feasible. Yeah, it's not that hard to do so I think that was the I don't know what the financial model is now, but that was the the idea of like the YMCA is right It becomes a community focus point like My wife grew up in North Carolina I was like she talks about how they were down the YMCA all the time like playing basketball I used to have a YMCA when I lived in Boston that I used to go to really cheap They had weights they had a track they had they had a swimming pool They had all sorts of stuff. It was way cheaper than a regular gym They had classes you could take. Yeah, and there was something very similar close to where I grew up in the UK Just like for a couple of pounds you go do a Some kind of martial arts class or something. Yeah, they had that too. Does Austin even have a YMCA Yeah, definitely. Oh, yeah, there's one there's like a big one downtown. I've driven past it once like big glass front Like I don't know what it costs. How much is it cost to get into the YMCA in Austin What's fine? I mean that should be paid for by taxes. Yeah, but I mean if we pay for all this other shit that we don't need Why don't you know when when a big hurdle is accessibility and one year New progress packed joined today. How much? 125 dollar value for a year is that what it says? How much does it cost? It doesn't say how much it costs? What is it gross join today? How much I The secret of most memberships on for gyms. They don't list their prices on yeah, but it's a YMCA click on join that join today They can talk to you. Oh That what it is every yeah, that's how everyone works, but it's probably cheaper than most well Why don't you put it into? Proplexity or something like that say what is how much is it cost to join a YMCA? Here we go. Let's guess how much do you cost? 20 bucks a month 50 yeah, I think yeah, it can't be much more than a planet fitness when I was Planet fitness is a pretty cheap, but the thing about planet fitness is they kind of the a lot of these big gyms not just Singling out planet fitness. They kind of hoped that you don't show up. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah Gilead look at 40 to $80 per month depending on age and household type. That's not too bad Yeah, but for some people that's that's a lot of money right 30 bucks a month. Yeah, like that's a good chunk of their food bill So I There there should be some slightly scale where this becomes very very heavily subsidized. Yeah, but or free. Yeah, yeah Yeah, I mean why wouldn't it be free? Yeah, I think it should be and then homeless people going there in shower There are well, I mean I'm okay with that scene depends on who they are I mean if they shall okay with some of them You know fucking crazy people shitting that's up in the in the shower Blue Cross Blue Shield bup-up-up-up-up many health insurance plans offer gym membership Through reimbursements discounts or programs like active fit or global fit benefits can include 20 to $400 annual reimbursements That's how some people can use their health insurance to get some of that fee covered. Okay, well, that's nice But the thing is again, it's just like planet fitness or any of these places The thing is like they want to recruit you and then you go and you're like, okay, and then you never go. Yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, but we genuinely want people to go like that's right. That's the whole idea Well the thing is like there's one thing like for someone and I've taken friends to gyms before that don't work out And they're like what do I do? They have no idea what to do. Yeah, classes. Yeah, classes is what should be absolutely like Learn you skill, move make a friend like so much amazing stuff Yeah, yeah, yeah, and they should have multiple different classes available. Yeah at the same time Right, they should be a class for people that have done nothing like okay, these are dumbbells Yeah, this is a pick up a light one I'm gonna show you to do a shoulder press and then it should be for you know more advanced people and intermediate people Yeah, and I hope whole range of different skills yoga zumba Pilates, Tai Chi different dumbbell weights, but in Austin they have a bunch of public-free gym equipment and different parks playgrounds and parks. Yeah, that stuff's great Well in New York City has a whole look at these guys Yeah, we'll look at staring at each other talking shit that I think one of the problems is that Well festival like a lot of people might just like look at that be like What do I do with that and then the second is that a Lot of what we see around fitness and movement is kind of the extremes right there Iodilize professional athletes like this is what the best of the best do and we often we internalize this idea that That's what we need to do and if we're not doing that then we're not doing anything Right where is all the data suggests that literally any type of movement above what you're doing right now is beneficial cardiovascular health Cognitive health dementia. Yeah, so I think some of it is just like letting people know and having people understand that it doesn't Take that much to move the needle and then when they start to do a little bit Right you get get a bit of a bug maybe enjoy it you find a thing that you enjoy you do more of it And so that that's part of it too like having people understand that it doesn't take that much To really start you know having having an impact. Yeah, and it's also for a lot of people This is a society that really emphasizes quick fixes on things and It's not a quick thing. It's you have to trust in a process and so that has to sort of be That has to be edgy people have to be educated to that it has to be taught to you like this is a process and Your on a process you should be very excited about being on this process It's gonna be weird because it's gonna take a long time for you see any results But that long time like in that in that time period you will eventually see results and then you'll be excited You'll feel better you'll have more energy. It'll help every aspect of your life. You just got to do it one of the one of the things that I like when I talk about movement in particular or exercise and say cognitive function is that you'll start to see benefits relatively quickly So if you go and do a six second max sprint a couple of times, right? And there were studies that show this you will acutely like immediately see an improvement in cognitive function But above low to the brain you've created arousal, which is really important for focus and attention If you you go out go for a walk outside right? You'll sleep better that night so you'll feel better the next day and so yes, you're absolutely right that This is a lifelong thing right you can't just do it for a couple of months and then Hope that it's gonna translate to benefits for decades to come but you can see immediate benefits if you start to do some of this stuff And you can and you can feel it very quickly so I think that That's that's gonna be important because not everybody is gonna is Gonna feel in the position to invest in their future selves, right? So if you start to see benefits straight away You'll more like it's to keep going with it. Okay, so that's for people We were just I mean I'm glad we covered it But we're essentially talking about people that don't know what to do For people who do know what to do you said you work with a lot of formula one athletes and what do you do for like what is Formula one is fascinating to me I've been to the the code of racetrack. We're actually putting up a studio We're gonna have a studio at code. Oh, we're gonna have a second studio at the racetrack And the ideas to take people around the racetrack. I think it would be like stimulate their mind And then come in and do a podcast be a lot of fun. Yeah, right? It'd be like you'd be like racing like mine. He'd be like whoo that is an incredible sport where it's Fractions of a second split second decisions your ability to react has to be like incredibly fast like have you ever seen the thing where they drop things Oh, yeah, I like who's Hamilton is like better at anybody Yes intense What do you do with them? So you already have people that are primed right there the best in the world Yeah, but they are constantly looking for an additional edge. What are you doing for them? Yes? There's a few things there My work with Formula one drivers Happens mainly through a company called Hintz performance was founded by Akim to hit Hintz H-I-N-T-S-A Named after Akim to who was a finished orthopedic surgeon He worked with highly Gabriel Slaasi with Mika Hakanan. He was two-time Formula one while champion and then now the sort of like a big sports enterprise and I'm their head head scientists for motorsport so that's all motorsport categories from like casting in kids up to up to Formula one and we work with several Formula one drivers and we Provide coaching and medical services each driver or most of the drivers have a coach right so like you know when you watch Formula one There's like somebody holding the umbrella holding the helmet right that's that's usually well that's often one of our coaches They're usually a strength and conditioning specialist or they might be a physio or a nutritionist like they they have a ton of You know really high-level skills and they're Everyday right they do the sleep they do the training like they're traveling with it the whole time they sort of can manage as much of their of their life as possible and when you're thinking about that level of of skill the The stimulus part has has taken care of itself, right? One of the reasons why these guys are so good is because it's all they've done every day for You know two plus decades four decades if you're if you're Lewis Hamilton or close to that So and that's slowly building these skills first and carting then in these different a form of the categories for me three for me to up into up into Formula one and so The kinds of things that we might work on and so like I'm helping the coaches work with the drivers we have a look at a huge team you know Doctor who's who works for the bunch of Olympic athletes as well and so it's it's a combination of Are there any individual performance limiters? So we might do some blood tests look at new trends status and various other things You make sure they're really on top of that with their with their diets um but then in that kind of world and like I'm sure you experienced this yourself Everybody's got a thing for you to try or a thing for you to do right? You're constantly been bombarded with the latest greatest technology and like this guy wants to study this thing so a lot of what we do is like Be really careful about the things that get added and maybe even Like take stuff away if we need to Like what are we what are we trying to work on? What are you trying to build? What does this one driver need because they're all very different? They need a different you know They have different uh Diots they have different training programs. They have different um warm-up Strategies for when they get in the car um And so a lot of what we end up doing is focusing on on the other side right? So if you stimulate your brain it adapt When you rest and recover afterwards so because they're It's actually jet lagged nine months of the year Right than a different country every every week Um, that's a factor. Yeah, that's a huge factor And like on top of like every race weekend They've got to go meet sponsors. They've got to do media days right? They're constantly moving So it's what can we do to maintain their level of performance throughout the season? This is something that the coaches do a ton of work in like how can we what kind of exercise and how can we do targeted Training to like maintain performance throughout the throughout the year And then the other part is how can we get as much recovery as possible? Because if we want them to Adapt to all the work they're doing and come back Each weekend at the top of their game where it's closest possible We need to get them to rest and recover And come back and do it again. So often we're not focusing on the stimulus part We might be in uh, driver training We might be thinking about how can we develop cognitive skills and these kinds of things and these driver physical skills In um, in formula one often it's how can we get these guys to recover better? How can we get these guys to sleep better? And then that that might be Technology but it might also be you know Just like how can we nail the basics again and again? Again make sure they're getting enough time in bed right especially when you're traveling a bunch So it gets really difficult So we're often focused on the on the recovery side and how we track like how do we collect those data? How do we know when something starts into sleep and get on top of it early? That's the kind of stuff we tend to focus on so let's talk about the jet lag aspect What are the strategies for mitigating jet lag and like how do you When like let's say if they fly in for a race like if they're going from Europe to the United States and they have to race How many days in advance do they arrive and how do they shift their circadian rhythm and eliminate jet lag? States and they have to race. How many days in advance do they arrive and how do they shift their circadian rhythm and eliminate jet lag? What are the strategies? Yeah, the time for them, like the number of days they come before the race will depend on how it was since the last race plus what other things they've got going on. But though it's often like two or three days, right? They'll try and get it get come in the beginning of the week, at least like Monday, Tuesday, if the race is then going to be on Sunday. And then as much as possible, you might start to try and shift things earlier. So shift your light exposure so that it aligns more closely with your destination a couple of days before you travel, shift your sleep if you can, shift exercise and caffeine timing again because those things shift circadian rhythm so that you can kind of get closer to what you're going to do when you land. And so those are probably the primary tools is exercise, light, caffeine, use some of the amusement amount of tone in. You can also change when you eat. So like food timing is a zy-gabber, it's a fancy word for like time giver like helps to drive circadian rhythm. So often when you're flying, they'll give you a meal that's happening like in the middle of the night in the time that you're going to land. Right. So often you might try and avoid eating while flying and then have your next meal in time with like a normal meal timing when you land. I've heard that one of the things to help jet lags just eliminate meals when you're flying period. There's something about eating, even if it doesn't have anything to do with the time. Like say if you're flying from a Los Angeles to New York, one way to eliminate jet lags, they say is just to not eat on the flight. So six hour flight, don't eat at all. Usually, I think most of that is to do with circadian circadian timing because you're usually flying at a time when you wouldn't normally eat or like you're often like they give you dinner at like 9 p.m. or it's even midnight. Right. So if you you see, but is that all it is? Because ways explain to me is that just there's something about your body processing food when you're flying that actually exacerbates jet lag. So I can't think of other than the fact that I mean, you obviously sat still for long periods of time, which might not normally happen at that time of day as well. I think the majority of it in terms, but certainly in terms of jet lag plans is thinking about the timing of meals relative to skating with it because you normally break your faster, faster certain time of day have dinner at a certain time of day. So I think most of it is related to circadian timing. Okay. What about rigorous exercise? Because one of my strategies, like say if I have to fly to London or something like that and I want to avoid jet lag, I immediately go to the gym. It's the first thing I do. I put my stuff in the hotel I go right down to the gym. Yeah. No negotiation whatsoever. And I get in at least an hour. Yeah, I have to. That's a great way. That's a great way to to help offset some of the jet lag. Because you you start to tell your body or hate, like even though it's whatever midnight in Austin, right, this is the time when I want to be awake. So it starts to advance the circadian phase. So exercise, some people like to do cold exposure, right, it does a similar thing, right, increases the adrenaline, increases heart rate, increases arousal. Can do it with like, can do it with caffeine. And so like some combination of those things can definitely help. Okay. So there's the sleep adjusting the sleep. There's the light exposure. There's exercise and food. Is there anything else? Like what kind of supplementation is effective to mitigate that? Yeah. So they might use melatonin. One of the one of the issues that we have, it's not an issue. It makes perfect sense is that the supplements that we use with the drivers have to be third party tested, right? NSF for sports. So it's a form of sports certified. So some of the things that we might like to try is that because the drivers get tested, because the drivers get tested. And what do they ban? What's banned? Everything is the same as like all the while all the water drug drugs, they're under water regulations. So are they allowed use peptides? It's it's a gray area in general. I don't believe I don't believe anybody does and we certainly don't recommend recommend it for that reason because we just don't know what's in there. Are they tested for peptides? So they're not tested for peptides. But well, it depends on whether it's actually a peptide that has good high quality evidence in humans. Well, there's also you should get them from a real good compounding pharmacy. Make sure you're getting it from a quality source, which is the real problem with peptides today is that since they're not regulated, there's a lot of gray market. There's a lot of real, you know, bullshit corporations that are selling you stuff that's nonsense and even things that are tainted. So yeah, so the main thing that you'll you'll worry about is contamination, like what else have they put in there, right? Right. To make it to get back to the same thing as supplement. Yeah, same thing as supplements. But in reality, like there aren't many peptides where I'm like where I would say, or actually I couldn't think of any, where I'm like, this will have a definite benefit based on high quality studies in humans. Right. Those studies just don't exist. And so until we get to that point, plus the sort of like the gray area of the sort of legality of it, we tend to focus on, you know, the real, I mean, is the basics, but we know that they work. But there are peptides that have shown to increase sleep and increase REM sleep in humans. Like with humans. Boy, what should I tell you? Because they talked about it, but I never tried it. I know Tom Segura is on it. Seem we can find what it is, Jimmy. It's boy is fucking with my head. Is that what it is? No, I'm. Delta sleep inducing peptide. I want to see the randomized control trial trial trial. I have to. I can't recommend it unless I know that it's third party tested, it's legal, and there's a high quality trial in humans. Like all those things have to align. The high quality, the problem with high quality studies is they take time and money. Yeah. And these aren't FDA approved, so you're not going to get those things. But that doesn't mean they don't work. And this is the problem. Is it like you could try it? And then if you show benefit like in that, in that setting on a contract, you can't. No. Well, you can't because of Formula One driver. Yeah. So the way drug free sport works, which is the governing body of the UFC drug testing, they don't allow anything but there are studies that show the BBC 157 includes it increases tissue recovery and helps you feel from non humans. True. But there's what the same thing with the COVID vaccine. They weren't tested in humans either before they started trying them. There was some for the first wave of COVID-19 vaccines. There were some pretty good quality trials in humans. Right. But all it showed is that it showed an antibody. It didn't show that it. Oh, no, that against hospitalizations and death in the in the first in the first waves that we could argue about that because it's very sketchy. Okay. It's very sketchy data that has been disproven. I think that those I think those first waves were high quality. But the thing I didn't even say that increased hospitalization and death, it was stopping transmission and infection, which was just a lie. So that's what they claimed. But so it's all sketchy because it was based on profit. The whole thing is weird. It's a weird one. It's a weird one. I can't talk about my children. Yeah, I can't talk about my children. It's not a good example. Yeah. But with there's plenty of anecdotal evidence, especially with professional athletes with BBC 157 and TB 500, particularly for tissue injuries, for recovering quicker from tissue injuries. So I know I know there's anecdotes. I know that people say it benefits them in the environments that I operate in. That's not enough. I understand. You're an actual doctor. Dr. Tommy would easily jet. I'm just a dork. I'm allowed to just say try it. Fuck it. But so with drug free support, like with the UFC, they use thorn supplements with the UFC recommends, which is very good. Yeah. Yeah. Pretty tested. So you have to find whether it's pure encapsulations or some legitimate, well-proven established company that provides you with third-party tested supplements. What supplements have been shown? Like for, let's stick with Formula One drivers. Reaction time is critical. Your ability to function at a very high cognitive state, right? You're thinking constantly. You're always calculating and movements. What supplements are these guys taking that benefit so when you think about complex skill performance and there's a whole chapter on this in the book, the most important driver is arousal. How aroused is your physiology and are you set up with the right level of sympathetic activation, nor adrenaline, adrenaline, cortisol to kind of get the best level of performance? And don't want any one of those overwhelm the other ones. Yeah, yeah, exactly. So the curve is bell shaped, right? It's the Jiekis Dodson curve, named after a couple of guys who actually did studies in mice, that then translated actually surprisingly well over to humans. And so what it says is that if you're sort of under aroused, you're kind of disengaged, a bit lethargic, right? You're not really going to perform well. If you're over aroused, you're sweaty, anxious, right? Again, you're not going to be able to sort of pay attention to the task. So there's this sweet spot at the top of the curve, you're capable of flow states, clutch states, which is where you can perform with your best, but it's still like it's hard work. And so what you're trying to do is get the guys to the top of that curve. And this, for many involved some element of routine, right? Knowing that I've done the thing that I know that's going to make me feel good. And so it's a combination often of the things that we've already mentioned. They might use some warm-up sprints, they might use music, they might use bright light, they might use breathwork, they might use cold. Certainly if it's going to be a hot race, they might do some pre-cooling to bring down core temperature that improves endurance during the cold plunges to Formula One days. Yeah, so some of them have a cold plunge or you can fill a wheelie bin with water and ice and jump in that. It doesn't need to be that cold actually. So increasing endurance performance, like 20 minutes at around 20 degrees Celsius or like 60-ish Fahrenheit, that significantly improves endurance. Is there a benefit to 20 minutes as 60 degrees Fahrenheit versus three minutes at 34 degrees? So the problem is that when you get too cold, you can actually decrease cognitive performance. So there's a fine line when it's really cold that what you want to do is you want to decrease core temperature without negatively affecting cognitive function. And so that's easier to manage at slightly less cold temperatures. Because just like if you did really, really exhaustive exercise, right? You go out and so I was a robot in college. So like a 2K test on a row machine, like after that my brain doesn't work for hours after. And so like very cold ice baths for several minutes for some people that can decrease cognitive function. So you can find a sweet spot. That makes sense. That makes a lot of sense because my mind is very bad after brutal workouts. Yeah. If I have a really hard workout and I come in and do a podcast, there's a moment where it's just not firing. Yeah. And that's perfect. And that's normal. We know that you do very fatiguing exercise for a period of time you experience it to climb in college. But a light exercise stimulates exactly. So like one of the best studied exercise modalities to improve cognitive function is literally just like a 20 minute job. Right. It's like exactly. But you're just kind of warming everything up, increasing sympathetic activation, increasing release of all those hormones you mentioned. And that increases arousal that improves cognitive performance. So they might be doing some of those things in the car. Right. There'll be differing types of caffeine use, depending on sensitivity and timing. Are they taking it in pill form so that they could regulate it quickly or accurately rather? Yeah. So some do sometimes pill, sometimes gel, some guys just like a cappuccino, some might use like green tea because like the theanine and they're might balance some of like the jitters that you can get with caffeine. Some, some people find creatine stimulating or mildly stimulating so they might take creatine before they get in the car. Well, there's been studies on creatine and cognitive performance that are really interesting. Particularly in the setting of sleep deprivation. Yeah. And so when they're jet lagged, like I think that that that will make sense. There is some newer caffeine related compounds that if we can get them when they're third party tested, you know, some may try those. So theocrene or tea cream and parazanthine, which is a, a metabolite of caffeine, some of they may have some fewer of the like anxiety promoting high blood pressure, high heart rate effects, but maintain some of the cognitive effects, especially in combination with caffeine. So you know, a little bit less caffeine, possibly those. They're harder to get sort of third party tested and stuff, but and that some of the evidence is newer. But that that's looking sort of promising as another thing that the people might try. You mentioned theanine, which is a neutral book. There's quite a few different ones that people enjoy, you know, beta Colleen. There's a bunch of different ones. Like do you do Formula One drivers? Do they supplement with that kind of thing? So, so do you think you like alpha GPC? Like, yeah, yeah. So like, it's a Colleen type of Colleen. Yeah. It's like, it's preferentially turned to Astol Colleen. And Astol Colleen is really important for like, focusing attention. Some of that stuff isn't regularly used, like mainly because it's hard to get a third party tested source. Is it really? Yeah. Like most of the things that you take that probably isn't, or that anybody would take that there might not be an NSF support certified version. There's very few companies that do that routinely for all their supplements. God, you'd think that that would be really accessible because new tropics are so common now. So, but so there's that. Plus, there's the when we're working with different drivers, that each have very unique needs. So it's trying to, it's a combination of what do I think is really going to move the needle and not over correct. I think most coaches I've spoken to inform me to one have a story where their driver had three espresso before it got in the car and then you overcook the first corner. Right. Right. So it's a really tricky balance of trying to make sure that they can systematically get in the zone to pull one in the car without sort of pushing them too far over the other side. And so that's where supplements become trickier because it's very easy to down regulate. If you've overcooked it through some of those physiological means, right, I can do some breathwork or something to kind of calm myself down. But if I've like stuffed myself with caffeine, it's going to be hard to like come back from that and then you sort of step in the car and it could cause some issues. So we tend to focus on some of the physiological stuff and then maybe a little bit of supplementation because that seems to be there the sort of like best balance across those different needs. Well, it seems like Formula One would be a great place to develop a framework for this because there's so much money involved. It's such a massive sport. And you would think that they would have that dialed in like you're 168 pounds. This is when you woke up. This is what you need right now. You need this much protein. This much this stop eating X amount of hours before the race. So yes, we do a lot of that. But it's different for each guy and nobody wants to share what they've got. Oh, yeah. So like even even like your your biggest rival is your teammate in many respects, right? Because that's the only guy you can go up against truly head to head because you're in the same car. Right. So yeah, you know, a lot of what we do, we have we we have to silo within a driver like this is the stuff that works for this guy. And I can't use that to help this guy. Right. That's one reason that's one reason why hint. Share information. Yeah. And that's one reason why hints has been very successful as a company is because they've been we're very good at walling this stuff off. Like we know what's good for this guy. We know what's good for this guy. And we we sort of leave those separate because right different frameworks, different approaches might be needed. Well, it's such an extreme example because any little deviation that you wouldn't normally feel in everyday life could be disastrous in a four-mill one race. Yeah. Yeah. What about different things to stimulate cognitive function like playing chess or doing is there anything that those guys engage in specifically to improve the way they think? Again, it depends a little from driver to driver. A lot of them like play some kind of video games, which actually have some interesting evidence to support them in terms of improving cognitive function. I think for them though, a lot of that is it's almost like relaxation. Like when you drive a Formula One car for a living, like playing a video game. It's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a really challenging. Right. And so a lot of it tends to be very car, car focus where they get tons of time in the simulator, like during the season, they get a lot of time in the car. So there's nothing that like consistently would work or that that everybody does. I think a lot of where the cognitive training side comes from is during driver development. Right. How can we get more sport-specific or sports sport supporting cognitive challenges in younger drivers as they're developing. So we might use some cognitive training tools and some other things to try and support some of those development processes. Because by the time they're at the top, especially if you want to maintain it, that the main thing that you need to do is obviously maintain those driving skills, which you'll get through like the day to day aspects of the job. Plus then it's really continually paying attention to sustained physical health, physical performance, especially because of the like, arduous schedules and all that kind of stuff. So often again, they're focusing on the other areas because they know that will help them stay at a high level for longer. So they're focused on recovery from all the unavoidable aspects that are going to mitigate your performance. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So sleep, some of them use different meditation or breathwork or other devices, just to kind of help maybe you like gamify it slightly or you make it slightly more enjoyable experience. It's easier to do easier to switch off if you're doing things related sort of like vibration and that kind of stuff. You mean like pressure plates like those standing on? Yeah. So like, um, you know, there's turbo sonic. There's a there's a chair that that some guys use and I mean, this is using a ton of different sports and like in other military groups as well. Cool. The shift wave have you heard of this? Yeah. Have one. Yeah. Yeah. So some of the guys, some of the guys have a shift wave. Um, it just kind of depends on what works well for them in terms of like allowing them to downregulate, allowing them to kind of sleep better. Um, and again, we sort of often focus on the more sort of physiological environmental side rather than, you know, trying to, uh, throw a bunch of supplements on it. Well, it seems like that's a great place to study Formula One drivers because you're dealing with these like fine lines. There's this tiny differential between success and film. Yeah. Yeah. And the, one of the interesting things is that the sort of the real performance stuff is kind of siloed within the team. So then, um, right, because that's related to performance in the car and that's sensitive information. So a lot of the time we're kind of thinking about and this actually across most sports, the best predictor of performance is subjective well-being. How does the athlete feel? How? And, and so like, there are tons of studies even like coming out now, like you compare that to blood tests and HR V and all this other kind of stuff. How they feel? Am I tired? Am I achy? Um, do I feel alert? Uh, you know, all that kind of stuff? That seems to predict performance really well. So how can we, or, and, and better some of those, uh, better than some of those other things? The best is a combination as much as possible. But, so, so we do a lot of work aggregating data. But then really the rest of the time is, how can I make sure this guy feels good every day? Right? And it feels confident when he gets in the car. And so then we have psychologists, they're a big part of that. Plus like keeping an eye on their body and all that, you know, all those sort of things sort of put them in the best spot possible when they get in the car. Do you coach them to avoid toxic relationships? I'm not, I'm not sure if anybody's ever gotten into that. For fighters, it is like one of the number one predictors, uh, poor success in a competition. I've seen it over and over again. Guys with horrible relationships. Yeah. You know, whoever's fault it is, both, both parties, whatever it is. But those are the ones like when they have like really bad relationships. Like there was this one guy that I know that, um, was a really high performer, very good fighter. But he had this crazy girlfriend and, um, she required so much attention that it would drive her nuts when he was getting ready for a fight because he was spending all his time concentrating on the fight. And they would peak literally the night before the fight. Like the relationship was so toxic. She would always start fights and all the coaches knew it. She would start fights after he weighed in because he was so locked in on the fight the next that he wasn't paying attention to her. Yeah. So she would storm out of the hotel room and go down to the bar by herself and he would freak out and he would always wind up performing poorly. At least I personally haven't seen the evidence of that in that in that world. Um, I will say that fighters are kind of crazy though. It's a, it's an interesting group to study because it's a very bizarre activity to begin with. You know, it's the way I describe it is high level problem solving with dire physical consequences. Yeah. And, you know, although you could say that Formula One is similar in that respect, right? Very similar. There were certainly, you know, a lot of drivers come into into the sport with up is often driven by family relationships. So, so I think that that may maybe an influence. Some of those are overbearing parents or another one. Um, coaches overbearing. Yeah. Yeah. So they come in with this long history of right of like what got them there. Um, so maybe some of the, some of the more not sure. Um, what are the most challenging athletes? I assume you've dealt with a bunch of different athletes from various sports. What are the most challenging ones to deal with? The, the one, I think the ones that I found most challenging are it's usually because they're pulled in so many different directions that it's, it becomes difficult for them to like really engage in the, in the things that we know are going to, is going to help them perform long term. Um, and so as, uh, and like I have friends who work in the NBA, for instance, where I think this is amplified even more. Right? You have teenage millionaires who can literally do whatever they want. Right? But you have to like keep them on, on task. And we see that in a lot of professional sports. And so it's that, it's that kind of stuff is what's, um, distracting them. What are the other things that they're doing that's stopping them from being able to engage in these processes? Um, and so you, you can have like really good conversations and put together really good plans and like in the moment they're really engaged and they're interested in the right, they want to do well. Right? This is their job and they love it. But when other things start to come into play outside of that conversation, they don't engage with things. They don't do it. They don't see the results that they want. They get demotivated. But it's usually because like other things in their life. Right? Could be like the toxic relationships, but it tends to be other other distractors. They're kind of, um, pull them away from that, that's what like cool goal. Unfortunately success is a big one, right? Because the motivation to succeed in the first place is you want financial gain, you want recognition, you want all these things that you're chasing after. And then once you get them, now what? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And some, some, some people like maintain like really dead, they, they maintain dedication to the craft. Like this is the thing that I love and I want to do it every day. And like the longer you do it, the more you have to take care of like the little details like early on in your career, you can train however you want, eat however you want. If you have a certain set of skills and training up to that point, you're, you'll, you'll do pretty well. But you want to, you want to sustain that for a very long period of time. It requires an increasing amount of dedication to the, to the other areas of your life to make sure that you can still do that. Um, and I think sometimes people just aren't honest with themselves in terms of what they really want to do or what they're going to spend their time doing. So that, that's the, that's the most frustrating thing is when you sort of, you hear one thing that you see another thing because of like the other areas of life that that it, that it's taking care of. So what do you do if you have an athlete, like say an NBA athlete and you see all this talent, all this potential, but then you notice that they're getting pulled in all these different directions. Maybe they're just like spending money all the time and partying and hanging out with girls and how do you get them back on track? So I don't do it. It's kind of working NBA when, when I intersect with that. I'm generally advising on like the data portion, rather than like the interacting with it with the human. So I don't have good tips, but luckily because I've never had to deal with that because I might as it's quite frustrating. So what athletes do deal with like what sports? So formula one is that is the one where I primarily am like face to face with athletes. And in other professional sports, I'm like an advisor to the team that works with them on like a data health nutrition. Oh, God, it got it. And when you compare notes, what are the differences between like dealing with formula one athletes versus dealing with like NFL or NBA or baseball? A lot of the stuff comes down to differences in travel schedule and training and the ability to capture data. For instance, so data capture in Formula One is really hard because of the types of travel and right, you don't get to aggregate across a team, whereas when you're part of a big team, there's several people you can kind of work, but you work with an aggregate data across to kind of understand what's happening with individuals as well as like overall. But I think that it formula one is unique because it's so it's so individual in terms of each driver has their one specific team. And it's often very difficult to capture some of the data that we might want to capture like getting blood tests on guys who are in a plane every other day. Right. Right. Where is other places where they have a home base and this kind of stuff is usual, you might be be able to get at that better. So I think that's maybe one of the biggest differences is the travel schedule and how easy or not it is to like capture an aggregate data. When you're working with these Formula One athletes, like how much are you changing the methods that you use like year to year, it will depend on whether, I mean, my job is to stay on top of the latest research. Right. So what what's come out recently that we think will meaningfully move the needle? In reality, I think this is the case in in the majority of professional sports that I've interacted with. The main thing is getting the boring basics done consistently. And like again and again and again, like we know that's foundational to sustained performance. And yeah, like the some of the tools and technology for recovery. know that's foundational to sustained performance. And yeah, like the tools and technology recovery and some of the supplements, especially if you're trying to address nutrition, insufficiencies based on an adequate diet, which is also very common. Right, those things do make a difference. But the main struggle, at least from the guys that I regularly see is having an environment and framework that allows them to keep doing that stuff. Like stay on top of a specific training program or stay consistent with a certain sleep routine that allows them to sleep well. Those are the things that make the biggest difference. And so it's like that's where we tend to focus. And then maybe every year or so, we'll have a constantly improving our data, and our data analysis. We're constantly trying to improve the support processes. Because we know that with the better support, we can make sure they're more likely to do the stuff that's gonna make a big difference. And then maybe every year or two, there's a new thing that comes in and we're like, oh yeah, we're fairly confident this is low risk, high potential benefit. It's not gonna take a time at that time. That's another thing is when I first, when I first walked into the paddock in it was here in Austin, it was the first time I went to Formula One to start working with these guys. I like, I showed up and I'm like, I've got like a hundred things that these guys are gonna love. It's gonna be really important. It's gonna revolutionize everything. And then you speak to like a coach for the first time. They're like, we've got time for maybe one thing. And you better be really confident that this thing is gonna make a difference. Right, or else you wasted our time. So how do you decide? So a little bit of it is, of course it's gonna be centroion error. And it does depend on, but the error is like, consequences are huge. Yeah. And you just have to acknowledge that upfront. And the error is biggest when you're telling some guy to do something before he gets in the car. Right, because that's gonna immediately have an effect. So there are ways to offset some of that. They have practice periods. And so it's like right now there's a new generation of cars for this season. Nobody's driven them before. They're getting more extended track time to practice practice with them. So like that might be a time when you could try a new supplement or something before you get in the car because it's a much lower risk setting. You're not racing. There's not 19 other guys or now 21 other guys trying to get past you. And then, right. So some of it is that, right? Try an error. So acknowledge that you just have to be really confident that you know what problem you're trying to solve and that it's an important problem. Right. So I've worked with coaches and their driver where like reaction time was a very specific thing. Like off the line, we think we need X amount improvement. So then is a combination of practice, maybe tinkering with some supplements, maybe tinkering with some of that arousal stuff that we talked about earlier. So you need to make sure it's an important problem. Then you need to think about like, what's the hierarchy of things that have the highest likely to hit a benefit and the lowest risk and then sort of work your way through it. And I realize that this is all kind of in the abstracts because it just like really depends on the problem that's in front of you. What about the psychology aspect of it? I mean, this is a very controversial aspect of mixed martial arts in particular because there's kind of two schools of thought. There's like, I have a good friend who's a coach that recently told me he's not working with any fighters anymore that need a mental coach. And I said, why? And he's like, you just can't count on them. He goes, they're just too fragile. They need a mental coach because I want a motherfucker who just knows that this is what he's supposed to be doing and just go out and do it. I'm like, boy, but that kind of limits your athletes. Right? Do you think that there's benefit in mental coaching or do you think to reach a championship level, there's an inherent mindset that you must have going into that and you can improve upon that? But if you do not have that mindset, you're not going to be successful. This is my friend's idea. I don't want to call him out yet. I know the athletes we're with. Yeah, yeah. But he recently had a bad result with one of his athletes. He's like, I'm done. No more guys who need mental coaches. I want killers. So I think that you're going to need some element of a mindset to get to that level to begin with. But we have psychologists on our team who work with the drivers regularly. Other drivers who aren't working with us, bring in sports psychologists, very great people. Do you collaborate with these psychologists? Do you talk to them and get their notes? Yeah, yeah. So we have what are common issues? The, I mean, again, it's just, it's so dependent on the individual. But it's also very common across all athletes. So it's like overcoming failure or fear of failure or maybe it's dealing with difficult relationships which for various reasons that they can experience. And then it's how their inherent thought process is when that happens. So we know that the most resilient athletes are those that tend to be self compassionate. Right. So like, interesting. Yeah. That is interesting. I would have thought the opposite. Yeah. And so this is idea, right? That, right. You want killers. You want people hard on themselves. These guys who are hard on themselves. Yeah. For sustained. And so this is looking across like as broad as possible across sport. Those who are most, most successful, most often, of course, there's going to be the killer who's just like hard on themselves and gets the job done, of course, right? But these elements of self compassion that include things like mindfulness, like thinking about the world and understanding it and about their place in it. And common humanity, which is like treating themselves as they would treat other people. And acknowledging that we all make mistakes and stuff always happens, but I can overcome this. I, you know what, this is up until before. Like I've sucked, I've crashed, I've done something wrong. And hey, I overcame it. And now I'm succeeding again. Those mental skills are most common amongst the high level, high level athletes. So I give an example. This is not, so I don't know him. But like Roger Federer has a very famous quote, right? He gave it some like graduation address or something, where he says that across his career, he only won 54% of his points on court, right? So that means that 46% of points he lost, right? So that means that every time you make some mistake, every enforced error, he has to come back and be like, hey dude, like you've got this. And I know I can do this. And that's the point that he's making in this address. And it's those kinds of mental skills that seem to be most important. So when you've had a history of beating yourself up and being hard on yourself, and that's kind of got into that point, there will often be a stage where there's so much accumulated pressure or stress or failure that just working harder and being hard on yourself isn't going to get you past it. But athletes who are successful for a long period of time tend to have those other abilities to like think about the bigger picture, understand what they've overcome previously, treat themselves more like they would treat others. And they seem to the ones who overcome failure and then continue to succeed. I'm really into professional pool. I play pool and I follow a lot of professional pool players. And there's a trait amongst the elite pool players that's pretty consistent for the ones that are successful and win tournaments is the ability to let a bad shot go. Exactly. Because the guys who beat themselves up over bad shots, you see it. They slump in their chair. They start running their fingers through their hair. They're fucking, they throw their head back. They take a beat deep breath. And then they're carrying that with them when they go out to make a shot again. And for a high level pool player, so there's performance scores. And a really high TPA performance score is like, I think the best in the world right now is Joshua Filler, who's this guy from Germany. And he's arguably, if not the best, one of the top two or three guys in the world. His performance score is about, I think it's like 850 out of a thousand. So that means if he makes a thousand shots, he's gonna make 850 of those shots, which is very elite. Yeah. So you gotta think like even the best because they're playing on four inch pockets, but this guy never gets upset. When he misses, he just sits down and he's got a dead look on his face. The Chinese type players are the best at it. I don't know how they coach them over there. So there's some of the best in the world. The Chinese type type, hey, players. So these guys from Taiwan, they have no expression. When they miss a shot, they just go and sit down. And maybe they'll smile, but they never get upset. Whereas a lot of the American players, they get fucking pissed off and like, oh, you see it, some of the European players do the same thing. And those guys, they fall off a cliff. Their performance is elite. They'll make a couple of bad shots. And then the match goes downhill and they wind up getting steamrolled. And I think you can, there's other stuff going on. You can think about it in terms of that. Like a rousal curve we talked about earlier, right? As you get stressed and like worked up about a missed shot, you're pushing yourself further and further away from the level of a rousal twice for performance. Yeah. And dwelling on failure. And then you're thinking about what happened previously rather than the shot that comes next. Well, that's one of the most important things about a shot, because even if your mechanics are good, if you think you're going to miss, you're going to miss. It's weird. It's a weird thing because you know what to do. You know how to do, but if you think fuck, I can't miss this shot. You're going to miss. Like nine times out of 10, it's very weird. So it's a very mentally, the game, a giant percentage of it. Once the skills are acquired, because most of them when they get to an elite level have all the skills. It's a mental thing. It's ability to perform under pressure. Yeah. Because it's fine motor skills. And you know. There's, I mean, across every different aspect of cognitive performance, well-being, there's, you again and again, you see that psychology drives physiology and drives performance. Like you can measure these things as you think them, as the change physiology was then altered how you perform. So, so, I mean, this is a very, very long answer to your question of, like, is like psychology and mental skills important? Absolutely. Because I think that's going to be foundational to whether you can even achieve those high levels of performance. And everybody needs help occasionally. And right, that's perfectly normal. And they're right, different people are going to need different tools and different skill sets. So different psychologists are going to provide, you know, different things for them to do. So, like, yes, that's always something that we have on hand as needed as part of the team because that's going to be really important. Yeah, the mind controls so much of what you do in life, even if you have skills. And that's something that elite performers either figure out or don't. Right? They either never achieve their true potential because they keep tripping over themselves or they go, okay, this is not helping me. It's only hurting me. I keep allowing myself to spiral into this same sort of mental state. And I have to find a method. And so, like, when you talk with psychologists, what do they, what tools, and what sort of strategies do they give these athletes to abandon negative thinking? There are a few different ways to approach it. And again, like, don't want to pretend I'm a psychologist, right? These are the, we have other people with these skills for a reason. But I think a lot of what becomes important, again, is thinking about the causes of, maybe initially the causes of mistakes and then the causes of stress and why that may or may mean it be beneficial in the way that you can, you can leverage it. So there's a lot of research on understanding that stress responses are there to divert resources to something that matters and something that either requires your attention or adaptation to it, right? So understanding that actually stress in the moment in that kind of moment is a good thing. And you want to, you want to leverage it rather than be scared of it. So, and we know that people who are trained in this mindset, so this is work by, um, audio-crumb at Stanford, the stress is enhancing mindset. Um, also, like, predicts how well, um, Navy SEALs do during training, like how much they sort of like appreciate that stress response is important. This is me, you know, rising to the occasion. Um, not only that you still get stressed where you still make and measure stress hormones, that still happens, but you release other things that help to, um, also, like counteract that and drive adaptation and the results in better decision making went when stressed. So like reframing some of these responses can be important as well as then thinking about, like after a, a mistake happened, you know, thinking about other examples of times when you did that and you overcame it or, you know, having, having like these different parts of understanding what it is to be a human, even when you're performing at an elite level. Maybe some of it is building in routines so that you feel confident in a given situation, right? Like these are the things that I do. And when I do these things, I know I'm going to perform well. That can be a double-edged sword for some people because, and I think this, we see this a lot of this in the, um, in the world of sort of like health optimization. We assume that we need to do all these things in order to perform well. And so then if those things don't happen, we think we won't perform well, right? So that's another way for us to get, get in our way, our, our own way. So you kind of have to balance that depending on, on the individual. And then some of it can be, um, right in, in the moment, right? So you, you want those pool players and you're getting increasing frustrated because you're not making your shots. It's almost impossible to think your way out of that, right? Your brain is too busy being dunked in adrenaline to like make good decisions. So that, that's where you might have tools like, um, leveraging your physiology, breath work, um, closing your eyes, uh, visualization, those things sort of work from the bottom up to kind of help your mind get a grip and like get back in the game. So it's a whole bunch of different things depending on, um, what you might need. Is it, I need to regulate myself in the moment? Is it, how do I set myself up for success through a series of, um, and it could be like, what's my warm up? What's my, what am I thinking through one of my visualizing before I perform? Or is it, um, tools to kind of deal with the processes of failure afterwards? And I would also think that even just the knowledge that these high stress situations where you do encounter failure can produce a result inside the mind that can be beneficial if harnessed. Yes. Yeah. Exactly. And so one, one of the ways that this is, this is taught to other people, right? Not just athletes is like think about all the people who've performed under significant stress, right? This is what the human mind and human body is capable of. If only we allow it to, to do, to do. Right. Right. Right. Is like, I think inspiration is one of the most powerful fuels that we can use and inspiration from other people's examples is one of the best versions of that. Yeah. Cause I think, um, there was a young kid who recently broke the world record of the mile. Did you see that? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What's that? I think 16, 3, 40 something, 3, 48, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Which is nuts. Which is nuts. This 16 year old kid hits 3, 48. And I immediately thought, wow, through the inspiration of this kid being able to do this, who's going to break 3, 40 now? Yeah. That I was, I heard from somebody that in the ramp to the race, he was like, he hadn't raced a bunch recently. He, um, this was just going to be like a, just like going to be a run out. He was just like going to, you know, loosen his legs up, get back in the, and into the race and so like in that situation, he's put no pressure on himself, right? All the all the breaks are off like whatever he's got nothing to lose. And so like in that situation, that you could like incredible performances of possible. And it's crazy because that's one of the 11th fastest indoor mile. That's it. It says here. I thought it was the fastest ever, but it's the first ever under 18. Under 18 record. Yes. So crazy. That's so fast to run a mile. Whoo. I mean, I'm not sure I could go that fast full stop ever, like for any period of time. Yeah. 20 feet. Yeah. Exactly. Right. That's it's kind of amazing. But I mean, this is one of the things we talk about all the time with mixed martial arts athletes in particular is that today is such an amazing time for them because there's so much access to video. So you can watch all these performances by all these elite athletes and then it raises your personal standards because your mirror what these people are capable of doing. And in your head, you have a very high standard because you've seen it and that that inspires people to become better. And so the athletes that we're seeing today, I say all the time that martial arts has evolved more in the last 30 years than it has in the last 30,000 years. And it's true. And it's it's true just based on my own personal experience of seeing athletes from 1997 when I first started working with the UFC to 2026. It's completely different standard. There's so much better. There's so much more elite. They have so much more balance. They have so much more balance in terms of their game is balanced, striking, grappling, wrestling all the together. It's it's amazing because they've they're walking on the foundation that was set by the athletes before them. So it's the mind recognizing what's possible. Absolutely. Or not thinking that something is impossible. Right. It's the opposite too. Maybe that's more of it. Right. It's the same with Roger Banister in the form of an Amal. Right. As soon as he did it, everybody, not everybody, but lots of people started to do it. Well, and also the ignorance of youth, which is why young athletes are so damn good. Yeah, because they don't they don't worry about their own limitations. They also don't have mortgages. They don't have wives that have kids that don't have bills. But this is also the thing is right. If we think about these traits that we we'd maybe like to carry over that that help us perform or maintain performance for long periods of time later in life, like some of that curiosity not worrying about like these burdens, continues continuing to engage in these things that challenge ourselves that kids just like readily do. Right. The brain is exploring and trying to learn. I think we need more of that as adults. But when you think about the standard being set or thinking that things are impossible, there's two parts that one yes, that that that's a huge aspect of achieving higher and higher levels of athletic performance. But for many of us regular people, when you spend a lot of time seeing other people performing so much better than you, it has the it can have the opposite effects. Right. I think this is something that we see on on social media. There's some really interesting right. There's some really interesting studies on social rank. Right. So we are always trying to see where we rank in the world compared to others. Right. It's the part of us like being social beings. And so if you spend all day looking at people who are richer, more beautiful, more jacked, the new are internally you demote yourself. Right. You give yourself a lower social rank. And that creates a social stress that triggers genuine stress responses. Right. Increase sympathetic activation activation of some like inflammatory process in the body. Very similar to if you're socially socially isolated. So for some people who have their you know, I wanted to trajectory to improve their performance, you know, because there are really athletes and they're seeing these other guys doing. Oh yeah, I can do that. Right. That's really beneficial. But in like the general world, the rest of us, when we spend so much time seeing other people do other things better than us. It can almost have the opposite effect. But not with everybody. No, no, it's it's very we're talking that's the thing between the difference between an athlete and someone who's intimidated by other people's performances. Well, instead of being inspired. Yeah. So but that's that's what I mean is that when when you're one type of when you're an athlete and you're seeing other guys like you do this thing, right? That's like, oh yeah, that creates a bar. Right. You want to try and hit. But that same thing is very different out for the out for the rest of us based on like seeing how we compare to others. We're particularly in things you can't control. Like your looks or your wealth. Yeah. But but but wealth in some ways you're achieved. But your mind doesn't interpret it that way. Right. You don't you don't immediately rationally think, well, I can never be that. Right. I'm never going to look like Brad Pitt. Right. Right. You can't you can't apply that sort of like rational thinking to him. Well, then even worse for young girls because a lot of them are getting surgery because they know that some girls have radically improved or looks through surgery. And so they think like this is the solution to everything. And I just need to get a nose job and a chin job and a this and a that. And which of course never knows. And also it's like the psychological aspect of being controlled by paying attention to other people's lives is very weird. And it's you know, Jonathan hate wrote a great book about it called the coddling of the American mind. Yeah. But the impact of social media and particularly on young girls. It's really bad. Calling them. So he did write calling them the American mind. That was more about changes in like academia academia and helicopter parents in safety as the the anxious generation was the one about. Oh, that's right. Yeah. That's right. And that aspect of it of comparing yourself to other girls is particularly devastating. It's like there's you see when the impact of social media when social media gets introduced into the world immediately see more self harm, suicidal ideation, all these different things increase. Whereas like so those same stressors, if you are in a position like an athlete and you're competitive athlete and you see someone who is elite, you would be inspired. But you feel helpless to achieve these goals that you know, like you can't get any taller, you can't get any better looking. You can't look. It's just this is what you got. And then you see these what and then you see people that are using filters. So it's not even what they really look like. Yeah. So I think that's why there's this. It's interesting that very similar exposures depending on who you are and what you're trying to achieve and what you have the ability to achieve can have dramatically different effects on mental and and other wellbeing. Right. And but you would imagine that for competitive athletes, you've already developed a certain amount of resilience already. You already have a competitive spirit and you are working towards a thing that's a high level of achievement and something you're already doing. So seeing a Michael Jordan, seeing a LeBron James, seeing if you're a basketball player, you would be inspired. And instead of being like, I'll never be as good as that guy. You'd be like, fuck, I want to be as good as that guy. What do I have to do? What Kobe Bryant worked out every day? And he did this? And he did that. That's why I'm going to do that. So but that's the key difference, right? Is that something else we didn't talk about this in terms of like the the approaches of of the most successful athletes is that they don't just say I want to be like LeBron or Kobe. They say, what did he do? Yeah. What can I do? So they focus on the process. Right? Yeah. You have to love and focus on the process because you you can't guarantee a certain outcome. Right? So like in and I talk about this, I talk about this in the book and I give the example of the 2012 Olympics. The the guys who came second, third and fourth ran personal best times. Like several other national records were set during the during like the whole 100 meter sprint competition all the different rounds. But like you say in bolt ran, right? And so like you can like you you can be the best you've ever been and be amazing. Like you can run fast enough to a one-and-a-gold medal any other year. But like sometimes you're out of luck because you say bolt shows up. Yeah. So like you've got to focus on the process because you can't guarantee the outcome. But by focusing on the process, right, you're going to get you're going to get much closer. Yeah, that's interesting because if you you are a person trying to be the best in the world and you happen to be in the same weight class as Mike Tyson. It's going to be tough. Yeah. But I mean, that's always been the case. That's the thing in championship level fighting. You find that one someone is a real outlier that what happens is all the other people in that weight class tend to achieve a very high level. Even if they never wind as good as Anderson Silva or whoever it is, they they want it wind up winds up being a very competitive contender class. Yeah. Underneath it and much more competitive than divisions that are not being dominated by elite fighters. Yeah. Yeah. You're this a very large book. So I know it can't just be the stuff that we've already covered. What other things do you think are in here that are important when you're talking about future proof in your mind? Um, I will say you're looking at dummy copies. So all the pace. Yeah, you just tricked me. Look at this folks. I was saying this is a really large book. It's a fucking empty book. So that's crazy. The different I read this. I'm like, maybe it's a trick. The, oh, yeah, you're just not paying attention enough. The, um, the book is as thick as the real one will be. I believe you. So, um, and that that's on purpose. I've never been given a dummy copy of a book before. So does it even have writing? No writing. Good. I'm going to use this as my new joke book. Well, um, once once the, uh, once the full thing is printed, we'll send you a real one. Okay. Um, you did trick me though. Think I didn't try to read from it. So that like the first, the first part of the book is about, um, some of the history of, of neuroscience and why we think about the brain, the way we do and some of the limitations that's created. Like, why we think about, um, Alzheimer's disease as just being like the accumulation of amyloid and tower proteins in the brain, which people might have heard of, right? That's what it's been boiled down to when there's actually a much bigger picture in many other things that, that are important. Was it, was it, uh, Alzheimer's where the amyloid plaque, with that idea was sort of proven to be a little bit bullshit. So there have been a, so, uh, not really, but kind of. So there were several seminal papers in there were hooks, the, there were manipulated in some way, right? They, and this is this, unfortunately, it's quite common where you, you change the figures, you manipulate these blocks to make them show different things and you kind of move them around and copy and paste and it kind of shows what you want to show. And so like for some of the like seminal papers and Alzheimer's that, that turned out to be the case. But it, it doesn't like discount the fact that it's still a, still a part of it. Um, but people have increasingly looked away from just the accumulation of certain proteins in the brain. For, for two reasons. One is that we had, as a field, they had to create new ideas like resilience and this is think called cognitive resilience, which is how much, cognitive function do you maintain in the face of these proteins building up in the brain? And that's because the, the amount of animal, if you have your brain doesn't really predict cognitive function and that, and cognitive decline that well. So some of that is related to other things. So we know that like exercise is, is, is an important part of that. Um, and then we know that these other things that, that are important, um, as well. So information, um, other cells in the brain that become critical. And then we know that these other things that are important as well. So inflammation, other cells in the brain that become critical. So like the white matter is a really critical structure in the brain. It's what allows us to have really fast processing speed, decision-making, executive function, the function of the prefrontal cortex. All of that is kind of dependent on white matter structure. And that seems to be really related to like vascular function, vascular health, resistance training is really important to support that. So like all these other things become important as well. So like that's kind of the, it's just showing like the first part of the book is saying, hey, we kind of focused a lot here, but actually that's not that that's not important. But like this whole bunch of other stuff that's important to and a lot of it is related to things that we have control over. So then then, you know, I talk about all the different types of exercise, how different types of exercise affects different parts of the brain in different ways. Nutrition, talk a lot about cognitive stimulus, social connection, sleep. Like I said, stress management and stress mitigation and how you can kind of manage a performance in the moment. And then all of that comes together in terms of into like a model that I call the 3S model of how these different, like things kind of interact and affect you on a day to day basis. So the first S being stimulus, right, we've talked about all the reasons why that's important. The second S being supply, which is if you stimulate a part of the brain or a network in the brain with a new skill, that air of the brain, the neurons and the astrocytes there, they ask for more blood flow. So the blood vessels have to widen, they dilate to bring in more oxygen, bring in more glucose or whatever metabolic substrate are using ketones, lactate, etc. And so you need really good cardiovascular health. That's critical. So that's a big part of what we talk about. You also need good metabolic health. So high blood pressure and high blood sugar are two of the biggest risk factors for later dementia. Because they affect this supply component, either the blood flow getting there or being able to regulate energy. And then there's a bunch of nutrients that are important in that bucket as well. So omega 3 is vitamin D, iron, magnesium. Because they have very, are B vitamins, they have very specific functions in the brain that we know that if you're deficient, you have an increased risk of cognitive decline dementia. And then you've stimulated a part of the brain, you've given it all the substrate it needs to do its job. Like we've talked about, adaptation occurs and function and gets enhanced when we sleep or when we recover. So that's support is the third bucket. So sleep is a part of that. Other support you might get like hormonal status is important. Trafect factors, hormones that get released or proteins that get released that support your plasticity in the brain, things like brain derived neurofic factor. And then you want to avoid things that kind of inhibit that process. So chronic stress can do that. It creates like an overtraining kind of picture in the brain. Smoking, excessive alcohol, air pollution, those kinds of things can have a negative effect. So that's how they all interact. And the fact that the interact means that depending on what feels most impactful to you, what's the thing that you think you can move the needle on by focusing on one area, the whole network starts to shift. And we see that in multiple different studies. So if you focus on sleep and you sleep a bit better, then the next, then we see that like inflammation decreases and blood pressure improves and blood sugar improves. And the next day you feel more sociable. So you're more likely to interact with other people in a friendly way. And you're more likely to engage in cognitive-estiminating tasks because when we're tired, we kind of shy away from those things. And it's the same if you, so there are studies in older adults where you give them a brain training program and they sleep better because when you stimulate a tissue, you then drive greater need for recovery after the same. If you exercise more, you sleep better. So it's not like there's long list of things that everybody has to do. And because when you give somebody a list of 37 things that I'll do, zero things, right? We know that. Yeah. So if you just know that they all kind of communicate and interact, anywhere you come in, you can start to kind of shift things in your favor. Now, when you're compiling a book like this, I would imagine there's a lot of editing. And so how do you decide like what to leave? I mean, this looks like it's, I mean, obviously these are our blank pages that were not numbered. But it looks like this is at least a 300 page book. The final book is about 450 pages. Oh. 165,000 words. Whoa. The reference list. I like, so unlike most health books, every time I make like a statement or I mention a study, there's a little number. And that gives you the paper or papers that I'm talking about that supports that. Right. It's 2000 papers long. And so like that all has to go online because they can afford to print it in the book. But that's probably better anyway. Yeah. Like because like there's like seven people who will do that. Right. They'll read that. And then they'll go and look psychos. Yeah. So it's important to me like anyway, people who want to do that can do that. But in, I'm not quite sure how it ended up being this way. But I actually had to cut very little. Like there were things where I kind of went down a little bit of a rabbit hole about it. So it was like, man, I'm not sure we really need this. I basically wrote until I got to the word limit and then I stopped. And I've focused on the things that I knew that were important. And we're going to stay important even in the age of AI and as technology improves and changes. So there wasn't a ton that that ended up getting cut out. But when you're putting it together, like how do you decide the, like the, what's prominent? What's the most important thing to focus on? Where to put things? So when, when I started, when I started writing, as you saw, I'm going to disagree with my former self, like the first, I wrote the, I wrote the first part of the book like three times. And like the first time I wrote it, it was like 40,000 words all focused on psychology and like super, like esoteric and academic. And I was like, never was going to read this. So like, I had to be scratched a couple of times. So then the core middle part of the book is all those different areas that we know are important, like the big rocks and practical frameworks for how to address those. And then this is just like a, then there's an introduction to like, why should you care about this? Like, for like, in individuals over 40, dementia is the most important health concern, right? More than 10% say they've experienced changes in cognitive function. We know that the rates of dementia are going to double or triple in the next two or three decades. Like, so why do people care about this? And like some, some history there. And then the middle part is, which I always knew I was going to write, these are the most important things. And they're always going to remain the most important things. And then the last chapter sort of like just kind of bringing it together. Sounds your question. Good does. It does. Well, I'm glad you wrote it because I think it's a very important thing. And I think there's a lot of people out there that don't understand the risks of being sedentary and that these are things that you can change. Yeah. And that you can improve the quality of your life by making those changes and. It might make you uncomfortable to begin something like that. But there's some real value in that uncomfortable feeling of trying something new. Absolutely. And then it really does change the way your brain functions. Yeah. And it'll improve the quality of your life. And in this case, if possible, hold off dementia and just hold off cognitive decline without calling it dementia. Yeah. So many people experience cognitive decline because of atrophy. Yeah. Yeah. So that's kind of like the, the, the worst possible end state we want to avoid. Right. But you want to maintain your current level of cognitive function for as long as possible and possibly improve it. And there is evidence you can improve it even later in life. And so a big part of this is that when you, right, the, you know, earlier we talked about, you know, this graph of cognitive function, right, it increases to yourself 20 or 13 then it declines. When we're doing studies that show that kind of thing, what we're doing is we're looking at a whole bunch of people, maybe tens or hundreds of thousands of people, and we're saying, like, you plot them all on a graph. And yeah, as, as you get, as you sort of increase in age, there are some people who are going to lose function and you kind of like draw the average down. But we've known essentially since, for the last 50 years that when you look at the same person over several decades, it's actually very normal for us to maintain function. So like the Seattle longitudinal study was run by a guy called Walnishai in Seattle. And it was one of the first studies where they measured cognitive function in the same people every seven years for several decades. And like every seven years, they measured the same people and brought in new people. And so they ended up with people who were like, in their 20s up to over 100 years old. And they found that the average effect by that, I mean, that more than 50% of people maintained the same level of cognitive function into their 50s, 60s, 70s and 80s. And those data were used to actually raise the retirement age in the US in the 1980s because they showed that it actually wasn't normal for people to decline. But the problem is now we've embodied this idea that as you get older, you will decline. And as a result, you stop engaging in all the things that we've talked about. So you're like, I'm too old to lift that. I'm too old to learn and you skill. You know, I don't have time to do that. And as a result where it's a self-fitting property, you stop engaging in those processes and decline happens as a result. But if we know that it's possible to maintain function and we continue to engage in those processes, the norm should be that function has been tamed. Last question. Yeah. Did you an audio version of this? Yeah. I'm recording at the moment. All right. When will that be available? Yeah. Out on the same day, March 24th. March 24th stimulated mine. Dr. Tommy would go get it, folks. I promise it won't be like this. Thank you, Tommy. I really enjoyed this. Thanks so much. I think it's really important information, too. And I think it's something that never went to apply. Thank you. All right. Thank you. Bye, everybody.