Peter Brelon, thank you so much for doing this. I thought of you last week when I read this, I don't know how much you follow X, but there are a couple exchanges that suggested to me that things are changing very, very fast. Okay, so here's here's one. This is it. This is a tweet from last week, let's know we could go from a gut from a basically an anonymous account and I'm quoting, if white men become minority, we will be slaughtered. Remember, if non-whites openly hate white men, well white men hold a collective majority, then there will be a thousand times more hostile and cruel when there are majority over whites. White solidarity is the only way to survive. Okay, that's on the internet. Elon Musk retweets it and says 100% and then Elon Musk writes this, if current trends continue, whites will go from being a small minority of the world population today to virtually extinct exclamation point. All of that, in my opinion, is obviously true. And I think most people know it. But I read that. I thought here's the world's richest man who owns this platform and a lot of other things saying this. And Peter Brelon, who I know who's a thoroughly decent person, has had his life turned upside down and basically been destroyed in some ways, professionally anyway, for saying things that are way more restrained for that than that. So I have to ask you what it feels like to see that. It feels kind of tingly on the one hand tingly. I'm happy that the debate has moved in that direction and the things that we were talking about 20 high years ago on vda.com, which is what's my website, right, Billis White citizenship and so on, and how in the public debate, on the other hand, you know, we've been ruined and we're facing personal ruin, of course, because of this attack on us by the New York at only General La Tisha James. As nobody knows who I am talking, I should say that, you know, I'm a long time spat of my accent. I've been here for 55 years and I'm a long time financial journalist. I work for Forbes and and Fortune and the Barrens and so on. And I work for National Viewer, a role for National Viewer a lot. And I wrote an PTA immigration in 1992 same time to rethink immigration that sometimes credit with kicking off the modern debate. And there was a brief civil war within the conservative movement at that point, which we lost and bucked the status in the back and pushed the magazine of immigration patriots. And for the next while, you know, the worst journal page was absolutely dominant and of crime. I'm going on about the need for amnesty and there's no way to combat it. So I set up a website, which I call a name vda.com, after Virginia, the first, the first English child, not white, shadows, they always say born in the new world. And over Peter, about 25 years, we built up into quite a force until about two years ago, it was destroyed by the New York Attorney General Tisha James who just basically subpoenaed to subpoena this to death. And as you've fact now, a pseudo supposedly and as in the foundation through the foundation. So we're a bit like General Flynn, you know, no middle class family can stand up to this, General Flynn not to sell his house and then we're going to face a bit of an interpersonal bankruptcy, I guess. It's a horrifying story. I've kept abreast of it through your wife who texts me as a wonderful person. And I know that you're a man of great personal decency and restraint and basically a great citizen and the kind of immigrant we need. And I'm grateful to have. So the whole thing is shocking and so revealing. But I'd like if you don't mind to start closer to the beginning of this story with your experience at National Review, 1992, you said you wrote this piece saying time to rethink immigration, which I remember well at the time National Review really was a forum for conservatives to think through what it meant to be conservative. So that was a significant piece at the time. And then you said Bill Buckley that then editor William F. Buckley Jr. stabbed you in the back. Can you can you tell us, Tori, what happened exactly? Sure. I never knew his never on stuff. I know, right? But I was a what they called a senior editor in my role for it a lot. And in 1992, I wrote this very long course toys by 14,000 words. Bill had retired as the editor of that. He was just circling around in the background. But then editor John Solv and around with the went with this story. And for about five years, we're basically directly challenged the official conservative line, which was that immigration is good, more immigration is better. Allegling immigration is very good. That's what the war situation said. And still saying as far as I can tell. And then at the end of five years in 1997, Bill just just to brought without any warning, it's all fired or so of an unputtered push the magazine of immigration, patriotism basically told us to shut up but it's told them all to shut up but immigration, which of course they all eagerly did. He put the the Washington Bureau in charge, Ric Laury and Peneru and so on. And so for two or three years it, you know, you couldn't get even the basic facts about immigration out the public. But then the internet came along and you know, mosquitoes and I started vda.com. But ask you to pause and explain why that happened. Why do you think Bill Buckley who was retired in letting John Solv and run it? Another Brit I think. Yes indeed. Who now is in Budapest? Why do you think that he stepped back in from retirement to shut down that conversation specifically? Well of course I've had 20 audios to think about that and the answer is over time I had to have evolved. At the time I thought he was just jealous. This is actually a thing you see, I was a financial journalist for a long time. It's a thing you see often in the corporate world. Entrepreneurs will come back and purge the fire, the managers at the put into place. Yes exactly. I think the Congressional Republicans hated us talking about immigration because it upsets the donors. And I think that was influential with Bill. He liked being lionized by the then Republican majority in the house. And I think the Republican leadership didn't like it, Newt Gingrich, etc. Who was ascendant, came in in 94 to much, much fanfare achieved, not a lot. But they're the ones who pressure Bill Buckley, you believe. I think that was true. But I also think that the Neil Conz in New York hated it, hated the line. And Bill was very, very leery of offending the Neil Conservatives people like Norman Pothoris and so on. And I think they pressured him to, I mean I know they crashed him to get rid of John. Now why would they care? Because at that point, the Neil Conzoves is who predominantly Jewish faction, they had this sort of Ellis Island view of America. They wanted to that extremely frightened of the white majority of America becoming self-conscious because they feel as Jews that they will leave mountain to cold. Despite the fact there's never been any real anti-Semitic movement in the United States. There's no evidence that white people becoming aware of the fact that their white is a threat to Jews. I don't know where that comes from. Right. And I actually think there's a certain sort of jealousy there. They didn't like, I mean if you look at ideas on the right in the recent years, a lot of the original United States of New York and New York and so on. But here was a non-new Conservative faction. We would have then described ourselves as pale of Conservatives coming up with a whole idea on the whole issue. Because the immigration was completely dormant from 1968 when the hot-sire out kicked in until the early 90s. But there was no discussion of it at all. I actually went through National Review's archives and I found that they hadn't discussed immigration at all between the passage of the 65 Act until the early 90s. People simply didn't realize what was going on. Why? I think there are a couple of reasons. One is that when there was a pause in immigration from the 20 from 1924 to about 968. So a whole generation grew up when there was a sense of no immigration at all into the US. And so it just wasn't an issue to them. And what happens with it's like an academic life. It's not that it conquers an illithiness by being better and better arguments. It's just that the people who hold you earlier through his die off. And they replaced it by younger. And that's true for politicians too. A whole generation of politicians had never thought about this issue. And I actually included Ronald Reagan in that to me. It simply wasn't an issue when he was going up. And that's why he was hot and swagled by this, the Erkeh honesty in 1986. He actually genuinely thought that they would, the ruling, the permanent government would exchange honesty for the serious enforcement. Well, it just took the amnesty and didn't enforce the law against illegal immigration at all. Christmas feels like just yesterday. But in fact, it's already time to think about Lent. Lent is a great chance to step back, examine our lives, and decide whether or not we're headed somewhere worth going. This Lent, we strongly recommend the world's top number one prayer app. It's called Hallo. Its Lent prayer challenge starts February 18th called pray 40, the return. Transformation is done. Start with improvement. No, transformation starts with repentance. The courage to admit that you are lost and change direction. Pray 40 forces you to confront that responsibility, forgiveness, and what it means to truly repent and live a life of meaning by following Jesus. Every day enjoy simple, deliberate prayer. No spectacle, no performance, just silence, honesty, and one small step toward renewal. This is not about fixing your life overnight. It's about beginning the journey home. Pray 40, the return starts Wednesday, February 18th and runs right through Easter. download Hallo for free at hallo.com slash Tucker. But I'm a little bit fixated on William Buckley because he was such a dominant force. Let me just back up again. What I think now is, I think looking at the National Geographic, you know, it's obviously don't adrift. It's of course. We weren't aware of that in the 90s. I wasn't even aware. I didn't think about Donus and Raw and Partix really until some years later than that. We thought that people just got up and argued and you just didn't realize how dominant to how I had brought the Donus. I think now looking back in a particular given, Bill was not as wealthy as Elanti people to think. And he depended on National Review, a financial tool considerable extent. If financial is life-stamped or considerable extent. And I think he depended on the magazine. Yeah. I think the rest of us had the magazine depended on him. That's what he wanted you to think. But in fact, he did finance his lifestyle to Chris's will extend. And the winters in Stard and the sailing across the Bermuda race. And I don't know how much, but there was certainly quite a lot that that was deducted or expense to the magazine. In any case, he just didn't want to disrupt the donor thought. And then what I think about that, more I think that probably was the reason. Interesting. So that's basically a species of fraud. I don't know. I mean, against the tax code, I mean, it's intellectual fraud. It's your making the case that you believe these things because they are true. And in fact, you're taking money to say them. I think Bill actually, my experience with Bill is that he actually was not very interested in politics. When he went to his, his, his love didn't, didn't as he used to put on 73, 73rd street. It was very hard to talk about politics. It was, it was, it was all towards wandering off in a large direction. And you can see that in the way, you live this life, latterly, I mean, writing these books and so on. He just, he just basically didn't do any serious thinking about politics. Initially, he was very private. I like to very much say how wonderful my immigration story was. But really, yes. And it was, you know, if I get what he said, but he said, it was beautifully organized and the beautiful argued and the tone was perfect. And that that's sort of, he never admitted that he changed his mind on immigration. He just, he just said, told them that to stop covering it. But the official, the official line of the magazine was that immigration was, was questionable. They just didn't do any journalism on it. But just how he was about drug legalization? He was officially in favor of drug legalization, but he very rarely that the magazine right about him. Why? I guess he was balancing a number of issues. In the case of immigration, he, you know, I think he's gone as an immigration was a very unfashionable subject. And I remember and I think as we were talking earlier, I've watched him bench a pirou on main Kelly and Kelly. Yes. And he was attacking you for some reason or I forget what. And he was saying that that then he suddenly says, but took his good on something. He's got an immigration. Well, I understand that you're your, your, your, your instant idea of immigration moratorium and so on. Of course. This and used to me, that's not been a superhero thing. It's good about immigration. Well, I mean, just about five or six years ago in national review, he called me a Y supremacist for basically, for no other reason than, than, than advocating immigration reduction. And those days, if you're back in the other days, if you, if you, um, I'm advocated, immigration control, you immediately suspect that you need the suspect to be an anti-Semite, even though there's not a reconnection at all. And now they've changed the mind on this, the form back. I mean, Norman before he died, I was, I was very friendly with Norman. He didn't talk to me for the last 10 years of his life. But he, he, he died just a few, a few weeks ago, the age of 95. But just before he died, he gave an interview, which he said, he changed his mind in immigration. He thought, those are limit times immigration could, could be absorbed. And he credited John Solve, the edge of national review for helping change his mind. He didn't, he didn't mention me. Why, why didn't he speak to you for the last 10 years of his life? Well, I just, I think he just decided that that was suspicious character. And, and, uh, deviate on the immigration issue and, and he suspected, um, I had the habit of calling the, uh, national review, the gold book review, because that stage briefly it was dominated by John John and Gold book. I think he's a complete fraud and lightweight. And of course, was perhaps a bone headed on the immigration issue. He's certainly a lightweight. I, it's hard to know what he believes or doesn't. But he's certainly, I mean, if John and Goldberg is like your intellectual force, then you've been degraded. Well, Norman actually email me and said that you've got to stop calling national view, the gold book, if you're because it sounds anti-Semitic. Actually got a mountain, is that gold book is not, is not technical issue. It's, it's, it's mother was, it was a, it was a Gentile. So I knew her, she was a great person. Right. I reply, I reply and said that he didn't get bad. But he just gradually suspected more, he suspect me more and more thought crime. And Norman was extremely passionate man. He didn't, he didn't socialize with, with, with, with, with, with, with, with, with, opponents. I miss him. I, I, I, I really liked him. So I was sorry. No, there was a lot about him that was appealing. He was a man of great energy. And I admired him in a lot of ways. It kind of repulsive and others. But, but certainly he was not standing still. He was constantly in, in motion. And we are actually all his wife from the dextralot because she, she was the, the chair thing of the Philadelphia Satin team, which is a conservative affinity group. And she invited me to speak on immigration. Yes. In, in, I guess 2005, even that's where I met my first wife just died. And that's where I met my current wife Lydia, who of course was running the V-def foundation with me. She was the publisher of V-def.com. And he's had a run of course. Of course. And I'm, and I'm a fan. She's a brave woman in the smart one. Miss asked what happened to your relationship with Bill Buckley? I, when he fired John Solvum, I was the only one of the entire staff who went in and asked, why did you fire him? Because, where what? Yeah. Well, the official line was John and designed to write a book. That was because John was very popular with, with the National Review base and immigration. She was, was, was, was, was very popular. And so he didn't want to admit that he was dumping them both. So he got really ruffled because he wasn't used to being challenged and said, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, and, and we gave basically never this boat to each other after that. I mean, I was constructive this mission from Nashville. If you got elected to tell me I was no longer senior editor, which was actually very, very important in, in that the National Review will because it will run like a fraternity. And if you, if you were senior, you, you were automatically invited to all kinds of events and so on. And to his dinners and all that kind of thing. And, and I never wrote through to Kim. How, why did they dismiss you? Do you think? Oh, well, well, I'm sure that the Washington Bureau was always upset with the immigration issue. It goes, it embarrass them, it embarrass them in Washington cocktail parties, you know, and, and he put the Washington Bureau in charge of the magazine. So I'm sure they will be happy to do it. And, and, and they didn't want to write what immigration. And I think also, you know, Mod Sticks took it. So, you know, Mod Sticks, yeah, and, and this constant whispering campaign of how I was a racist and anti semi-pharacian these issues, it sticks. And it has stuck so that, you know, even though Ben Shapiro's now in favor of just could talk about immigration, I don't see him apologizing to me. No, well, of course, not he doesn't care about you at all or other other people at all. I had a really interesting experience recently. We, we, we, we, we, I worked at the ISI book event and I bought Martin Cotton. That's his book. I mean, actually bought it. I put it down my mind. It's a wonderful book about about the Conservative movement. It says that I was born in Canada, which obviously wasn't. Well, I still, he's a so, I mean, it's all this. This is Bill Crystal, son of a lot. Bill Crystal, son of a lot. I took it up to him when I like to collect and describe books. I forgot to bring your book. I'm sorry, but, and he wouldn't sign him. He wouldn't describe it. He said, I have nothing to say to you. And they're really weird thing about this. What kind of work crowd? I mean, you, I don't think you've ever said that I'm aware of an anti semi thing in your life. I don't think you're an anti semi. Well, Cotton Act is a converse, of course. So he's probably very, you know, particularly ardent, but, but the, the weird thing about this was that Cotton Act had actually been some quite sensible things on immigration, which is odd when you think of his father-in-lawers. But he said to your face, I won't to describe your book because I have nothing to see to you. Essentially, I asked this one. He signed it, but he wouldn't describe it. Then he signed nothing to say to him. Wow. Yeah, I mean, it's kind of surprising. And we live out there in Eastern Parliament in the West Virginia. And we don't have to face this stuff. But I guess when you and DC face it all the time. Yeah, well, I left. But I also believe in forgiveness. And that's kind of the difference. I think, I mean, we're commanded to believe in forgiveness and to treat people as human beings. No, no, I didn't believe them. No, I'm very aware of that. You're aware of that. It was a principal position with it. Yeah, it's a principle, but it's a it's a satanic principle that you can't forgive other people. That is you're not forgiven if you don't. So that's my view. But wow, what did that's amazing? So you were just cast out. Well, the thing is, you don't already signed the books. I couldn't give it, signed it behind this grad. I couldn't give it back. Well, as conversely, Europe has only was also there. And you know, has only, as you know, bundled from his national conservative conference because he said he didn't think we were appropriate. And so we have, and we had a series of bitter exchanges in B.D. But but there's only was perfectly final. And he signed the book and it's crowded and we chapped about children, grandchildren, so on. Yarmus Zoni is a very courtly man, a very charming and warm person. I'll say, I had lunch with them once that I don't agree with them on a lot. But I I was, I liked him. It's hard not to like him. I think he's very good. And so a lot of the stuff he says about consortium is exactly accurate. But I think that's right. Moving is the way from being classical liberalism. The problem of course is that he's caught in this buying because he doesn't want to admit that Israel is an ethno state. Because he doesn't want the market to have ethno state. He wants them to be cult, uh, uh, uh, civic nationalist state. What do you mean won't admit? I mean Israel is by its own description in an ethno state. Yeah, but he keeps arguing that that, uh, that's not an attack. But yeah, at all. Well, you know, I have never been able to get into explain how you cannot say that there's a racial component Israel when the whole when, of course, the Jewish religion is, is racially based. I mean, of course why they have a map, but the the material in principle, where you've got to have a Jewish mother. And I've never seen him respond to that. And I don't think he can because he, he's, he's, uh, he doesn't want to encourage straight up white nationalism in America. For years, you've been told this is not happening and you're a bigot for thinking it is, but it is happening. Mass migration is reshaping the West completely. It's not a conspiracy theory. It's a fact. Different people live here now. You're not a racist for noticing that. You're just using your senses. Again, it's not a theory. It's the biggest fact of this or any generation in a thousand years. The replacement is real. European governments aren't just tolerating mass migration. They're encouraging it. They're funding it. They hate their populations and they want new populations. We've got any documentary on this called Replacing Europe following the world's deadliest migration route. Our film makers follow what nobody wants you to see this book directly with migrants, locals, officials who admit what the public is never told. It's not ideological. It's reality. This is happening. It's destroying the West and our cameras caught it. Replacing Europe. That's the dock only on TCN now. I just want to be clear about my own views, not that it matters, but just because I hold them sincerely. I have no problem with the fact that Israel is an ethnostated to their country. We have whatever state you want as far as I'm concerned. But it is an ethnostate. By definition, the people who founded it were not religious, a lot of them were atheists, and they identified as Jewish racially. I have no problem with that at all. That's their country. But to say it's not an ethnostate is not only alive, but it's like a ludicrous lie. He won't admit that. That's my reason of what he wants. He's one of the situations where he's civic nationalism, so intense that he might as well be a nationally if for the US. My love thing he says about immigration to you. I'm excellent. I agree. I'm not attacking your Amazonian at all whom I like, but that's dishonest because Israel is an ethnostate. You should just tell the truth about, especially about obvious things. What I will call double-think, isn't that? Double-think is that you've got to believe two contracts or things at once. It's necessary to operate in large parts of political world. Interesting. But why wouldn't people who support in ethnostate and Israel want one here? Why would they object to that so strongly? Of course, this is the profound question about the American and Jewish role in the American immigration debate, the overwhelming pro-immigration. However, having said that, typically, if you know ethmout Jewish intellectual life, you know, they're going to people on the other side. Some people very aren't on the other side. I know a lot of them. Why would never be anti-Semitic? Because I mean, you can't generalize. I have a homestants, Stephen Miller, who of course is an aide to Trump. I think he's a deputy chief of staff. He's going to be the first Jewish president. I say this because it's hard to first but not to verify people so much. But he's like, Israeli. Benjamin, Israeli, of course, was Jewish. Yes. A convert to Piscopeliness. He was converted by his father to his father. Took the whole family over to Piscopeliness. He basically invented the Conservative Party. He reinvented the Conservative Party in the 19th century. He came up with a complete grand strategy for it based on the empire and imperial patriotism and so on. That really carried the party through for the next eight to eight to 90 years. A couple of generations, because they're part of the Britain with a nationalist party. Because of the being a nationalist party, they've got a very substantial working class vote. It is the blue collar workers with the Patriots. The Conservative Party was able to tap into the house. Miller's done the same thing. He's invented a grand strategy for the Republican Party, which you desperately don't want to take up because it's run by cowards and pools. But he thinks they should move towards re-stabilising the America's ethnic balance and basically eliminating this immigrant inflow, which is causing all kinds of problems with the philosopher's skilled workers and ultimately changing the racial balance. He's not afraid to admit that. Not only that, but I don't think anyone is coming to survive the cushion of White House. That was really extraordinary because Jared Kushner, of course, believed exactly the opposite, he's basically a liberal neo-Jou. But for some reason, Miller was able to survive with them. I couldn't have done that. I wouldn't have banned and Jeff Sessions in the way that he did with Sessions, it was a close aid and it was a mentor. Miller abandoned him when Trump turns against him. I couldn't have done that either, but then he's in the White House and I'm not. Yeah. No, I think those are all fair and true observations. It's interesting though, the degree to which the immigration project is a demographic project. I mean, it has almost explicitly been an effort to make America less white. They'll say that. It's not controversial. I mean, you could prove it on video. It didn't even bother to because I think most people watching us already know that. It's architects starting with Teddy Kennedy in 1965 basically just said, ultimately admitted this the whole point is to make America less white and non-majority white country. Why is it so hard for conservatives to say the same? If Democrats are saying we want America to be non-white, why can't conservatives say that that's what their motive is? I have to say that Kennedy didn't say that when he was first. When he was the floor marriage of the heart seller, I take a very explicit assurance. Yes, you love to quote saying that this will not alter the racial balance of America and it will not million and million people you will be coming in. Where's in fact, in many people you're upcoming in? Of course. And that's one of the reasons I bitterly regret not having to be there. Even though I have my own Peter Brum, Peter Brum, or dot com, substag. That's not the same kind of voice because of a got to get legal immigration to the debate here. I thought what Trump has done on illegal immigration is remarkable and more remarkable than people realize. But we're not to know it's an air to legal immigration. But I'm sorry, that means I'm not answering the question. What was your question? Well, my question was the whole point of the project was not to like feed a desperate need for low skilled labor. That definitely no longer exists now with AI. And it wasn't to improve America. It's completely destroyed America. It destroyed the state of California. Well, when I was writing my the book I wrote on immigration alienation that flowed out to my cover. So the 95 book with hapogonz of shoes to be print. I quote in a man called Earl Rob, who is a Jewish activist and so on. And he explicitly said that the judgment favor of massing mass non-white immigration because it makes the rise of a, I didn't use the term now, Nazi Blaswarty meant and party in America impossible. In fact, it was the exact opposite it makes it more like. Well, exactly. Well, you did say that. And it quite can't be said that this is why most Jews have favored. Well, it's also made the rise of hard edged anti Israel politics. And I'm not pro Israel especially, but I don't hate Israel. A lot of people hate. it's a rise of heart-aged anti-Israel politics and i'm not pro-Israel especially but i don't i don't hate Israel right a lot of people hate Israel immigrants so i look at the new york america america well exactly and i'm a one because they're going to vote exactly exactly state's been a tip on the native born american new yorkers and god knows look at who they are for god's sake i mean they're but they voted for for against my darmic exactly uh... uh... so so they've been screwed themselves of this hasn't worked i mean if if your interest was to keep anti-Semitism and really kind of crazy anti-Israel sentiment to a minimum and i agree with that i'm against anti-Semitism and against like basing our life on hate against real it seems kind of lunatic if that was your goal i mean you literally achieve the opposite result is that there's a fair to say not for the first time yeah fair um... assuming to think that maybe that wasn't the goal i don't know i'm just guessing here maybe there was another goal that we don't understand but well i think a lot of it is it's deeply uh... emotional and and and can't be analyzed to intellectual and that's just a whole series of of reflex spiritual but you know uh... uh... one of the reasons why we know that the uh... the new yorked attorney general tachon was uh... what was was it was a basic instigated by the anti-defamationly uh... because we were journalists we know actually did got the idea to admit this that they've gone to the eddy at the t-shirt james and told it to take feed out and we say to ourselves why us juice what we have done to you you know we have the birdish brings cast on the west Virginia which we bought as a conference venue because we know how to have conference anywhere else the don was jewish we have we have we have we have all kinds of jewish don's all cast jewish writers but it doesn't make any difference uh... to the idea of our so what are you going to do when the power goes out not theoretically but actually in real life most americans used to think total power failure only happened in unstable countries places without functioning governments places you only went to a vacation this is the u.s. people that could never happen here oh okay well then it did remember texas during the deep freeze the grid collapse people were left without heat some froze to death in their own homes so the truth is obvious now the government can't guarantee you electricity and when things go wrong no one's coming to save you that's why last country supply offers the grid doctor it's a thirty three hundred watt battery backup system built to keep your entire household running when everything else stops it powers full size appliances medical devices essential tools you can use the indoors it's totally safe there's no fuel there no fumes there's no noise we have one at home and it's awesome it's got fifteen output ports it charges from the wall when you have power from your car when you don't it's got a solar panel so the sun can charge it it's built to withstand EMP's lightning solar flares it is durable as hell so taking care of yourself and the people you love the people you're responsible for is your job get power you can trust always get the grid doctor today at our very own last country supply dot com our business this is the power supply that we use last country supply dot com now to what happened to you into v dare so you're expelled both from national review and you leave your old life as a financial journalist behind uh... i think it's a fair summary in the new create this organization called v dare named after for jenny dair the first british child born in the america's and it becomes successful becomes big and it's not anti-Semitic it's not racist it's against changing america's population from the creation is that a fair summary yeah i stayed in financial journalism for a long time v dare was covered moonlight in project uh... but you pull that off it was very difficult and it caught the event eventually became impossible uh... and uh... i was fired both from forbs and from uh... uh... cb was used to be cb smarkers became down john's market watch in both cases it was in it was joined uh... turned down in the markets but i happened to be the one you know that uh... the children find me rather people who are frankly less valuable to them uh... so so it did it in the end uh... terminate my career the mainstream media bought on the other hand you know we would develop in v dare very rapidly and it became a came uh... quite a big deal and uh... two thousand nineteen we recently four million dollars which had was to buy the cast on dual-cast all things of course we've you know we've we've uh... it's been all the destroyed now i've been i've been uh... i've been for the all you know who was suspended two years ago and i resigned so you know i've i've supported for me now on on the pension pension son savings and so on and i do have a family i've i've managed children so it's it's kind of irritating but you're taking doesn't begin to describe it so tell the story if you would you're running v dare and somehow the t-shirt james is the to the church of the five one c-three charity and it was registered in york in nineteen ninety nine entirely because i have them pro bono lawyer happened to be barred in new york and therefore could that it was convenient for him and this was when uh... uh... you know there's a problem government in york and no never heard of law fair nobody heard it the idea of law fair that this kind of uh... exploitation of of uh... regulatory power uh... never could to anybody at that point but because we're registered in york even though we don't operate in york she she was able to demand that we one day walk up on famer got these them these massive subpoenas uh... demanded all kinds of documents include no email going back to 2016 of course that was a huge problem because if you got that she would have the names of our donors and our anonymous you don't have as writers and uh... had people writing for me whose career would have been ruined if they were they were far may ask them what bit okay so you're not domiciled new york and operating in york you know nothing we registered in york that's the key part but the but the five o'clock c c is registered in york that's what you're not any can't get out you've got to have her permission to get out and you know you can't change states no it's we have we can only with her permission uh... and in some circumstances if we were to set up another five one c three and start up right now to that she will claim that we will transfer an asset which claims your addiction of that is a huge mess and we had very expensive laws looking at it for a long time but even before she came along and hit us with this but may ask them what grounds you should subpoena's to you and what does she just have to give grounds uh... but what she said was she wanted to investigate the castle purchase uh... which we didn't two thousand or more actually i should say lived it in two thousand because you know we had uh... maybe it doesn't depend on how you can but it doesn't fifteen conferences canceled her tells would would accept a booking and the cancels was the camera depression from the left and we realized we were never going to be able to have a uh... uh... conference so we we bought our own venue and and she wants to investigate that well of course all that all that uh... purchase was very carefully large precisely because we knew she wouldn't want to investigate it but it doesn't make any difference she demands that and she demanded that and she did all kinds of other things the really killing thing for us demanding all the email we had to turn over more than a million documents we we we uh... the very killing thing was demanded the email because we know if she got the writers names and the donors names she would release them she did that with Nikki Haley the lead they leaked her her the donors to her pack and the paper that the papers that you saw that that gave the the names of the Nikki Haley's doors were actually the letterhead was the new architect in general's office it can't get out of the course nobody ever came after for i'm i'm just confused did she did she have evidence she committed a crime no she was looking for evidence and she's not found it but she's charged us anyway but she hasn't charged us not a criminal thing but she's she's she's she's so soon as anyway my impression my guess my guess is that the Trump administration will begin to ignore the courts in some cases and people will say that this is the beginning of fascism and a takeover of the destruction of our legal system and you know that's a fair point no i would not affect one of the world exactly destroyed that's exactly what i'm about to say exactly it has already been destroyed and when the attorney general the state you don't live or operate and can destroy you because she doesn't like your opinions then we don't have a functioning legal legal system period and this happened before Trump so i just want to say that the wonderful i mean the one you know the one of the wonderful backup second one wonderful thing that has happened within the last year is that a very enterprise and journalist actually dug up a speech made to the idea they had a conference called taking hate to court by Rick Sawyer who is one of the teacher James operatives and he is one who's leading the charge against us and he said in at this in this to this conference that hate speech that's us hate speech it's protected by the first amendment but there are ways around that all you have to do if it's a charity and you have jurisdiction it's a start issuing subpoenas he said it sucks to be sued just to pin them to death and of course that's exactly what he's done to us you know they have flicked it over a million million a half dollars in out of pocket costs for lawyers and so on let alone the holders of ours that lady had to spend digging through documents and so on which meant that she couldn't fundraise or do any of the work they just destroy you through the process of punishment they just destroy that way so we actually openly admit in this so when we saw this we thought oh it's all over they've obviously admitted that what they're doing is not it's political it's not because of some regulatory concern but we've been told unable to get the federal court to pay attention to this we're trying again now we have we have what they call 983 action again against La Tisha James and the operatives personally we're trying to make the first of this first amendment question there but the courts have been extremely resistant to looking at it well I mean if the attorney general and staff are admitting they're destroying you because they disagree with your opinions seems to me that any federal court would take that up because that's a foundational question that's what we thought but in fact they did the first time we did it that caught symbiote on the tannic lyshion they have a tenant they cannot attack the excuse to dodge in and we have a toy trying again now but you know we just have to open the best I think one of the things that is clear to me I mean I is from looking at our litigation experience which is now considerably goes far beyond this situation and all the cases are aware of is that there seems to be some message is gone out from judge central that anything that that's quote unquote in a white nationalist has got to be suppressed by any means necessary in our case the classic example is we had an atel cancel on the car out of springs and they were always not with them because they paid up a liquidated damages like man and there's a lot of money but they canceled because the mayor of car to spring so it was a rhino john solos had said he wouldn't extend police protection to the conference when when then you know in other words it would anti-fac or going on and he wouldn't extend police protect us that's right now this is an issue that's been trying to kill you that's right and who is this his name was john solos he was the mayor of who was the republican john southerner's mayor of colorado springs basically threatened to allow mortal violence against you if you went to his that's right city now this is an issue which has been extensively integrated in the civil rights era and the point was made very clear that that by the course that that the local authorities will go but have to extend protection to people's first amendment rights in other words in those days the black damage states will go into it would have meetings the city and the local the local watch behind the basketball or the whites had to be kept away the blacks had to be allowed to have their meetings well we litigated this right up to supreme court and which were shoes to take take the issue up and there was the appeals court in carado rejected us and i believe it had at least one we had one good judge there who said this is obviously a tack on first amendment rights and but the other two i think republican appointees to vote against us so we lost and we weren't able to our initial lawyer in our civil rights litigation is extremely damaging to the wrong side of it to me there's enormous damages involved so it was it would it would have been a huge so victory and we would have we would have actually been made whole in a very dramatic way and our initial lawyer in carado springs was soaking on this it was so obvious open initial case that he took it on contingency you know but as soon as you were out there the city was going to resist you run away and we had to start building a pair of panellists to to litigate him well anyway subsequently there was a case in before the supreme court New York I guess those follows called the volocades vu-l-l-l-l-l-l and this was a case where the communists in New York were putting pressure on insurance companies not to ensure the n-r-a-r-a and the n-r-a-r-a-r-a-f-for-t-it and and and the one and in the in the decision Katenji Jackson says the house case is strong produce is essential parafractic it's not as strong as we did as case where they were um- did I please- but where the state agency you know were basically to discriminate against them on political grounds what about this we we never heard about this. Well, it turns out that 16 or 2 in his general had signed an amicus brief saying that the appeals court in Colorado had been wrong to reject our attempt to sue card or springs on a civil rights theory. And that was wrong for the following reasons. And for that reason, the Supreme Court should take up the NRA's case against, but NRA versus Boula, I guess it was called. And I think the Supreme Court did take it up and ruled against state of New York, 9-0, which of course, those are absolutely no good, whatever, because we are out all that money. And, you know, I first remember I was not protected. I mean, in other words, there's a real determination on the part that the NRA is apparently that more part of them we are. I'm a little bit confused, just conceptually with the idea that white self-awareness is effectively illegal in the United States, whereas ethnic self-awareness in every other group is encouraged. Doesn't make any sense. Just speak for myself. I'd rather live in a deracialized world where people think about it less because it does cause problems, but as long as you're encouraging identity politics, why do whites not get to have it? What is the answer? But it's completely, completely difficult. It's because the people running through the society anti-wann. And they've been able to persuade or intimidate the entire legal system to to operate in anti-wann. Why do you want in this case with me is anti-American? I mean, because the white's are Americans. That's who Americans are. The people who sign it are decorated with independence. I did know that. And the purpose of the project, big picture, a guy, I keep going back to this, but I'm just, I am a little bit confused because this is the defining fact of our lives is that whites around the world are being eliminated. And I would like to know why. Do you have any guesses? I'd say, I think, Dr. I think it derives from emotion rather than a kind of rational calculation. I mean, if you look at what's happened in South Africa, that meant that after in every big American blacks, as soon as that's majority black, I mean, they can't want it to be wanted to get into a situation where the water is putrid and nothing works and all that kind of thing. But they do. The purpose of a system is what it does. And that's right. And the purpose of non-white government is to produce non-white government and non-white results. Unless of course your Chinese. Because Singapore's ones are actually saying they're on very efficiently. They are. It's just interesting that people move here because it's a white country. And we see to run it into the ground. All of us benefit white and non-white. Better like from systems created by whites because they're more humane, they're more just and we're fair and they're much more efficient and cleaner. Obviously. You know, I was looking at interview, if I can interrupt you, I was looking at interview, I did something something I did for Forbes magazine with Milton Friedman. And I asked him, are the culture prerequisites for capitalism? And he said, yes, he said, and now now as you know, he's a very, a five reason libertarian. And but he actually thought about this question. And he said that, you know, capitalism is really only ever worked in the English-speaking countries. I don't know why this is so, but the fact has to be admitted that there's some kind of a cultural underpinning for capitalism. Well, I sometimes it what economists call a metamorphic, framework, so the question is why are these capitalists bring it, you know, why is the chamber of commerce suing to keep the H1B flow coming? When they know it's going to, when it's obviously going to produce people who don't do it like Mandar, they could don't support capitalism. In fact, hate it. What are the capitalists doing? Well, they're doing what Lenin said, they will sell us the rope by which we hang them. And I mean, that's demonstrable. It was true in 1917, it's true in 2026. Do you think it's the product of short-term thinking? Oh, in the case of business people, of course it is. The malign influence the lawsuit, your legislative, whole generation of business people actually believe all this nonsense. It's very hard to get out of the heads because they're never allowed. I mean, they're never allowed criticism of immigration on their editorial page. So you've referred repeatedly to Wall Street Journal and also HarperCollins, both of them are owned by the Murdoch family. What's been your experience with the Murdochs? Well, you know, I spent well over a year working for Rupert in I think that's 1990 on a ghosting as autobiography, which was never published. The verse really changed his mind about it. But I have to say he was extraordinarily generous to me personally and he continued to be extraordinarily generous until very recently when I guess I guess had been on the payroll quietly for very long time and they dropped me when you came on to attack because somebody, somebody looked into people on the payroll and they found that there's thought criminals on the payroll. So at that point at that point, I was dropped. But he was always a postman extraordinary generous to me. So that is my experience with Rupert Murdoch. And he's not the case with a lot of these characters. That's not. Lots of these myths. It's not. You know, Max Well and so on. I'm a Rupert Tommy once that he thought that Max Well is, you know, how off is he off the Canary Islands and was found that Rupert's theory was this guy is such a jerk that the crew probably couldn't stand him anymore. That is one theory. That is one theory. His lawyer told me that he was murdered by the Israelis from he worked. I don't know the truth of it. But he certainly had a lot of enemies and a lot of suspects in that crime. But I mean, he was postman plays. That's not the case. But he's not cruel. He's not even not vintage. Rupert is one of the most personally gracious people I've ever met on my life. I mean, it's perfect manners. He's truly Anglo in that way. And I never had a bad time with him. Always agree. Even when he fired me, I talked to him after he couldn't have been nicer. So I strongly agree with your assessment. But he kept you on the payroll for decades. Yeah. So I had five children born on his health care. I had some born on his health care too. They got a blessing. You're a permit. It was very good. I mean, it's no, I mean, I don't know. The truth should be told good and bad. So essentially I was a consultant for man and I didn't consult at home because of course I was told to do the exact opposite what he was actually but I have no complaints about it. Yes. No, I just want to say out loud, I agree with you 100% through much experience 25 years. So but it does raise the question as it does with Bill Buckley, then Rupert has great personal decency that I've seen it. But his the editorial product is aggressively opposed to American basic American interests. So like, what is that? Skylake's America. He treats people around him. Well, there's a lot good to say about Rupert. But the Wall Street Journal, the New York Post, Harper Collins, like all of them are engaged in a very aggressive campaign against America's interests. So why why is that? Do you know? Well, I think he handed over the sort of intellectual, the thinking part of news corporation or 2021, essentially, faucet of its court, whatever it's called now, two of the nail conservatives. So he took on a lot of nail conservative baggage at that point. I mean, they used to run an editorial every year saying there ought to be a constitutional amendment. They shall be open borders. You know, I mean, it was really an I believe that's still the case. But why would he do that? First of all, because they're very good. I'm extremely active. Full of ideas, full of energy, they're extremely good in the Cold War. They were. That's correct. But that was then, this is now and they have just been having made the transition. But that's that's that's a major reason. I know I'll switch operating in New York and, you know, he's under a lot of suspicion there and there's been a, you know, you had to show what he was, what go of it out called once okay, goi. And he's showing that. It's genuine though with we but I remember once talking to him about why he was so pro, the initially rack wall, the Gulf War. And he said, well, you know, it goes back to it, it goes back to my father and Gilep. You know, his father played a major role in, in, uh, discreting the Gilep expedition, which was his attack, oxygen by Wilson, Winston Churchill, they're trying to break through the Darden Elves to get to Russia to help Russia join the war. He said, so, so I'm just, I guess I'm just basically anti-arab. I said, those aren't haves, it took exactly. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, yeah. All the same. Yeah, the Ottoman Empire's gone and they've done an enormous amount of business in the Gulf with Arabs help finance his company. And so, it's kind of a strange answer. His father was a famous journalist in Australia who broke the news of the disaster, glipletes. And he was very proud of that. But that's not much of an answer. Is it? Well, you don't know about the night we're talking about. I don't know. I just, it's you know, he said such an effect on the world and my life. And as I said, five times, I've always liked him and still do. But it does. Somebody mentioned he was one of his, his handsmen in Australia said to me that Rupert is a businessman who wants to be a journalist. And his father was a journalist. Do you want to be a businessman? Because he did found a published empire in Australia. Of course, he was a Keith Murdoch. I think there's a lot in that. I mean, I think that we, we, we, you and I already logs, professional idea logs. Well, really has not a percentage of it. No, that's somebody who spends all this time looking at numbers. He's fantastic memory for numbers. He knows all he can, I can never remember any phone numbers. He remembers every phone numbers of a dial, you know, and the, the running operation like like his, it requires a tremendous, doesn't attention to detail tremendous application to the, going on, going on over pages and pages and figures. And I don't know. It's been great. There are times thinking about politics, except in a sporting sense, you mean likes to be like, he likes to be, you know, he likes to be backing winners and, and, and, and, and, winning elections and that kind of thing. But then he likes going to Australian football matches too. So it's, so is the, I think it's kind of a similar thing. That is a very sworn analysis. I think you're, I think you're, I think you're exactly, I think you just answered the question. He's outsourced a lot of the thinking to others. It's transactional. He's not tightly wedded to ideological details at all. But he's really allowed the Wall Street Journal editorial page to become a force of destruction. Well, I have to admit it's many years since I'm bothered to read the off June. Yeah, me too. I, I rely on people sending me things and they don't send much from the law of the journal. Or I might have from National Review. A very, very seem to see me. It's National Review still in existence. But finally, sorry, it has the Republican, you know, establishment to support. It's like Lindsey Graham and Ted Cruz and what do you know the editor of National Review? I have the, have the, the, the, the, the, he's got, he's gone for some time now since he's, his, and he's, and he's, and he's done, they've done, they have somebody else. I have the famous idea. But did you know him? I know I sat in rooms with him and I went to Bockus parts with him. Absolutely not my member at home. He never said I had to talk of, of significance. And I think that's why, why Bill had him because he was completely malleable. Yeah. I think that sounds, that sounds right sad sad sad how much has been lost. So speaking of what happened in the end, if you're an owner of your story in my apologies, but to be there. Feeder is suspended and spend it in July of 2024 because he just ran out of money. The foundation still in existence. And Lydia is still, she's not paid, but she still, she, she's still paying lawyers and dealing with the, the legal situation which continues to ram it for as I say, we're being sued personally and, and as a foundation and what grounds are you being sued? All those are a whole bunch of things. Funamentally technical issues to do with, with, to do with whether we had the right number of directors vote on the right number of things. It's all paperwork stuff. It's all stuff that could, would normally resolve with the phone call and possibly refalling and stuff like that. Well, they're not found any evidence of, of, a misappropriation of funds. And in fact, we moved to dismiss on this basis that, although they Huff on Puff a lot, from the six yard pages of rhetoric, but the actual charges, they haven't got anything. So, it's suing you. It's New York State. So, they're using tax dollars still? Oh, yes, that's right. The enormous, it's been, it's the, they've spent a great deal money on this. They also, very weirdly, subpoenaed Facebook for all our records of, all our dealings with Facebook. Well, Facebook Bandos in 2020 as part of Zuckabuzz campaign to defeat Donald Trump. They thought we were, we were pro Trump. So, we actually hadn't, hadn't had any deal with Facebook for more than two years when they came out after us. And, but nevertheless, they got all these records off of Facebook. But they've done nothing with because of course there's nothing there. We've, I think they, I think they genuinely thought that they would find that we were accepting money from the Russians or Russians to run, to run bat farms. Do you remember that was the allegation with interference in the D.S. in 2016 that the Russians were financing tiny little Facebook pages. And that's, that's what, how they were manipulating the election. I think they genuinely believe that. I think they want to think about Democrats, is that they really do believe they're all propaganda. You know, they do think that the middle America's full of people who are in pointed house. It will be a war with Qatar by the end just because they've talked themselves into, well, leaving Qatar secretly controls America as they did with Russia. And then we went to war with Russia and we're still at war with Russia over there. Right. So the difficulty with this is that the Republicans believe the Democrat propaganda too, which is why they won't, for example, appeal appeals to the white vote. One of the things we did at Vida, we, is we, we discussed and documented what we call the sailors' tragedy as opposed to the role of tragedy in 2000. Carl Rovers saying that the Republicans have got to do outreach to minorities. And it makes no sense statistically because I think George Bush, George, George W. Bush got like 51% of the white vote. It's a Paul in performance. It's a lot of self-searles, what if I write as we've had on pointed out that if they could just increase that percentage of proportion of the white vote to what is father got, which is like 57, 58%. That was swamp and overwhelm any possible. It's conceivable gain among minority voters. So we were saying you should go for the white vote. And now this causes a great deal of trouble for us. I remember I got elected from an email from Jude Wineske. He ended with Jude Wineske. Very well. He said, Peter, you've gone too far. In other words, appeals to white vote is not allowed. And I've walked, it's just a question, arithmetic. There's more of them than the role of minorities. And in case to this day, the Republicans still are still not done that. And I've walked it's just a question, arithmetic. You know, there's more of them than they're all of my narratives. And in case to this day, the Republicans still are still not done that. They don't, why was Jude-Wonneske mad? Jude was a liberal, you know, way back when he was a liberal Democrat. And he still had a lot of these reflexes. But it was just thought to be, people just got very emotional about it. They think it's somehow legitimate. And they still do think it's illegitimate. For example, so we see in Virginia in this last election, you know, there's a young kid who's a complete cypher as far as the Wall Street cypher as far as I can see. Choose as it has his success in the gubernatorial race. A candidate who is one in immigrant, two a woman and three black. So he's a black Jamaican immigrant. And this is how he's going to peel off the white vote. He's going to get people in the South or the halls of South West Virginia out to vote for this black immigrant. So ridiculous. And of course, they got a terrible share of the white vote. He was like 53% and that's why they lost. But they would rather lose than to make a full out appeal to white vote. I think the tell was in the ability. So this was in, you know, I'm not saying a bad person. But when some seers was not a good candidate, it was kind of an incapable candidate. And hard to deal with. So like they chose her because she was black. Because despite the fact that she wasn't good at her job. And this is epidemic in the book about it. What's epidemic in the country? It shows us some of the public members in particular. It shows us so many black candidates about to adhere in Florida. The next couple of times, it's like a black, unless a male who goes. Why is that? They're just, they're just pixelated by this, the transfix by this. I'm trying to file the right word. The hypnotized by this phenomenon, by the whole race question. There's race, what it comes down to. They're just so afraid of being called racist. They'd rather lose with a black candidate than run a candidate to appeal to white. Trump did appeal to white, not enough. But he does it in some kind of really implicit way. If you actually look at what Trump said, inspired by the rhetoric, he's not said anything that's explicitly white, nationalist or anything. I see no sign that he'd had all the civic nationalists. But for some reason, he's made some connection. I mean, all through West Virginia, for that, you know, when Biden was was president, you would see these signs supporting Trump and saying very rude things about Biden. And these are outside. Very rude things about Biden, yeah. I mean, you know, this is a poor area. These run down trail homes that you see with these Trump sides on them. For some reason, Trump made a connection with them. And it's eerie. Now, on the other hand, they also made a disconnection with the other side. So you get this Trump derangement syndrome. But he was able to mobilize the white voters. Why do you think that was, which part of it? That he was able, working class whites love Trump. Trump is not a racist. I've never seen any sign of that at all and not a white nationalist at all. And hardly a Christian nationalist. But he, for some reason, had an emotional connection with these voters. Why, you know, the concept in sociology called implicit community, you know, communities that represent or appeal to some people without actually saying to explicitly the classic example, will an NASCAR, for example, why is NASCAR a white, a stronghold? Or everybody watching NASCAR is white? And the NASCAR operatives don't like this. And they can't hate it. Yeah. The constant time diversify Republican parts of the classic example of this. I mean, without ever, without ever doing anything, deserve it. The Republican's become absolutely unbeatable in Virginia. And you and I both remember that when the Democrats were unbeatable in Virginia, you know, I forget when the last Republicans, I also keep forgetting when the last Republican Democrat to Kai West Virginia was pretty might have been Clinton. And now it's just the Democrats have ceased to exist in West Virginia, even though this is a very poor state. But it's broken, prevailed by simply by virtue of not being Democrat. Brooklyn lost California in 92 and one West Virginia. That's how much has changed. Right. So there's something that's gone on to a very deep psychological level. There's some kind of implicit signal. And it's baffling. And of course, he did say, you know, when he came down the elevator and said, just a few words about Mexico, about Mexican immigration, and never look back. So he obviously struck a nerve there. So he did enough to strike a nerve. I simply by raising immigration in this sort of rather, you know, I'm sure it drives to even middle crazy incoherent and peculiar. And if it's the cast of forget, it's his lines and says the wrong thing, way that Trump does talk about immigration. But he did raise it. And of course, until then, it's been driven out of Republican politics completely. I know we wrote about it for a few weeks. But you were fired over it. Right. Just wait, you know, there's almost no sign that any Republican would pick it up. But then when he did the damn broken now, what a big difference I found talk is if you speak to grassroots Republicans as opposed to elected Republicans, the consensus of, well, that immigration has got to be ended. The consensus of a woman, whereas when I got involved in this in the early 90s, I was Republican has never heard of this question. And they would assume, for example, that immigrants don't go on welfare to the same as to the native border, which is completely wrong. It's completely reversed. The truth and the world's back then. It was obvious that they were going back onto welfare and just for fortunate numbers. But people didn't know. And the war was just not telling them. Well, the war was just still isn't telling them, but they do know now. Maybe we played the role in that. Well, yeah, and it's had such a complex and degrading effect on the native population. It hasn't been, it's not just a matter of competition in the job market or my tech job went to an indie and or something. It's way more complicated than that. And as immigrant communities became totally dependent on federal benefits, it changed the incentive structure for native-born communities. And one of them started going on it. And higher rates also. So it just it created a vortex that's hurt everybody, I think, especially the whites. Where does it go from here? The big thing that has to, the next, if I was still running VDA and on my own website, PeterBrenewell.com now, I, I, I, what I'm interested in is legally immigration. Legal immigration is still running that to a million a year. No, that's that puts the fact that the foreign born population in the US was falling back two and a half million in the last and just joined this year. That's an extraordinary number. I used to track it if you do the foreign born population because it's the way of, of tracking the impact of immigration. It's very rarely goes negative. It went negative briefly when Trump first got in because it was framed up in the last week, legal is left. And then towards the end, before COVID, it was falling because of various technical executive action measures that Trump had taken the administration to tighten up on both legal immigration and illegal immigration. Now it's two and a half million gone for one and a half million foreign born population. In though we know a million legal immigrants have come in 90% from COVID by the way, only about 10% wide. So what we really need is immigration moratorium. And I'm delighted to say that there is a bill proposed by Chip Roy in the, in the house. Call it, call the pause hat. Call it for, for moratorium. And there's several other very interesting bills. There's a very good bill on both rights citizenship and I miss you. Look at my list here. Secure the board. I mean, in other words, they should set in codified Trump's, uh, Trump's activities to tighten up on the, on the executive action, tightened up on the, on the, the sort of the board because we know that when the Democrats get in, they'll reverse it. But they won't be able to do that. If, if, if it's in, in the law, they'll have to pass a, a law enough to admit what they're doing. The problem is that the White House seems to be, is, is not pushing any of these bills. And unless they do, I don't think that Speaker Johnson is going to raise anything. It's just going to, you know, it's just going to lie, lie, lie, lie. And I don't know why the White House is pushing these bills. Of course, it's got his hands full in, in, uh, Minnesota where they clearly need to declare the insurrection act and that kind of thing. And the kids could keep going around blowing up foreign, foreign governments and stuff like that and thinking ships and stuff. I mean, which is must be very entertaining, but, uh, I would really rather than focus on, ending this, this, um, ending this immigration, to disaster. Uh, you know, it's, uh, whatever it is, 34 years now since I started writing about this in last few weeks. I'm 78. I can't wait much longer. I think that she was getting home with him. Can you have a number of children who will inherit the country? That's really the point. You know, people occasionally, uh, yeah, uh, people say, okay, I get attacked all the time for, for not being, for being an immigrant. My position is, you know, I'm at, so I'm in a doing a, do a job that Americans won't do. Talk about immigration, but the real reason is I have children here. My youngest child is 10 years old and, and, and, and, and, uh, she, God knows what the country goes behind by the time she, she, you know, she's a growing one. Are you bitter? I, um, I've been extremely blessed in my personal life, uh, even though my first wife died. So, uh, I don't think, I think things could have worked out differently for me professionally. Well, my personal life, I'm very blessed. You don't seem angry. I mean, cause what my read on it is what happened to you is grotesque and unasevil. And not the kind of thing I thought would ever be allowed here. So, so I'm, I'm shocked. Oh, always shocked to hear your story. I am, I guess I am bitter at the conservative movement. People in the conservative movement, people I've known for, for 13, 40 years who basically haven't helped us haven't defended us. Uh, uh, the most prominent people who have defended us, talk to you and Laura Luma, you friend Laura Luma. So that, that just shows how he can manage learn that way. Uh, so Luma helped you. Oh, yeah. She supported us on Twitter when we were good for him, when we were trying to raise money for to defend ourselves. And she may have a, I have a gift saying go, which I just launched before Christmas, frankly, it's, uh, to help us personally. Because of course, we're now post face intermendous legal costs personally and, and, uh, I believe she's helped us with that. Have you received any help for the Department of Justice? Um, we know that we, there are people in the department of justice who are, uh, uh, not, not directly. Uh, on the other hand, Trump cast Dan Latisha James quite rightly. And, and, though they made very attempts to bring her to book for a very, as cramps, one thing I mean, she's clearly guilty of massive mongies before going back over what her has. But you know, the obverse of law fair, run by Democrats, it's your notification by Democrats. Uh, they've been unable to indict her because, uh, because, uh, basically because judges have keep disallowing the prosecutors and because the grand jury won't, won't, won't indict, um, won't indict Democrats. Uh, we, uh, so that I don't know where that's where that stands. They also have an investigation into her deprivation of, uh, Trump civil rights in this, these scandalous cases and, you know, the, the, the whole money case and the fraud case and so on, we should never have been allowed to go to court. The judge should have started but, of course, the judge is on the other side. And our judge has just tried to get to try and strike that down by, um, by, uh, disallowing the prosecutor. I mean, what's happening is these Democrats senators, uh, not only have the power to veto, uh, judicial points for judicial appointments, but they also the power partly to veto, um, prosecutors, federal prosecutors and they've had, but they're a pilot taking the position that they won't, uh, they won't allow the point of federal prosecutor if he's likely to prosecute the teacher, Jim's, or any other Democrats, you know, and gut knows they're enough Democrats are there that need prosecuting. That's how they're protecting them. And they're especially, you know, we're looking to, uh, slow-motion civil war here. I mean, New York and essentially it's a city of the Minnesota, essentially it's a city from the Union. The, the whole legal systems are, uh, opposed to what the federal government is doing. It's Jonathan Turley, who is a first-minute specialist, uh, wrote recently that New York is, is the land that law forgot because normal legal norms simply don't apply there. The, uh, what happens is what, what the Democrat operatives want. Uh, and of course this is not, not a government under law. So if, and if Fat New York is, and it's a city from, from, from, from the Union, uh, and, uh, and that's why I think ultimately we're going to have to go to the insurrection now. And we're going to have to go to the whole sailing pichman of judges. I mean, all these judges brought in by Biden, uh, uh, I think he had one or two white men, both of whom would get he something like that, all the, all the others of women and people of color and so on. And they're delivering the most extraordinary rulings, uh, uh, uh, uh, disregard the plane and the last of the law. Ultimate is going to have to be pushed into the judicial, of the judicial system. Trump when that happens, Trump will be attacked as destroying the third branch of government. Um, but it's, it's, it's been completely destroyed. Long before Trump, right. Right. My last question to you, Peter Brown, and thank you so much for, for doing this. Um, is, are, are you hopeful? Uh, I have, I have, um, one of the things I want to remember before is that, based on a talk I gave in about 2015 is that miracles haven't quite often in politics. Yes. I mean, nobody, nobody expects over uni collapse. Are you all done to remember that? I'm 56. Yeah. Remember it was yesterday, 30 years ago and 30 years ago. Um, I mean, that's literally true. Nobody, nobody, I don't know after all the right expect the Soviet collapse. On the other hand, uh, you know, I don't think they expected the Catholic Church, on direction it went and Vatican II and, and, and, and, and on the third hand, no big expected Trump. And he has been a miracle. I mean, he's changed the situation so many ways, not of which I think he, he has probably thought about, but, but he does it anyway. Yeah. So I'm hopeful because I think miracles happen in politics. Uh, frequently, but we need one. Uh, the situation right now, we're heading in a very, very bad direction. And in the situation with, where, you know, Democrat parties, and so openly calling up people to disobey federal law, uh, disobey law, the, uh, prevent ice from, from deportation illegals. Uh, that's more extreme than, uh, than ever happened in the South, uh, join the desegation. Much more. It's more extreme than what the South did at, for some term. I mean, this is, this is insurrection actual. That's right. That's right. That's insurrection. And of course we, uh, we, uh, Eisenhower, Howard, did use the insurrection act to impose integration. Uh, uh, he said the 101st airborne to a high school. Yeah. Right. With the total pause from from the main, main street media, because then of course, completely, um, oligopolistic. I mean, it was dominant, uh, at least now we have, we have Twitter, even if we are Shadow Van Hunt Twitter. Are you still shadowbanging? Oh, yeah. Well, as far as we can see, we are. And cold and, you know, her, her, um, fellowship has not risen for like six years. It's been 2.1 million for six years. It doesn't go up. It doesn't go down. I mean, it's obviously, you can see from an engagement that there's, there's, there's something, there's something very strange going on. It's all the Indians he has in there. He hasn't been able to root him how he has. But you remember, thank you very much. Thank you, Tom.