Good googly moo-gly. Hello everybody. Welcome back. This episode of the Joe Rogan experience podcast is brought to you by Ting Ting is one of my favorite sponsors on the podcast because I have heard nothing but positive responses From people that have used Ting and have saved money It's a no bullshit mobile service and what they mean by no bullshit is they have no contracts No early termination fees no ridiculous funding or ride along services The way they set up their rates you use what you use and you pay for what you use no overage charges No penalties no add-on charges no mysterious line items on your bill They decided to put together a mobile service the way mobile really should have been done from the beginning with no nonsense and good service They use the sprint back bomb So you have a major provider that's providing your bandwidth providing your your cell phone service and You can get the top and Android devices when you buy a device from Ting if you go to ting's website If you go to rogan dot ting dot com you can actually save $25 off one of these Android devices But if you see the range of devices that they have they have all the cool new gadgets like the Samsung Galaxy S3 The Samsung Galaxy S4 actually is the new one the Samsung Galaxy Note 3 which is what I have the HTC one They mean they have all the really cool interesting new Android phones so you get the high-end phones you get Sprint service. It's exactly the same as sprint. It's not some weird mom and pop company that's giving you some Ricky dink cell phone service and You can do it and save money and do it in a way where you don't feel gross at the end of the month like they got me these fucking creeps Tingle Tingle also give you credit for $25 of your early termination fee up to $75 per device 25% rather. I'll say that again Ting will give you It's they call it their early termination fee relief program, which is kind of sweet They will give you credit for 25% of your early termination fee up to $75 per device So if you're getting fucked by your other company when you leave and go to Ting, they'll try to give you a little bit of relief It's a really cool way to get your mobile service. It's a really cool way that they've decided to provide mobile service Just no nonsense and it's it's ethical. It's it's clean. It's a better way to do it We have friends that use it and it's been nothing but positive We've had nothing but excellent responses. So go to rogan dot ting dot com save money and better manage your mobile service Using ting so that's rogan dot ting dot com and go save some money with you We're also brought to you by on it calm. That's oh and and it and Very excited that we have doctor Ron to Patrick on the podcast today because she can explain some of the shit that's an on it that Confuses me all the baffling stuff What what antioxidants are necessary what about What about digestive enzymes when do they come into play? All these things are very very crucial for health and very confusing So we're gonna get to that today, but on it calm carries We we essentially try to carry everything that we find beneficial in everything that I use Everything that all bar uses everything that our friends use athletes mix martial arts fighters jujitsu people things that Things that would benefit your physical conditioning things that would benefit your cognitive function things that benefit your immune system Your endurance what we sell whether it's our strength and conditioning equipment like kettlebells Battle rope steel maces those things along those lines or whether it's the nutritional supplements like hemp force protein powder or New mood or alpha brain. We just try to sell you the very best Most high quality Supplements that are available in the world whatever we can find if we find stuff that's beneficial We try to sell it to you and because some of the stuff that we sell it on it is controversial We're in the process of running many tests. We just got back the results where we actually just started publishing the results of the Double-Blonde placebo test that we did on alpha brain if you go to the on it website You can see the results of that test. It was a pilot program of 20 people out of those 20 people a few dropped out so we were left with I think 16 or 17 people But we got positive results from two categories from memory and from execution the execution of I think I think it's actually verbal execution was the You can learn it on on a dot com the idea behind it is What you're doing when you're taking something like a neutral because you're giving your brain the building blocks to produce human neurotransmitters the nutritional aspects of of of thought and When you take you know if you're just getting that stuff through food Man you'd have to take a lot of weird food and you could take you have to take a lot of it in like really high doses A lot of mosses and grasses and weird shit that you're not gonna want to eat All of it is very controversial So we're in the process of continuing even more studies if you go to the on it website You can see the alpha brain clinical trial results We have them all posted and we're in the process of a much larger test right now We're also in the process of tests on several of the other supplements because they're controversial even though we 100% back them and support them we offer a 30 pill 90 day 100% money back guarantee on anything that you buy from on it any of the supplements if you try them You don't like them. You feel like alpha brain didn't make your brain work any better You get 100% of your money back. You don't even have to send in the pills. We don't want anybody feeling ripped off We just want to sell you the best shit that's available currently So go to on it calm oh and and I T use the code word rogue it and save and percent off of any and all supplements All right, that's it boom talk to Rhonda Patrick's here. Here's music. I'm just dying to ask you. So what's in alpha brain? The Joe Rogan experience That's good question. What's in alpha brain? We could read it all off But it was sound like another commercial on top of a commercial. It's essentially Alright, you said you said neurotransmitters I'm a little bit. I'm looking I'm looking Do do do do I should give it to you so you could read it Yeah, because if trip to fans in there, that's actually a really Hold up, but this is just 180 this has alpha brain That's that has a lot of different shit and 180 is the stuff that we take oh Wow, yeah, okay that's uh, okay. Here's the action ingredients You read that right there. There's the actual ingredients. Dr. Rhonda Patrick reached out to me because she had some things to say about some of the things that other podcasts guessed it said about nutrition about health and Tell the folks what your credentials are what you do who you are and why you are uniquely qualified to explain Nutrition and health these folks absolutely so my name is Rhonda Patrick I have a PhD in biomedical science I did my undergraduate work in biochemistry chemistry and now I'm doing a postdoctoral fellowship nutrition and metabolism so I started out with synthesizing peptides and doing organic chemistry and I got really bored with that and I was a undergraduate sort of student Research and you know research in in turn so then I decided to Try biology out and I went to the Salt Institute for biological sciences in mohyah And I did some research on aging using worms as a model because they have a really short lifespan And so it was really cool to do a lot of genetic manipulation and see how that changed our lifespan and from there I was like oh my god, I freaking love this I want to get my PhD in biology and I decided to go to Memphis, Tennessee because I wanted to do a do research on Cancer and a St. Jude Children's Research hospitals located in Memphis, Tennessee So I ended up going to University of Tennessee at my PhD, but I did all my research at St. Jude absolutely fantastic place and then So I was doing a lot of research using mice and some human cells and then I decided I wanted to mow my people Just glassing over that I did research with mice and human cells and I mean I could go on and on about my My people no no I didn't make I've been mice people but I Did a lot of work on mitochondria and mitochondrial metabolism and how that relates to cancer and how cells die and how they don't die and what you know what's going wrong with cancer and I got a really awesome publication out of it in nature and Then I decided that I was really wanting to move on to something You know during your PhD you like dig dig dig dig dig deep mechanism You know and finally you got you know you just keep digging deeper and I felt like I was like lost from like What everything meant and what was the significance of it? You know and so you kind of have to do that in grad school because you're you're learning the tools You know how to use tools to answer questions what kind of questions and how you answer them and so I did really a lot of that and Then I decided I wanted to kind of take us back and look at the big picture and Do some clinical research and apply the tools that I learned in graduate school and try to learn some things using you know Looking at you know people So now I'm at the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute worth working with Bruce Ames Who's pretty famous for his Ames test Carson, I did a test where he basically made this test I could help you figure out whether or not a chemical was a mutagen meaning if it caused cancer And so I'm working with him and I'm actually looking at What causes you know, I'm looking at a lot of things But I'm actually fundamentally looking at people that are obese and how obesity accelerates the aging process people that are you know bees dive all sorts of age related diseases sooner cardiovascular disease type to diabetes cancer By the age of 40 they like there's a 14 year reduction in their lifespan which is I think even greater than smoking cigarettes So I'm trying to understand fundamental fundamental mechanisms Like why these people are accelerating you know their aging process and so I'm actually looking at something specifically I'm looking at 30 and a So I'm taking blood cells so we draw blood from people that have a BMI of like 30 year above or 25 and below which are considered Normal or lean which is body mass index right and you know it's just problems with like using body mask index as a marker for You know obesity because you know some people some people are you know lean and You know anyways, it's it's it's kind of murky, but I'm not gonna go into that so I'm actually looking at So I take their their blood cells and I look at their DNA And how much damage is in their DNA and I kind of want to get into that a little later Kind of explain what that is, but that's kind of what I'm doing I'm also doing some research on vitamin D I have a paper that's actually coming out in six days. It's gonna hit the press I found that a vitamin D actually regulates serotonin so It's really cool. Well that makes sense for people in Seattle They don't get any vitamin D. They don't get any son. They're all bummed out. Right. It you know thing every winter People in northern latitudes a lot of a lot of people are having adequate levels of vitamin D So it's it's a really important finding To can so that can actually affect your mood supplementing with vitamin D when you live in place where it gets so You know, I'm not gonna talk about the details of this paper because there's like an embargo and all that but I'll talk about absolutely serotonin Effects mood behavior, you know, so that's why I was asking if trip to fan was in your alpha brain because trip to fan is a rare amino acid that occurs in protein And most people think that oh I eat turkey. I'm getting my trip to fan But the thing is is that trip to fan in order to get converted into serotonin has to get transported into your brain through this Transporter it converts to 5HGP correct it does convert to convert to that we have that in my HTP and then it converts into serotonin. Yeah, that's one of the principal ingredients in new mood new mood is five HDP and L-trip to fan the idea of being that there's a sort of a slow release effect The L-trip to fan converts to 5HDP and then 5HDP converts to sort of right so 5HGP can actually cross the blood brain barrier So that can already get converted into serotonin in your brain and trip to fan so trip to fan actually competes with other brands chanamine acids like losing nice allucine to get transported into the brain and it loses so Blue scene these brain channel amino acids there are abundant in proteins. What ends up happening if you're not taking something like 5HDP or something else is that Most of the time you're not getting enough trip to fan transport into your brain Now certain things can help alleviate that competition like exercise So exercise you take up a bunch of brand chanamine acids to make muscle So exercise actually boost serotonin in your brain by allowing trip to fan to get transported into brain Leviating some of that competition from other brand chanamine acids. Oh Yeah, and actually it's really interesting. They've done you can actually deplete someone's brain trip to fan by giving them a big bolus shake of brand chanamine acids because then it really out competes all the like trip to fan that you've from your diet and Within like four or five hours you can deplete like 90% of Someone's brain serotonin and then they do all these like behavioral test to see what you know What the what the results are what how how not having serotonin your brain impacts behavior and cognitive function and they found that it really There's a lot of things that are you know Sort of messed up if you're not making serotonin you become impulsive impulsive behavior your long-term thinking kind of you know shut down Some of your meth head actually there's a study There's a study where they compared Meth anaphidamine users cocaine users and then they depleted just normal people they depleted their trip fan by that method I just told you about and depleting the trip to fan so basically depleting the serotonin in your brain You were you're doing your scoring just as bad as a meth user and actually methamphetamine does deplete your serotonin Isn't that frightening wow? so That's wild. You know Sarah fact that serotonin is affecting our behavior and that it's basically you know trip to fan and vitamin D Or important for that people don't realize you know nutrition effects effects the way your brain works It does it and it's so confusing and when you're a regular person that's trying to go online or read books about Health and nutrition and what you need what you don't need there's so much contradictory information There's so many people that tell you you don't need anything just a balanced diet Well, what's a balanced diet well then that gets squirrel you know the balanced diet includes grains. Whoa no don't eat gluten Oh fact shit glutens bad, you know stay away from eggs eggs contain You know, it's it just gets so weird there's so much information. It's so hard to separate the wheat from the chaff That's the expression right we from the chaff totally agree so much noise out there and it's very confusing You know, and it's yeah, you get getting your nutrition from your diet Well, that would be ideal But the the reality is we have you know the national institute of medicine that are conducting these surveys every five years They call them the nutrition and examination health surveys and hens. It's very notorious You know the nutrition field there, you know, we consider and hens surveys to be pretty accurate into determining what people are getting from their diet and You know these surveys are telling us you know people are not getting what they need from their diet The majority of Americans are not getting what they need in terms of you know, micronutrients Yeah, it's really hard to do so and to do so Daily basis requires you to really eat clean and healthy I mean you can get what you need from your diet, but boy you have to really mind what you're eating You have to really work at it and yeah, it's yeah, it's a lot of effort You know, it's and there's also the difference between the idea of you just surviving and not getting a disease and you being at optimal health absolutely absolutely that's something that our lab works on You know, but we've got this sort of theory that it's hard to to do aging studies in people and particularly looking at different, you know Vitamins and minerals and what effects they have long term but that's that's one of the theories in our lab that they there's we've shown some evidence of it Is that you know a lot of vitamins and minerals? They're co-factors for many different biochemical pathways in your body like if you would just go to go bio biochemical pathways You'll see this like massive image come up and it's just like holy crab like and vitamins and minerals are co-factors for enzymes Meaning they need to be you know there for the enzyme to work optimally in enzymes in proteins in your body are doing Everything I mean that's what's right what's doing everything our bodies doing And so if you don't have you know, there's certain proteins that are important to survive right now like you're Soting in potassium ATPAs, you know, you want to make sure your heart's getting the right signals you want I mean if that shuts down then you're dead, you know, so I mean some of these some of these functions are more than that Yeah, so that's the biochemical pathways. I'm talking about And that's just a snapshot that's just a snapshot So I mean all these different pathways they require vitamins and minerals Essential fatty acids. I mean these things It's complicated and so so cheeseburgers don't don't give that everything it needs No, they don't They don't and what you know what is it? What is it that someone should absolutely supplement with on a daily basis You know, I would say Definitely most people are not getting enough vitamin D and that is it's a steroid hormone Okay, it's a hormone that controls the expression of over a thousand different genes in our body which is literally like one 24th of our human genome many of them in our brain So what that means is Without vitamin D so vitamin D is so important that we can make it from the Sun Problem is we're not we're not doing that anymore. Most of us aren't out in the Sun a lot You know, I know I'm not I'm always on my computer inside And when I'm out, I'm you know, worried about skin aging if you're female or skin cancer, you know, and so I'm wearing sunscreen of course and As a majority of the people from the surveys, you know if you look at people that supplement and don't supplement in the United States About 70% don't get adequate levels of vitamin D and actually the way we determine what's adequate is Based on vitamin D's classical function of bone homeostasis, you know So we know vitamin D is important to make sure that our bones aren't don't start breaking down But in fact, there's a thousand other things it's doing and we don't know how much vitamin D we need to do those other things But to at least maintain that that's considered adequate and that's like 30 nanograms per milliliter Of the precursor vitamin D called 25 hydroxy vitamin E, which is what most people when you get your levels measured That's what they measure So what should you take on a daily basis? I would say, you know, definitely you should probably be taking a vitamin D supplement and what like what dose you think? Yes, so here's the thing You know a lot of different things regulate Vitamin D absorption bioavailability body fat for one. It is a fat soluble vitamin So the more Body fat you have the more it's stored in that fat and the less of it can be released into the bloodstream to be You know then circulated and brought to different organs in your body and then get into the cells to do its thing So people that are obese actually require much higher levels of vitamin D because It's been shown that that vitamin D bioavailability is reduced by up to 50% and like severely obese people So that's one thing to consider is how much per body body fat I think generally a good Marker is like a thousand I use per 25 pounds But like I said 25 pounds you could be 25 pounds of like muscle and so you know I think the best way to really gauge how much vitamin D you need is to just get a test Just go you know if you have if you have health insurance health insurance pays for it There's other you know Places that you can get vitamin D levels tested cheaply very cheaply And it's just so worth it like I get mine tested routinely because I just want to make sure that my You know dosing is pretty good like I personally take four thousand I use a day Is that a lot? Um, I think that's pretty pretty standard for an adult. Uh, that's you know Normal weight and in pretty good shape Yeah, I think that's pretty standard But I can't say that everyone should go out and take four thousand I use a day It can say that you should definitely make sure that you have Levels in your blood that's higher than 30 nanograms per milliliter Which is that's above the adequate status and actually if we look at Studies where they've looked at for example all car cause mortality lowering all cause mortality They've shown that um, you know huge like large cohort studies. They've done They've looked at the levels of vitamin D and then looked at mortality dying of different, you know diseases people with levels of Vitamin D between 40 and 60 nanograms per milliliter in their blood had the least amount of all cars cause mortality So basically they were living the longest um, so You know, maybe you want to have between 40 and 60 nanograms per milliliter based on that study You know, it's It's important to get the levels tested. That's that's kind of what I like to Advocate because it's so cheap and easy. It's so easy. When you get very few people ever get the their body tested for their vitamin levels It's uh, it's it is kind of unusual that we think about health and nutrition But how few people actually get their blood tested? It's the future really. I mean We're gonna start to do that. It preventative medicine being able to know if we have adequate amounts of these vitamin minerals It's gonna get easier and easier the next couple of decades. No, you reached out to me because of people on the podcast saying things That you didn't think were accurate and you got upset and sent me some videos and some some different things that that sort of describe what disinformation these people were releasing or erroneous information right Like give us some specifics or what thing well, let's just talk about what bugged you one of the erroneous facts where that most people most Americans get all the micronutrients They need from their diet. That was Brian Dunning. That was Brian Dunning. And that is not correct based on You know the national institute of medicine doing these surveys We know that's not correct and in fact They've even done surveys where they've you know looked at people that supplement versus people that don't supplement and people that supplement Have much more adequate levels of these certain vitamins and minerals So you know that's that's already the first thing that's not true um and that you know that this recent editorial that came out in the annals of Interval medicine Was really upsetting because they were basically saying that multi vitamins Do nothing and not only do they nothing do nothing they're bad for you And you mentioned you actually mentioned that on that podcast That you had with Dunning. Yeah, that's that Research that they first of all. I think it's one of the most irresponsible Studies or the most irresponsible press release I've ever read because if you actually read what the studies were in comparison to what they're saying They're saying vitamins don't work case closed But the studies that they did were on Alzheimer's patients Not showing any sort of improvement people over 65 that had heart attacks not showing any improvement I mean just those two things were two out of the three tasks that they did that they're saying the vitamins don't work When you're talking about a generic Multi-vitamin too synthetic multivitamin like one of those central ones Those ones that they find in the bottom of portapotis by the way when they clean out They find them they find those little blue pills still like intact Like they pass through people's belt allegedly that might not be true. I've never looked What do I know have I even looked online to research? No Just parroting it like a little minibird but the studies themselves were really shocking. I mean I'll read you the three things Male physicians over 65 showed no improvement in cognitive decline using a generic Multi-vitamin supplementation like they're dying. Oh, God. Can I please just tell you so that study? Was so infuriating because they were giving these these guys six? Okay, this was supposed to be a high dose multivitamin and they were giving them six pills a day Six pills a day. Okay. I take a high dose multivitamin. It's one pill a day, okay? And they're their total vitamin D levels were like hundred I use like hundred I use a vitamin D won't do anything and that was considered a high dose and They're you know compliance meaning okay You're asking someone to take six pills a day for like 10 years And then you you call them up every three months and did you take your six pills? Well, I took it yesterday. So you know, yeah, I took it for the last three months They didn't measure any there was no quantitative like biochemical analysis meaning they didn't measure any Any vitamins like choose one vitamin and that's in that you're your Multi-vitamin concoction and see if what you're giving them actually raises a level of that You know to show that they're a compliant be that you're giving them a dose. It's actually doing something So you're leaving it up to the person to take it as well and especially when you do that study they did Yeah, that's that seems pretty faulty and also you say that you take four thousand units and they had a hundred That's not so good. The other aspect of the study was that a high dose Multivitamin said no effect on the progression of heart disease and heart attack survivors again They're dying right these are dying people you mean this is not people who Preventative medicine is what one of the things you talked about earlier about testing blood and I really think that that is the key It's not about catching you when you're falling apart. It's about making sure you don't fall apart Giving your body the natural building blocks to repair cells to keep your body healthy from the jump And that's what we should be doing. We should be doing in intelligently Thinking ahead while you're healthy while you're young. It's it's so true. I mean, I'll give you an example so 45% of the US population doesn't have adequate levels of magnesium and You know I think I think most people in the fitness community are concerned with magnesium because they're always like You know my god. I sweat it out. I got a replacement magnesium. You know, I think that's their major concern or muscle cramping and things like that But magnesium is an essential cofactor for DNA repair enzymes So let me explain that is because boy like what's DNA repair enzymes so you know Every day just normal metabolism. So our mitochondria. They're they're you know taking food that we eat in whether it's carbohydrates or protein or fat And they're generating what's called electron reducing equivalents through this whole creb cycle if you ever learned in biochemistry And those electron reducing equivalents are really important because they have Hydrogen which has an electron and a proton and these electrons get passed along inside your mitochondria these various proteins And they shoot out Proton at the same time and this is basically the way it Generates energy to then take the oxygen you breathe in and reduce it to water and couple that to making ATP anyways So these electrons get passed around and what happens is they often because you're taking oxygen you breathe in and making water to generate Denergia you need to make ATP you start making superoxide anion you start making reactive oxygen species and you're mitochondria Every day we're doing this. We're doing it right now. I mean, that's the major source of you know reactive oxygen species I'm sure you've heard of that in your body. I mean these reactive oxygen species they react That's what they do they react with your DNA they react with lipids Your cell membranes they react with proteins and they damage them and what happens when you're Doing it's called DNA damage when it reacts with your DNA You know it sometimes you get like an Off, you know a bulky addict that's attached on or sometimes you get like an oxidative product Which then can cause a break you know your DNA's double strength and cause a break and what happens is you know The cells in your in different organs like in your kidneys and your liver these cells have a limited lifespan And so they have to replicate you know they have to synthesize their DNA replicate in order to replace their limited you know lifespan so When the cell then tries to replicate DNA and there's just like funny stuff there It doesn't it's like what is this and then sometimes it puts another nucleotide what's not supposed to be there and it causes a mutation and Then you have this mutation. It's like okay. Well, you can't go back once you have a mutation. It's there so You know if it's a mutation in a cotin region of a gene that does something important then you could really screw stuff up and so In order to prevent that from happening we have what's called DNA repair enzymes Okay, and they basically take this damage that's there and they repair it and Those DNA repair enzymes require magnesium Without magnesium they do not work. They do not work well. They're very You know inefficient and so if you're not getting enough magnesium your DNA repair Isn't going well and you're probably getting more damage But the thing is is this is this is a decade it takes decades for this to rear its head You know you've got a bunch of you and we've got DNA damage But you can't look in the mirror and be like oh I have DNA damage today You know, it's like well you can look in the mirror and be like oh my gums are falling apart I probably have scurvy So it's like you know this is something you can't see and What happens is over here over decades of getting this DNA damage? Because it happens at random places in your genes eventually You get it into place that you don't want you get it in a gene that's important for controlling cell cycle or stopping bad cells from You know dividing and proliferating these are called tumor suppressor genes and when you get one of those You're screwed because now you got some funky cell that doesn't pass those checkpoints that usually are Genes and you know making sure they they don't pass this checkpoint if they're funny and then they're they pass it and they start dividing and proliferating and now you've got this clonal You know population of cancer cells But you know that takes decades to happen So if you're walking around with not you know not on sub adequate levels of magnesium You're not gonna know anything until you're in your 50s or 60s and You know come down with cancer Wow So that's intense so now when you read something like this You know vitamins don't work case closed and you find out this is the research that they did And this is the conclusion that they came to from the research That's so irresponsible and so infuriating. I agree. It's you know There's a lot of studies out there that have done meta analyses and shown just the opposite You know it's not like this is the only research that's been done on vitamin and mineral supplementation The thing that's really infuriating is the Big over generalizations they did here. You know for example There there is an important case Where taking some vitamins and minerals can be bad and that is when you have cancer And you know these people have the opportunity to point that out instead of just saying oh vitamins are bad Meaning like everyone shouldn't take vitamins They have you know in my opinion they have They should they should be educating people on Okay, well if you already have cancer this can happen to you so You know the perfect example is folate. Okay folate isn't it essential to be vitamin and It's mostly fortified in a lot of our breads and even junk food like chips and I've seen it in chips and crackers and stuff so Not that many people in the United States are deficient in it anymore. I think like 14% of the population So it's not a huge huge problem like it was however folate is It's essential to make one of your nucleotides in your DNA Dymine which means without folate you're not making thymine and you have to you need folate You know to basically make new DNA for these new cells that you're making in your body every day Okay, so when you don't have folate that can actually Cause a single strand break in your DNA and it can do the stuff I was telling you about by causing mutations and leading to cancer eventually However, if you already have cancer Everything that's good for you cancer like it's like cancer is on crack man. It's like oh it's good for you Yeah, give me some of that, you know, it's it's like they they just take over everything That's good and because well, you know, they want to keep that's that's their goal Propagate I want to propagate and take over So with folate because cancer cells are They're dividing they're trying to you know replicate themselves They love folate They love it because that's what they need to make more DNA to make more of their cancer cells So someone that already has cancer shouldn't be taking high levels of folate And really I think these people that wrote this editorial had an obligation to educate them and specifically point this out There's a mechanism why let's talk about it instead of making this huge over generalization saying Multivitamins are bad What do you fix the motivation behind a study like that like or the conclusion like that since it seems kind of unscientific It's confusing like I don't understand why they would be motivated to say that based on the findings that they got Unless putting out that sort of salacious headline would get people thinking or get people responding and cause attention to their work Absolutely, it's it's a tension grabbing Negative negative things like that get press they get attention I don't know what their motive was honestly I I kind of feel like that's part of it I think another part of it is that a lot of medical doctors they aren't trained in nutrition They aren't trained in preventative medicine They aren't trained to understand the importance of all these vitamins and minerals and essential fatty acids And how their co-factors for these proteins and what they're doing long-term versus short-term They're not that's you know when they're trained they're they're actually trained to understand how different pharmacological drugs Act on certain receptors how that you know it's it's kind of a different Training so I think in some cases when you start talking about nutrition and preventative medicine A lot of people if you don't know about it and you get kind of threatened and you feel like oh it must be wrong I don't know about this You know kind of like one of those responses and I and I think that may also have Something to do with This is a lot of the MD physicians that are were involved in that there's a lot of people that want to be There's this this is need to be like a no-nonsense person. Oh Come on all that who that's a bunch of who we you know need any that's all complicated Is that a response to not wanting to delve into the incredibly deep waters of nutrition and figure out what all these mechanisms are And is it just like just the sort of a knee jerk reaction to oh, it's a bunch of BS. I think there's two I think there's two reasons I think one is absolutely it's a visceral response because there is a load of crap out there And it is hard it is hard to differentiate between what's the noise and the signal and so some people are just like oh It's all crap me know it's but I think there's also people that just it's just too much work like You know, I want to keep eating what I'm eating and I want to believe it's fine And that's what I want to believe and some gonna believe it I think that's another really you know mindset that needs to be changed and I think you know Personally, I would love to see people eating more more greens, you know more more of these Dark green leafy vegetables which are rich in many different micronutrients like vitamin K folic acid magnesium I can talk about the minute, but I think you know for people that are just that aren't gonna do that You know at least Give them a vitamin that's gonna give them some of these trace elements and minerals and vitamin D and some of these important Micronutrients that they really do need magnesium, you know, so At the very least it's just it's an easy way to do it, you know, it's an easy way to do it Yeah, it's um, it seems to me that in order to really get a grasp on what is required What is necessary for your body? It takes an incredible amount of study I mean, yeah, there's there's so much information that you have to get not just as far as Dietary information but supplemental information is there's just so much. It's it's it almost feels you feel a little Like hopeless like trying to absorb it all and figure out what what you actually need and what you don't need and when you read a study like that Vitamins don't work case closed. Good. Now. I cannot think right. Let me push that aside and just fucking have an apple and feel like I'm doing my job You know one of the reasons why I made a video to this you know response to this editorial was because You know A because I could have done some scientific paper and gone through peer review and but but you know I want to get it to the people and it's like Some level, you know this other scientists. They don't really care You know, I want the people to realize that you know because these people like my dad my dad takes a multi-vitamin And he listens to the news he gets his information from the TV like that generation does and you know It's just it's so upsetting that like all of a sudden my dad could stop taking his vitamin and I don't want him to stop taking his vitamin Because you know, it's important that he does take his multi-vitamin. They're they are certain You know Think components in that multivitamin that I know he's not getting from his diet So you know least let him get it from his multi-vitamin so I this this study there was a meta analysis that included like 30 different studies and I really read through them all and There were a lot of methodological errors and I point them out in the video where people were just they weren't measuring Levels of any vitamins and minerals and saying they're they're measuring some outcome like cardiovascular disease or you know cognitive function without any biomarkers like there was no biomarkers saying oh look we gave them this this changed You know that's important when you're doing nutrition research And that's a really important thing and if you look at some of the studies that did do that for example when they were giving them vitamin D They gave them vitamin D to a severely deficient population Which is like 12 nanograms per mill with that severely deficient. We're talking like rickets deficient And then after their supplementation There were still deficient. There were still less than 20 nanograms per mill which is considered deficient So it's like okay. Well, you're trying to look at this outcome and yet The the vitamin D supplement, you know the dose that you gave these people was inadequate. They didn't you didn't raise their levels to anything You know That was considered adequate by by the National Institute of Medicine Now when when people take vitamin D, what what is the exact vitamin D? They're supposed to take it? This was to take like D2 D3 Yeah, D3 D3 you can take D2, but it's just less efficient to get converted into the active hormone So D3 is optimal D3 is optimal. Yeah, D3 is optimal and you know like I said, I personally can't Tell people how much to take I can tell them what I take Which is 4,000 I use a day and honestly I can tell them they should Have levels of vitamin D in their blood greater than 30 nanograms per mill And we should also tell them if you're not familiar with taking Vitamins and most vitamins need to be taken with food Yeah, I mean you can definitely get nauseous if you're If you're taking your vitamins on empty stomach plus some vitamins like vitamin B12 if you're If you have a if you don't have an acidic environment in your stomach You know you you basically I mean if you have two acidic of an environment then you can't It's absorb it. So it's like there's there is factors that come into play. I mean it's complicated and also you've got bacteria also play a role in what you're absorbing particularly in minerals and And so and when you take vitamins on an empty stomach They it's if they're not attached to fats and proteins and carbohydrates. Do they absorb as easily? I mean it seems that What I think there's been research done that shows that your your your body doesn't really exactly know what to do with Vitamins and vitamin form if you take them on an empty stomach with no food attached to them I mean I think it depends on what if it's a mineral What vitamin I mean I'm not exactly sure But some things you're supposed to take on an empty stomach like like a amino acid some amino acids you take on an empty stomach I'm not exactly sure about that. Yeah. Sorry. So complicated even for wrong. Yeah See I'm saying that's what I'm saying. It's like there's so much to know about what to take right Yeah, my friend Dr. Mark Gordon every time I talk to him he fills my head up with shit that I'm never gonna remember the newest information include a thion and this and Just it's hard it's hard to keep up with it. Yeah, it is hard Things do get complicated and You know, I I don't have all the answers But I do I do dig pretty deep and try to get some information out there to people Well, that's why these folks who are inclined to be of the no nonsense group They find it so easy to dismiss this. I have a friend who's one of those You know, I he he and I were talking and he goes he was like he had this smug Look on his face see that thing they said about vitamins. They don't work and I said did you read it? And he said look I got glossed over it. I go did you fucking read it, man? I would they say vitamins aren't working I go to tell what they say and then I showed him what they actually said He was like get the fuck out of here. That was the test and I go yeah, that was the test old people with heart attacks They gave them a pill. Oh, they didn't fucking die any longer and they didn't live any longer crazy Yeah, and how do you even measure cognitive decline in people over 65 with cognitive decline by a phone call by the way Is it really was by a phone call what yeah By a phone call so they call them up how you feeling? Just watch shit, right? Okay. No improvement. Yeah no improvement by a phone call that that was that was that really got me Wow The specific you were reacting to Brian Dunning who what what specific things was he saying that you got so fired up about that you had a contact me Well one was that that everyone gets there. Yeah, and the other thing was He was saying that Was the vitamin C thing that was getting to me too? He he was going on about not needing Thousand grams of vitamin C and and then I looked up some of his stuff And he was also talking about vitamin C not being important or not doing anything for immune function and then he started talking about some Alignist Paulings I can tell you what's wrong with that guy and it is a bunch of things But one of the main reasons he does what he does is that he grew up Mormon a very strict Mormon background And then refuted it and now he's an adult and he's just not gonna take any nonsense He grew up with all nonsense and now he's no nonsense and I have a unique insight into this because I have some friends that grew up Mormon and now they are They abandoned it actually in their 40s and it's really interesting because they're like children in a lot of ways They really they're the fundamentalist lifestyle like growing up in a fundamentalist religion where everything is spelled out for you and Everything is preposterous, but you've accepted that your whole life You've accepted and you you're told not to question and you're told to you know follow the rules of this Ideology when you get away from that and then you try to like figure the world out on your own You're thinking it developed in this incredibly fucked up way the way you make your connections to things like you have this Black and white sort of connection thing going on in your head and that's his Fundamentalism translated to a fundamental skepticism So his skepticism is his fundamentalism now he automatically is skeptical of anything that might require additional thinking or curiosity or or something that's going to counter what like a lot of people Think like intuitively think to be true like anything that is Bizarre or weird anything that like doesn't seem like you think about someone and then the phone rings It's them nonsense nonsense immediately try to stop that you know He doesn't want anything to be once a black and white and it from in from a scientific perspective Science is so often So often gray so often not black and white. I mean there are so many There are so many gray areas. There's so many trade-offs trade-offs are really another thing You know where you're you're doing something you have a certain diet and you think it's like Gonna give me best performance It's gonna give me best cognitive function and make me live longer and it's like well there's some trade-offs here for getting all these things And I think actually that's a really important It's not black and white and so people that have that type of thinking that have been trained that way and just like you were saying You know, they've they've built up these connections where you know, it's it's black and white and if it's not black And it's definitely white and it's like it's just not how it works Well, their religion becomes just the skepticism and instead of it being an open-minded objective analysis of what's at hand And it's dead it's really just want to stuff it into the skepticism box You know and immediately debunk things people love to debunk things it becomes like a badge of honor it becomes like they get a check mark on their collar. Yeah, they do. Yeah Well, I mean and when you talk about Science being great. Oh, of course oftentimes it's not you know, but oftentimes it is but the reality of the science of biology is what's Really important to kind of drive home Human beings very so much If you get a phone, okay, like this phone that I have here I have a good one. It works great, but you could get a same manufacturer the same Samsung Galaxy Note 3 you can get it from somebody else or from from a provider It's the same components. It's built the same way It weighs the same thing on a scale and your sucks it fucking breaks. It fails Let me give you a perfect example. So I was talking about folate right folates important to make Simon Climbing you know nucleotide. It's also important to when you eat protein, you know, methiones and amino acid protein It gets converted in a home of cysteine and you need you need folate because it's a methyl donor that then gets methylated and reconvert it back in methionate because you don't want too much home of cysteine around in your body because it does bad things You know basically makes protein start aggregating and it causes vascular disease and cognitive decline anyway 10% no actually 10% 40% of North Americans have a polymorphism in a gene called the methylene tetrahydrate folate reductase Also known as the MTHMTH HFR or the motherfucker gene basically But 40% of North Americans have this polymorphism in this gene that doesn't make it work correctly And so what ends up happening is they can't remathulate this homocysteine to convert it back into methionine So they end up having elevated levels of homocysteine in their blood and unless they take more Folic acid to sort of compensate from that they're gonna have higher levels of homocysteine their blood and you know Which will lead to vascular problems and cognitive decline? So yeah, exactly. That's a perfect thing. It's like how much folate I take versus how much you take or if I'm from Canada You know who knows I mean You may have this polymorphism and you have to take, you know Five times more folate than I do well. There's also the variables like how many people grow up and You're in an environment that your biology is not accustomed to like people who come from other countries and then they're in a Specific country that's unique to their biology like if they're like what what the Native Americans experienced when they were introduced to alcohol Like this is not something that their biology was accustomed to and they really didn't have the ability to deal with it Whereas the Europeans who had been drinking alcohol for you know Untold years they were so accustomed to it. It was a normal part of their existence that their bodies had adapted to it Whereas the Native Americans just hadn't your body adapts to what it needs to adapt to your body adapts to its environment Your body adapts to its diet your body adapts to the genes that have been passed down from your ancestor to ancestor to epigenetics It's just there's so much so for someone to say, you know, you don't need this and you do or it's like it's there's so much So there's so many variables. There's so many components. There's so it's so complicated absolutely I mean even your gut microbiome like adapts like within 24 hours like if you're eating You know mostly a protein diet the different like enter your types that are in your gut You know are there they've they've shown that people that eat mostly meat and fat They're bacteria. They have bacteria that's like geared towards breaking down amino acids breaking down lipids metabolizing You know glutamine because you're given it a ton of it But people that eat mostly you know vegetable fiber and carbohydrates They have a lot of bacteria that is involved in amino acid synthesis Synthesizing these things because they're not getting as much But you can take that person that's had this long-term diet and give them You know meat and within 24 hours start to get that bacteria that starts to break down the amino acid so your your body is very Plastic and it does adapt to you know different dietary changes. Do you take probiotics? I do so Yeah, I do take probiotics There This the whole gut is so it's so fascinating. I work with someone that's doing a lot of research on the gut and so you know I get to learn just just from you know their research and reading on my own About the complexities of it, but it's it's fascinating like how Important important that bacteria is in our gut and how important certain types are and how that affects the way we respond to disease the way we age so It you know, it's it's complicated. It's very complicated It is it is complicated in the The environment that's inside your gut it actually can contribute to your mood it can contribute to depression Yeah, tribute to all all sorts of various aspects of your immune system absolutely like if you're so you know if you're If your gut is you know if you have Basically and your innate immune systems being active down there because it's unhappy You know causing inflammation things like you know having high c-reactive protein has been correlated to depression like that's actually a Biomarker that you know I think could be used with depression is actually c-reactive protein instead of just you know this They kind of okay. I feel this I feel that well. Let's measure your c-reactive protein levels. Okay. Yeah, wow. They're really high They've even done some studies where they've found they've gotten depressed patients found that they had a high c-reactive protein gave them like two grams of EPA EPA is the omega-3 fatty acid that's important for it's like anti-inflammatory It as opposed to DHA which is most you know most of your brain librarians are DHA but two grams of EPA day I forgot for how long but they lowered their c-reactive protein and helped with their depression so That's pretty profound that it's very profound the connection between the the human body and depression is such a weird one because For so many folks they go to a doctor They don't feel good the doctor gives them an antidepressant They feel better and then that's it but they're there could have been so many other factors that could have been manipulated Either their diet their exercise routines hydrating I mean how many people are fucking just dehydrated they feel like shit right how many people get out of a bad relationship And they feel like shit how many people have a bad job? I mean consider what people considered to be you know depression You know your moody you're done the dumps You're not you're not you're not feeling good You have bad thoughts all the time and then consider What's the stimulation that your brain is receiving every day? Well you're driving traffic in fucking pollution to a cubicle where you sit and do shit that you don't want to do all day You get home and then you force feed yourself You know some terrible foods because you're depressed and you're you know just sort of indulging giving yourself some pleasure and Fucking shitty macaroni and cheese or whatever you're stuffing down your face and then you wonder why you're depressed right? Absolutely this reminds me of a study where they're They're using teal a mirror length So telomeres are like caps at the end of your chromosomes That prevent your DNA from degrading and from getting damage People often refer to like the tips of shoelaces like telomeres because they prevent your shoelaces from freeing and These telomere lengths they're really they're when you're young they're long But each time you're each time you're cell divides they get shorter and shorter like with each year They get in short. I think you lose like 22 nucleotides a year off your telomeres and It's a biological marker for aging so the shorter your telomeres are You know the shorter your life is basically if you look at telomeres for a young person versus an old person you can see a dramatic differences and Stress stress has been correlated with taking like five years off your telomere length and the opposite's been to your meditation They've shown that meditation There's actually an enzyme that can rebuild your telomeres, but we don't express it in high levels. It's called telomerase But meditation can actually boost the expression of telomerase and Cause your telomeres to get longer. So there's really something to that you know having a more relaxed being able to meditate not having a lot of stress You know affecting the way you age literally and we have a biological marker for it Yeah, it's really interesting. It's another thing vitamin D. I wanted a vitamin D effects to telomere length also if you if you Google vitamin D receptor mice and pull up this image with that there's mice aging mice so vitamin D actually does affect the way we age and they did this study on twins where they looked at their vitamin D levels they measure their vitamin D levels and they looked at their telomere length and they found that those twins with the highest levels of vitamin D also had the longest telomeres That corresponded to actually five years being five years younger even though they were twins They're same chronological age their telomeres looked what they were five years younger if they had higher levels of vitamin D Wow, yeah, so what would you know anything about T a 65? This is sort of a supplement that's supposed to enhance your telomere lengths Haven't heard of it No, so but vitamin D Exercise is another one that does they've done study is showing Again in twins those that exercise the most Actually had telomere length that corresponded to being 10 years younger and those that exercise sort of like average compared to those That didn't had an average of like I think four years So you know there's there's things that affect the way you age and we have you know markers for that biological markers like telomere length That that proves your lifestyle is indeed you know affecting the way you age Yeah, I'd read this telomere study and I'd seen this the acts for this supplement Okay, so check this out. So those two mice. Okay. These are the same age mouse So the top panel on these mice are about four and a half months old and the one on the left is a vitamin D receptor Knockout knockout mouse which means it can't respond to vitamin D. So it's like it's like not having any vitamin D If you look at the lower panel those are the same age four months later Look how rapidly that mouse aging without having vitamin D. I mean there's lots of things going wrong I mean I told you that vitamin D is regulating over a thousand different genes in your body So inflammation I mean cognitive function. I mean there's there's a lot of things but look at that It's pretty striking have you ever thought about going into business like where you Provide some sort of a service where people get tested and then they develop a specific vitamin protocols for each individual person Yeah, I know we're like my my boss and I were we talk about that all the time Why don't you do it? It sounds like a good idea. I've got this assay where I can actually measure DNA damage in your body from your blood and that's also a marker for age because you know the older you are the more Damage you have and I can measure that clinically So what we're thinking is like giving people magnesium and seeing if we can you know less than that damage Because there are DNA repairs working better But that would be really cool another thing would be vitamin D measuring doing the vitamin D make these I think there's there there's a few Micronutrients that we know of that are really important for long-term effects, you know like Like I was saying there's it is often this trade-off where Okay, let's say you you've got you're getting some vitamin K, but you don't have enough in fact 35% of the US population It doesn't get enough vitamin K vitamin K's found in plants because it's a part of their they need it for photosynthesis So if you're not eating a lot of green plants then you know your you might not be getting enough vitamin K But you know vitamin K is often known for being part of you know Quagulation being important to make your blood clot right and that's an essential function So I'm sure any vitamin K you're getting is going towards that because you want your blood to clot right? You don't want to bleed out and have a hemorrhage, right? But there's other important functions of vitamin K vitamin K also prevents the calcification of your arteries and so if you all your vitamin K is going towards the proteins that are important for clotting Then the proteins that are important for not having calcification in your arteries aren't getting any and then you know two three decades later you start to see this calcification in card arteries and in fact people that are given warfarin which is a really common drug for inhibiting vitamin K They end up having problems with calcification in arteries and stuff so you know it there's I think there's a lot to Understanding how these micronutrients work that we don't know yet and you know We're starting to try to be able to do some experiments to understand them but The bottom line is that you know Your body smart and if you don't have enough of a certain vitamin or mineral It's gonna it's gonna shunted to the one that's gonna help you survive now and help you reproduce Because that's the what that's that's what it wants to do and these other things like you know And you know DNA repairing damaged DNA or you know having your brain work optimally You don't have to be that smart to survive. You know these things they probably get the short end You know so it's it's kind of like it's a vitamins in my mind Sort of like a long long term thinking when you're thinking long term So yeah, okay, well, I'm not walking around with any acute Deficiencies, which is what most people think when they're thinking have enough vitamins and minerals because I don't have very very I don't have you know these these problems that are severe deficiencies It's like if you're severely deficient You're gonna have some symptoms that you'll notice But most of these symptoms you're not gonna notice and they they're insidious damage It's just happening, you know little bit at a time over decades It's amazing to me that there's not a lot of these like a center where you could go and get a full Workup done and they provide you with like a recipe for your vitamin supplementation See that's the future that is what we want like we want to get it to where we can just get a finger prick a blood and We'll know Different proteins we can measure that are we know are involved in long term functions versus a short term functions of these vitamins And we can say based on you know having Looking at these proteins we can say okay you need more of this and this and this vitamin like that's that's gonna be the future It would seem like you mean you go to the dentist I mean the dentist is a normal common thing they're everywhere to repair your teeth right and that's such a basic thing you know, but the idea of Going to someone who measures your blood and finds out what you're lacking in your diet. That's not normal You know I think instead of going to a doctor to try to find a quick fix to get some You know you're depressed so they gave you an SSRI well You know we don't know what these what the long term effects of some of these pharmaceutical drugs are in our brain like they just had The study that came out a couple months ago on anticycotics Which they give your tingly give people with schizophrenia And they found that these anticycotics in a dose dependent manner cause brain atrophy So and they follow these people over 15 years. This is the first time this is the first long term effect of anticycotics That came out and that it was a really You know big study and they showed that these schizophrenia patients like the higher the dose of anticycotic they're on the more brain atrophy You know, it's like so here you are giving these people anticycotics and You know 15 years from now their brain is like literally it's like Actrophying at a rapid rate So that's just a classic example of us Not knowing what some of these long term effects of some of these pharmacological drugs that we're doing especially when it comes to the brain There are so many feedback loops like if you're if you're inhibiting serotonin for being metabolized or reuptake I mean you've got serotonin sitting around Your body starts to down regulate serotonin receptors which is how your body responds to serotonin you know It's like there's feedback things going on that I don't think we even understand and you know one out of 10 Americans is taking an SSRI So crazy. It's crazy and I know that they have benefited some people. I know people that they have benefited sure But it's it's have the exhausted all the other possible options I have a friend who's on SSRI and he recently found out that he had been taking Propecia and he recently found out that propisha actually caused depression on in some people It can cause depression in some people and He quit he quit taking propisha and he's starting to feel You know like maybe that was the cause of his depression the first place But he's on the SSRI now so now he has to figure out what to do You know is it was it the propisha that caused his depression? Was it you know going to happen? Anyway, is it the SSRI that he's but he also eats a lot of candy and doesn't take care of his body and doesn't really Exercise and you know he has a shitty diet all those things can factor into a low production of serotonin in your mind All those things can factor into you know just a clogging of the pathways of neurotransmitter dopamine to I mean omega-3 fatty acids You know 30% of your your brain is made of DHA which is an omega-3 fatty acid and they've shown that actually DHA affects the way dopamine signaling in your brain so you know and In terms of like back to the schizophrenia people with schizophrenia you hot you make dopamine in this frontal part of your cortex And the dopamine that you make there negatively feeds back on on the stopamine that you make in the back part of your brain And if you don't have that negative feedback what happens is The you start making more dopamine that back part of your brain you start to have like negative things like hallucinations and paranoia and things like that Yeah, and so they've shown that omega-3 they've actually given omega-3 fatty acids DHA to and P skits of pharynx and shown that it actually elevates the dopamine in the frontal part of the brain and helps Regulate some of that negative feedback, you know, and so it's like How many people are getting there eating fish every single day or getting their omega-3 fatty acids for their brain every single day I mean I know I am but I'm pretty Much an exception, you know a lot of people that are depressed Like I said the EPA is another big thing because inflammation has been shown to be correlated with depression I'm a huge fan of omega-3 fatty acids especially in fish oil form They make such a huge difference in how my joints feel the the inflammation Anti inflammation qualities are really incredible It's one of the few things that I always recommend to anybody if they tell me they have knee pain or elbow pain or so Yeah, I've seen studies on on how EPA like giving even like higher doses of EPA to people with like arthritis You know, they're they're inhibiting some of the production of like arachnidonic acid and some of these prostaglandins and things that are involved in inflammation Which a lot of people are getting because they're eating, you know, they're getting a lot of omega-6 fatty acids too So yeah, I've seen studies where like it's been shown to improve it, you know Now you were looking at this MCT oil over here and you were saying that's lacking something. Oh, yeah, so I it It's interesting because um You know, I I actually cook with coconut oil and I at some some periods of my life I'd put in my coffee um and But coconut oil has lower gas. It's a it's got medium chain triglycerides which basically is 12 carbons or less Lipids are just like long chains of carbons, you know that are bound together with hydrogens like so The way your body processes long chain fatty acids is very different from short chain fatty acids the way it processes long chain fatty acids For one I should probably get to that in a minute. Okay. Let me start with a medium chain fatty acids Basically get your paper and pen later The shit's gonna get confusing. It's it's it's pretty awesome. You know You're the way you digest it's different it goes straight to your portal vein and it goes to your liver And then it gets goes into the mitochondria without having to go through this like transport system And it's sort of you know slightly on couples of mitochondria. It's thermogenic and you know has all these great benefits for mitochondria But an interesting thing with lower gas it is that it's also been shown to be an appetite suppressant It's you know through a couple of these different appetites suppressing hormones. I think cck is one I can't remember what that's an answer for but And it's also antimicrobial so it's been shown to kill off like candida albicans, which is like a yeast So you have a lower acid is 12 carbons and it's a lot of MCT oils don't have a work acid And I don't I just can't figure out why they wouldn't Want lower acid because when I take coconut oil. I'm like You know lower acids like the thing that I'm really excited about so it's not naturally in coconut oil or it is in coconut oil But these MCT oils that people put together Some a lot of them don't have lower acid in it because they'll they'll have like less than 12 carbons So lower acid is a 12 carbon medium chain fatty acid and medium chain triglycerides How are they exactly extracted from coconut oil? Do you understand the process? I don't know how they do that and I haven't read about it Yeah, there is but there is some process that allows it to have this loric at high spelt LA You are IC loric acid. I'm gonna make sure the work acid is awesome. Well, I'm gonna make sure that on it starts making MCT oil Oil with loric acid yeah, and what are the benefits of loric acid again? Specifically for for combining it with MCT oil or making sure that it is an MCT But it's the benefits is one is the appetite appetites of pressing and two it's a very strong antimicrobial So it's like good for your gut It's it's killing off like yeast. It's been shown to kill off. You know, albic and Candida albicans It also has the same thermogenic properties all that the that the eight chain Fatty acid to have don't do some MCT oils have it if you've seen it in a lot of MCT really you know, I haven't done a survey I I just look at this one. I see that it says It says a eight carbon medium chain triglycerides from coconut and or palm kernel To me that says it's not having the 12 carbon which is loric acid, but You know, I don't know right The another thing that someone said to me that they were concerned about was that it's stored in plastic Is there an issue with plastic leaching chemicals into things like MCT oil? I mean they've shown that certain chemicals You know, especially in the presence of heat can leach Chemicals into whatever is in the plastic container So if like that plastic container sits in the back seat of your car And you're going to roll down or something along the line I always try to keep oils at four four degrees in the refrigerator Um, because it slows that you know, obviously the oxidation process and all those the heat You know, it's slowed down So ideally though, what should that be stored in it shouldn't ideally be stored in In a met in a plastic should it be in a metal should it be in a glass? You know, it's not a real big concern of mine So I really put any thought into it So as long as it's just not allowed to be exposed to heat And long as you're reasonably sure that the process from the storage in the plant You know, the product the canning the bottling whatever it is To storage to store that you're you know, you're not it's not sitting out the sun Yeah, I mean That's the thing that people are really concerned with right? It was like BPA which can leach into to water and stuff Yeah, yeah, friend is is girlfriend went to drink a bottle of water that was in the car You know, she had sitting in the back seat. He's like, don't drink it. You know, like it's a fucking bomb. My mom did that to me once Really? It's the same reason right? That plastic time ago. Yeah, is that something you I mean if you have a bottle of water and sitting in your car And it's a hot day Should you not drink that bottle of water because it's been sitting in your car It's probably not going to kill you to drink it, you know once, but you know I wouldn't do it all the time So what happens to the I mean the the bottle like heats up and then the plastics leach out into the water And then it affects hormones and some sort of a little bit. Yeah, I mean they've shown that that You know, I'm not an expert on I've done a little bit of reading on this So you know I'm not gonna claim to be any expert here But yeah, they've shown that you know BPA can have some estrogen mimicking effects and You know that's particularly I think a concern especially in you know developing males and I'm gonna email you this t a 65 stuff because I want you to check it out. Please check it out. Yeah, no sure But it's about the teleme telomeres. Yeah, yeah So I'm gonna Email you that right now because I had a friend who asked me about it and I didn't know and I felt like you were the perfect person to throw this by and then Laura Cassett Laura Cassett. Yeah, like I said, I I don't ever buy MCT oil myself like I just use coconut oil so is there a benefit in using coconut oil over MCT oil? Well only if the lork I think lower acids Benefit but a CMT to oil has lower acid in it. What's the benefit of MCT oil over coconut oil? You know I think they just Not having the other long chain fatty acids in there That's also when coconut oil would be but are those long chain fatty acids beneficial It's just that I mean that's right. It's bad. So, you know Bad fat good fat You know, it's debatable right. It's debatable. Yeah, I think So when it comes down to you know eating a lot of fat you obviously need that. I mean fat's important You need cholesterol. You know for your brain 60% of your brain dry weight is fat. You know your cell membranes in fat You hear that you freak vegans out there you need cholesterol. You do need cholesterol. I say that in my act like as a joke About the ends that they say you know things because they don't get cholesterol. You're straight offs dude. This is what I'm talking about so I've done a little bit of research and I plan on doing more and actually coming out with like a report on this But I will just talk about what I've done. So like I plan I like to dig really dig and make sure I'm comprehensive, but some of the when you digest you know fats You have to make bio assets and in order to make bio to basically be able to absorb them And some of these bio assets that you make when you digest fat are carcinogenic so Deoxy colic acid DCA is one that I'm talking about in particular So that's kind of like you know every time you're eating fat your your body's making this DCA which damages DNA damage DNA Your epseal cells lining your intestine So you know that's that's sort of a drawback, but doesn't mean you should stop eating fat Just means you should be aware of your eating 60 or 70% fat diet that you might want to consider some of these long-term effects that could you know rear their head later in life also Eating fat increases IGF-1 because IGF-1 is a growth factor and you probably have heard of it because in the fitness community It's it's sort of like a downstream media growth hormone people are always Really excited about having more IGF-1 because it's you know helps you bulk on muscle and And things like that, but also it's if you have too much of it that you're making over a lifetime It can it's a growth Signal that you know bit tells cells to overcome the checkpoints. I was talking about earlier where you have these checkpoints Where if you have some damage DNA that has a mutation then The cell goes okay. It's time to die, but lots of IGF-1 there says oh, I don't have to die. I'm gonna keep going So you know it's highly correlated with cancer So I Jeff one being In high doses. I Jeff one being like what like what doses are correlated with cancer? Yeah, that's a great question. Yeah, it's so basically people with cancer. They have like it's just out of control So people of gigantism. They must have an issue with this right? That's people that have like they have two Territory clan yeah, we've we've we've had a few of those guys in mixed martial arts that had cancer The pituitary gland and then they had the tumor removed so that they could compete in the United States They were competing overseas in the other and or their organizations like in pride They still allow these guys to fight and they would be fucking these literally giants We have a guy in the in the UFC right now His name's Bigfoot Silva Antonio Bigfoot Silva He has that disease and he had the tumor removed from his pituitary gland and now he functions on a normal basis But he has to supplement his hormones because of that and is that a similar thing? I mean when you're talking about like high IGF-1 is that yeah, well If you're making a lot of growth hormone from your Petuitary I mean are they make of these people are making a lot of growth hormone. Yes, yeah, I would assume that I mean That's why their heads are so big and their their bodies are so distorted. That's yeah, that's what he looks like now That's after the tumor removed It's you know, it's it's a really Fascinating situation because you look at the guy and it's quite obvious that his bodies gone haywire I mean his skulls enormous his hands are enormous. I mean you get to see what he looks like Mean he has all the classic very good fighter though actually some people that are Making when you're when your petuitary makes growth hormone and then stimulate soliver to make IGF-1 That IGF-1 negatively feeds back on the pituitary. It's shut it off The people that have that sort of problem don't have that negative feedback and they end up having all sorts of problems For one like even though IGF-1 can actually make your muscle cells insulin sensitive, which is good growth hormone Can cause insulin in sensitivity in like your liver so they end up getting you know having You know Insensitive insulin insulin insensitive liver cells and that's a major problem with I know with that and aren't there certain amino acids that you could take before you go to sleep that will stimulate your body's production of growth hormone I don't know. I know that Take protein and fat stimulate the production of IGF-1 But I don't know about certain amino acids. You can take to stimulate growth. I do know So there's you know Growth hormone can be increased from exercise and also from the sauna Oh, yeah, the sauna. There's it can increase growth hormone to like massive levels the sauna. Yeah Yeah, yeah, so like it's a good thing to go into a sauna after you work out It's a great thing to go into sauna after you work out It's also a good thing to go in the sauna when you're not working out if you're musl if you're injured Because it prevents Actraphing of mussels. Yeah, so That's really that's incredible. I've never heard that before my husband and I we did some experience I have a report coming out on this and a couple of weeks so I can't A friend of yours or I think it's might Publish it on their site so I'm not gonna mark. Yeah, so I'm not gonna give to me to this Tim Tim first. Yeah, okay cool So I'm not I don't want to let the cat out of the bag, but I do I did my husband and I did a lot of experimentation with with the sauna because we used to live next door to a YMCA which had a sauna and so we would just go use the sauna like all the time and Aside from all the research that I that I did to write this article just talk about my experience and and like when I was injured I had some injuries and I couldn't work out for like a month and I would do the sauna every day And I did not I was not losing my mussel mass like I would have If I wasn't injured and also it would help me deal with stress And you know just no killing stress and being able to focus. Yeah, that's incredible I'm so glad I talked to you today because I thought this sauna was nonsense. No, I was the other day I went to a spa and I got a little massage and then they had a jacuzzi and a sauna I was like who goes and that stupid fucking song. That shit ain't doing nothing You're getting all hot in there. It's doing so much. Why is it doing something? It's just getting you hot. I don't understand what's happening. Yeah. Yeah. There's there's a lot of things going on But like all I'll tweet you the the link. Please do. Yeah, because it's like email to me and then I'll tweet it because I Yeah, I'll email it to you. It could go to the abyss. There's two people doing it Sometimes I refresh my feed and I I can't find something that somebody sent me because it's just too much But but the sauna it's that's a fascinating thing to me that because there's infrared sauna as well Now what's the benefit of that? Yeah, so I haven't done a ton of research on like the differences between just the normal dry sauna Which most of the studies that I read they're using normal dry sauna. So a dry sauna is awesome Yeah, dry sauna. I'm just just elevating your core body temperature based So I think you know the infrared is somehow can heat you up without some of the damaging effects of the heat or something I'm not exactly sure. I'll just say that I haven't done a lot of research on that but My you can get infrared saunas and just like put them in your garage my in love I have one in their garage. Yeah We have one that my wife loves and she climbs into it. It's like a bag It's like a it's not one of those bags. I've seen those Is that worthwhile? She looks so stupid. I don't know she's in there with her She's got her iPad and she's watching break and bad and she's in this fucking sleeping bag It's so ridiculous. Yeah, I'm not sure if that's I think to get some of the benefits You have to kind of push it a little bit. I'm not sure if you're gonna she's pushing it. Is she okay? She gets out of there It's like she swam in the ocean. She's so okay. I've seen those on Amazon, but I was always curious Yeah, that's a different one. The image shows a different one. The one that She has she actually lies down in it. It's so silly looking Which is I thought it was horseshit and voodoo. It has benefits on the brain. I mean, it's like Think about when you exercise, you know, yeah, it's like you're elevating your core body temperature. That's what she has That's exactly what she has she claps in that goofy fucking thing. Okay, so her head is not exposed Her head is out. Yeah, she needs to get her head in there, right? I'm gonna tell her Yeah, I think put the head Yeah, I think put the head Well, I mean it sounds like there's a great benefit to having one of those things your house if you have room Yeah, totally if you've got a garage. I mean they're they don't take up a lot of space. I did not know that's incredible I I'm so glad I talked to you I I mean I just went last week to get a massage and just looked at that stupid thing I was like ah that hot wood box. I wish my gym had one like my gym now doesn't have one and I miss it Wow, yeah, so how does it stimulate human growth hormone? What does it do? You know, I don't know how it does But they've measured it, you know, they've measured growth hormone after people have been in the sauna and is it a temporary benefit A couple hours after it's just like if you were to you know Jack some growth hormone. I don't think it lasts more than a couple of hours either Wow, that is unbelievably fascinating. It is fascinating But there is an interesting and I did write a post on this this trade-off on growth hormone IGF one trade-off and that is you know growth hormone and IGF one are you know, they're considered really good anabolic They're you know, help you bulk on muscle They're also good. It's good for your brain. You know, it helps with neurogenesis in your brain But there's a trade-off they've shown that that reducing IGF one signaling and lower organisms like worms and flies and also and mice Extends their lifespan so if you take a mouse and you knock out growth hormone receptor it can live 50% longer What 50% longer like huge increase in lifespan? That doesn't seem to make any sense because you would think that growth hormone would be repairing the muscle tissue would you would and And so in people actually in people people that have polymorphisms in the IGF one receptor That it's associated with like centenarians like living to be 92 and 100 yeah, so and that's all that's mostly mediated through I'm not getting cancer, but There there is an interesting trade-off and I think that in lower organisms the reason is that Having that reduced insulin signaling helps them deal with stress like there they have it increase in gene expression for various different genes that are You know anti-oxidine genes like genes like you know glutathione reductase and things like that And also in genes that help them take care of proteins and increasing neurotrophic factors not sure if the same benefits or true In humans and humans mostly I think it's they're not getting cancer because Because of having lower IGF one well, here's the answer about amino acids and Growth hormone apparently there was there's a PubMed study on it And they they're saying that specific amino acids such as arginine lysine and orophine or thine Constinulate growth hormone release when infused intravenously or administered orally Many individuals consume amino acids before strength training workouts believing that this practice Accentuates the exercise induced growth hormone release thereby promoting greater gains in muscle mass and strength the growth growth hormone response to amino acid administration is has a high degree of Inter-individual Variability inter-rigivit that's a first time I've ever read that on 46. I've never read that word inter-individual That's a great word though inter-individual individual Individual variability and may be altered by training status age sex and diet although Parental administration consistently leads to no not parental parentural Parentural what is that word? PAREN T-E-R-A-L what is that word? Parentural Hmm administration considerably Per-tenual. Per-tenuals is it is it parentennial? Okay, they are E-N-T-E-R-A-L In-e-o no, it's not in-e-o Parental oh, let's google that motherfucker. Yeah, this is this is called the nature of information Okay, let's look up in dictionary. Here we go. It is administered by or occurring elsewhere in the body then the mouth and Elementary canal What's the elementary canal? God damn it There goes fucking confusing shit. Okay. Anyway, blah blah blah blah blah leads to increased circulating growth hormone Concentration oral doses that are great enough to induce Significant growth hormone release are likely to cause stomach discomfort and diarrhea. Boom son During exercise intensity is also a major Determinant of growth hormone release although one study showed that arginine infusion can heighten the growth hormone response To exercise no studies found that pre-exercise oral amino acid supplementation augments growth hormone release further No, appropriately appropriately conducted scientific studies found that oral supplementation with amino acids Which are capable of inducing growth hormone release before strength training increases muscle mass and strength to a greater extent than the strength training alone Hmm, that's interesting. How that doesn't that seems to be contradictory doesn't it a little bit Yeah, I'd have to take a look at the study if it says that the administration consistently leads to increasing circulation of growth hormone concentration World doses that are great enough to induce significant growth hormone release are likely to cause stomach discomfort and diarrhea So that means that if you do do that you will get more growth hormone. You'll also get diarrhea But doesn't that mean it works? Sounds like it means it works if you're looking at growth hormone circulating growth hormone as an end point. Yeah So how would they know that that's where it gets confusing whether they know that it increases strength or muscle mass to a greater extent in the Strength training alone because a lot of that is variable individual be individually as well. Yeah Like you have to do a baseline you have to do the person itself and do their You know do their baseline and then what they would do without the amino acid and then do their what they do with it So you'd have to compare each person to their own self. Yeah, that's the only way to do it, right? Yeah, I've had friends that can just I know I have a friend who just can't fucking pack on muscle the guy will lift weights all the time He lifts heavy he tries on he can't gain weight he gets a little stronger But he just can't pack on muscle then I have other friends that they just look at weights and it's just grow It's crazy. It's like some people they just have that mesomorphic body structure and they start lifting weights and their muscles Just start expanding and growing and they just start getting bigger another people that they have that ectomorphic thing going on They just can't they can't pack it on. So how would you with those Factors I mean how you'd have to know exactly who you're doing you didn't really have to judge it Intensely buy the individual right. Yeah, I think that's the best way to do it is comparing each person to them. They're baseline self Uh, you know so that's crazy though that growth hormones in mice allow them to live long Yeah, and the converse is true also if you overx if you make a transgenic mouse and over expressed the growth hormone like they're expressing lots of it They live 50% shorter Wow, so it's um, it's a it's an interesting interesting trade-off, you know because Oftentimes growth hormones except I mean Associated with what you want more of it because you're you know growth hormone levels go down as you age and it causes a muscle atrophy and You know your brain you know brain atrophy and in sense too. So It's I I think it it has to do with more of Supra physiological levels of growth hormone like people that are injecting growth like people that are body Yes, like ten units that maybe a trade-off and they get those big bellies from yeah, so you know like I said if you're if you're If you're When you make growth hormone from your pituitary and then that stimulates IGF1 to be to make it liver that then inhibits the production of more Growth hormone I mean that feedbacks there for a reason and so if you just keep injecting it you're sort of overcoming that feedback because Well your body you're giving it growth hormone. It's not making more even though there's IGF1 there saying shut it off You're saying no, I want more. I wonder if there's ever been any studies on people like bodybuilders They're taking massive amounts of growth hormone over long periods of time because I read this thing Dory and look at that guy. Oh my god. That's a oh my god. It's a monster. Yeah, this is not what's his name the Ronnie Coleman. Yeah, he's a foreign Mr. Olympia And I think he probably takes a truck load of pharmaceutical drugs every day in order to achieve that physique but his stomach That's like apparently one of the things that happens when you take massive amounts of growth hormone is they they literally bulge out like they're pregnant Wow, I would love to see someone study that see what happens to those guys when they do that over long that would be a really interesting study Well the bodybuilding industry or the bodybuilding as a sport is so fascinating to me because essentially you're dealing with these chemical projects Because that's what they are they're chemical projects. They're not humans. I mean when you look at a guy like Ronnie Coleman You don't get that big a normal guy doesn't get that big. I mean you can get big I had a friend who was a total natural bodybuilder. This photos of him and his gut. That's so crazy It's so bizarre and you know I used to think that that was just big stomach muscles I still think that he did a lot of abs so stomach muscles are huge until I actually read that their organs grow Because of all the the hormones that they're on It's fucking grand. He looks pregnant Look at how pregnant he looks That's so strange Yeah, like I said, I know I can cause insulin resistance and liver. Yeah, well people get diabetes from it. Yeah, overuse of growth hormone Now the the idea that there's a whole sport dedicated to shooting as many chemicals into your body and turn you into some freak of science That's a strange sport But you know there's there's there's a bit of a trade-off these people are bulking up and they're Lifting lots of weight and you know they're you know that at the trade-off the expense of a you know a few years in their life So I think they say fog got a rather be huge Yeah, it would be huge Mmm What do you think about There the this well, that's not a body. What do you think about the studies that have been done on? What is that? The thing that happens to cows God, I'm trying to remember the the exact function. There's something that happens to whippets and it happens to cows it's a an accidental aspect of of breeding that causes them to mild statin inhibitors You did you know about all that? No. Oh great. I'm gonna educate you Fantastic something happens pull up mild statin inhibitor Dog It's a whip it apparently it occurs like quite frequently. Oh amongst these dogs and they don't look real They look like incredible Hulk dogs and what it is is there something What is my esta do? I'll tell you right now my own statin inhibitor dogs It or dog look at that dog. That's real. Holy crap. Holy crap indeed. Yeah Double muscled cattle it happens in cows all the time Myostatin misfortunes. It actually occasionally takes place in human beings There was a boy in Germany that had an issue With a mild statin inhibitors like I'll pull that up boy in Germany boy in Germany and he that that's a cow that has it and They've done it in mice and the fascinating thing about them Inducing this in mice is that the mice lived longer. They didn't just live longer. They were fucking huge They were like super mice. Yeah, look at this boy. This is a baby look at the fucking muscles on this kid. Look at his legs Wow, he looks like an athlete wait you pulled up a mouse study. What was that? Yeah, look at the mice look at the mice It's a double muscle mouse that lives twice as long That is fascinating. Yeah. Yeah, I'm I'm definitely gonna have to look into that But I still don't know exactly what my estan does I'll pull up the thing about the mice. Yeah, I'm pretty sure they live longer It's just hard to do what you're actually trying to do a podcast at the same time This is how we rock it here though. We do it live because usually you know being bulking up like that is associated with living Yes, order. Yes life. Yeah, so that's fascinating Yeah Here is a mild statin Yeah, there's apparently There's quite a few studies that have been done and not just on the mice But also on dogs and cattle to try to figure this stuff out This is fascinating. Yeah If you do a Wikipedia just like what is the myostatin? Okay, yeah, I'll do it on Wikipedia here. Okay abbreviated Myostatin also known as growth growth differentiation factor eight abbreviated gdf8 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the ms Tng myostatin is a secreted growth differentiation factor That is a member of the tgf beta protein family that inhibits muscle differentiation and growth in the process known as Myogenesis myostatin is Produced primarily and skeletal muscle cells Circulates in the blood and acts on muscle tissue by binding a cell bound receptor called the active in type two receptor and animals lacking Myostatin or animals treated with substances that block the activity of Myostatin have significantly larger muscles and this could be of economic benefit to livestock industry However, these animals require special care and feeding with offs which offsets the potential economic advantage look at that boy So doesn't say anything about their lifespan look at that boy's body What the fuck is going on there that boy is yoked? I do not want to go to school with that kid Can you imagine how bummed out you'd be if you were both 10 and you're like why does Billy have a fucking 12 pack? I look like a girl Is ridiculous. I mean what is that kid? I mean I wonder if they're gonna allow him to like wrestle and do athletics? That seems unfair Little fucking kids gonna take other kids and just fucking herl them across the room. Oh He's gonna be the Hulk Dig into that yeah, I really interesting I like to understand some of the mechanisms. Yeah, so the a gene encoded myostatin was discovered in 1997 by geneticist doctor say gin Lee and Alexander McFaron Who also produced a strain of mutant mice that lacked the gene and These mice have approximately twice as much muscle as normal mice Incredible yeah, I don't know why it happens all the time in whippets That dog that one whip it, but it does happen in humans Really really amazing stuff very interesting. Yeah, but these these sort of things It makes you wonder what is that the mouse's body? What they killed it? They killed it just to show us its muscle. But how can we take off the skin? Yeah, rude Could have just taken a picture You have to forget fucking crazy the The ones who the mild statin dogs apparently They sucked as runners But they're appearance with significantly more muscular. Yeah, they fucking you know That's the thing about muscle and it's an issue that comes up and makes martial arts all the time and I talk about all the time in Commentary is that you can't just pack on all that muscle and not have sort of There's a point of diminishing returns. It's good to have some muscle, but the more muscle you have the more you have Muscle that's demanding fuel and you have the same heart and the same lungs It's pumping out to more tissue and it's just it's just a matter of resources You have only a finite amount of oxygen that you can take in the single breath and it's distributed through all this tissue all this extra muscle and It really has a significant factor on people's endurance. Yeah, especially in athletics Look at that guy. Oh, is that a real human? That's not Photoshop at all. I don't know it might not be man What they're it might not be Photoshop man what they can do today is just really really really I just I don't think they live longer Well, they don't live longer. That's not a milestone guy. That's just a guy taking drugs I don't think that's a milestone. Yeah, right. I don't think it was ever been a human that's lived I think it's a really recent thing. I don't know. Yeah, I'm just talking interesting to see what they're Mitochondria are doing, you know, you're mitochondria or when you're exercising when you're bulking at muscle you're Inducing mitochondrial biogenesis. That's not real. That's definitely not real You've just been a couple cases where they've documented children have it in 2004 a German boy was diagnosed with a mutation in both copies of the milestone producing gene making him considerably stronger than his peers his mother has a mutation in one copy of the gene and in then in 2005 an American boy was diagnosed with clinically similar condition but with somewhat different cause his body produces a normal level of functional milestone but because he is stronger and more muscular than most others his age the doctors believe that a defect in his milestone receptors prevents his muscle cells from responding normally to milestone and that is what I've heard that they are trying to Develop a milestone inhibitor and that milestone Producing milestone regulating the size of your muscle tissue if they could come up with a milestone inhibitor It would increase the the size of your muscles I don't know if that's a good thing. I mean doesn't seem like it. Yeah Well, it seems like it would help some people if they're you know if they have like wasting disease or something along those lines But right right it's gonna be really interesting though that when they start coming up with like gene doping for that and they start giving it to wrestlers or football players or you know things along those lines right because it seems like Anything that affects the body so significantly as you see Or those those dogs someone's gonna take that shit or someone line. Oh, yeah, absolutely. There's a guy lining up right now With his wee Willie in his pants and he's ready to just shoot that in there and make up for everything Right and there's gonna be a trade-off, but you know he is Who cares? Well, do you follow genetic manipulation or studies on genetic manipulation in the potential for what they're what they're figuring out these days Because it it seems incredible and it seems that the the future is going to be so bizarre when you deal with the idea that You know the exponential increase in the ability to change things into alter the human body is just going to continue As long as society allows this research to continue as long as society allows you know It's we don't blow ourselves up. Yeah, this work is gonna continue to go on There's gonna be more breakthroughs. There's gonna be more significant increases in the capacity for change and You know who knows what the fuck is gonna be like just a decade two decades from now. Yeah, I'd like to see some We've already made some major advances in the stem cell research which to me is one of the most important You know because if you can if we can get to the point where we can replace our damaged motor neurons or you know Make sure we're not getting Parkinson's disease. I mean, I think that's a huge You know that's that's a huge thing and in helping us to you know extend the quality of our life. Yeah, you know because you don't want to merge our disease No, that's that's Something you don't I mean there's certain things you can do in your in your lifestyle to try to not get one But it'd be it'd be pretty sweet to have some genetic breakthroughs in these stem cell therapies and and we're making progress. We just we're not there yet I would like to see a study on someone who follows the exact protocol that Science that someone like you would prescribe to him or her and that they do it over a long period of time And they have a twin that doesn't do right, you know I they do and they do some of those studies where they're looking at specific You know things like specific vitamins or exercise or things like that but a long term Study where you're looking at multiple changes. I would love to see that as well. Yeah one person drinks one person doesn't one person Yeah, they did this study. They did in monkeys, you know, and it was like a 27-year experiment I think Where they so colorwork restriction is known to extend lifespan and lower organisms and also in this monkey monkey say did Where if you Give a give a monkey 30% less food than it would normally eat so you basically let the monkey decide what it would eat and Then you say okay, I'm gonna I'm gonna give them 30% less of that, you know every day and they did this for like 27 years Can you pull it can you do a Google search on Caloric restriction monkeys and just like pull up the image that compares them that has a big impact So it has a huge impact on the way they aged these monkeys are they get age-related diseases less cardiovascular disease less cancer Brain atrophy nerve-degenerative diseases less were they significantly smaller The monkeys were not significantly smaller, but they looked significantly better. So that's crazy They weren't smaller. They weren't better. Yeah, okay. There's one picture. I think there's one where they're like four panel Well, it seems like the right on one of the right is obese though. Okay. Yeah there it picked that that one with the four panel Yeah, that one so yeah, these monkeys are actually the same age here and that monkey on the left That's monkeys. It's in its old age 27 half years and it's had a normal diet like it's just eating what it's Normal amount of food and that monkey on the right has been given 30% less food every day for like it's 27.5 years That's incredible. It's incredibly better way better. I mean you can just tell by the way looks he's aging better But he's the same body. It's actually he looks more muscular Yeah, so it's it he looks like he's lost less muscle less much muscle atrophy I mean so what they found they've done like these gene profiling Expression arrays where they can measure like thousands of different genes at once and they've seen that Caloric restricting actually changes the expression in like thousands of genes. Oh, so it helps like you know genes that are involved in you know Protein degradation protein synthesis like all these things are changed in these caloric restriction monkeys genes that are involved in like you know growth factors in the brain Those are up regulated inflammatory genes are down regulated. So it's like you know 27 years left less of constant inflammation going on and so there's It's it's very interesting How and there's a couple of theories as to why these monkeys age better or why caloric restriction? You know is can can help the way you age and one of the big theories out there is that this there's sort of like a Hormetic response so Hormesis is basically where you have like a low level of stress like a little bit of stress and that stress then helps you Changes the expression of genes that are involved in stress and so you basically can then deal with stress later So it's kind of like conditioning your body to deal with stress by giving it a little bit of stress I mean this is kind of the same thing with a lot of like xenobiotics like plant Polyphenols catakins these sorts of things. That's how they work. They actually you know They induce this Hormetic response where they increase the expression of stress resistant genes that we have in our body That help us deal with protein stress with you know React evoxins species stress with all this different types of stress and and because we're increasing the expression of those genes We're dealing with stress better every single you know every single day and that's in that case, you know for 27 years And so it's a very This whole idea of Hormesis is very interesting where you're sort of giving your body a little bit of stress like exercise is stress and it's a little bit of stress It does the same thing but that whole field of epigenetics is just so fascinating how you know things that you eat what you do Can actually change the expression of genes and this actually affects the way you age and really what's interesting? Not only does it affect the way you age it affects the way your children that you haven't had yet age, you know So are you familiar with what epigenetics is yes? Okay, so please explain it for people might not be so you know Epigenetics is basically causing a change in your And your gene their factors that sit on top of your genes basically to give you a very simplistic topical view They sit on top of your genes and like methyl groups or acetylation groups and they turn They activate your genes and when they activate your genes They turn them on and so the genes become what's called express They're expressing the genes when they're expressing the genes. They're doing what they're supposed to do and other factors can sit on top of them and turn them off and Even though the gene is still there. It's like it's not there because it's it's not being expressed But these epigenetic factors don't actually alter the DNA nucleotide sequence like a mutation would so that's a difference in mutation changes the DNA nucleotide sequence Epigenetic factor this thing could be modulated and it's it doesn't change the sequence It just changes how much of that gene is being active or not active and and these epigenetic marks are regulated by what we eat by stress by exercise by all these you know various factors in our environment and So that's that's one study where they've changed in gene expression from calic restriction. They've done and I heard someone on your podcast talk about this study It's a sweetest Swedish study That was there's been a few of them that have been done Where in in Sweden they keep like extensive records of people's You know, they're There's records of what they eat what disease they've had throughout their life when they were born if they were depressed What they died of I mean they're very extensive like records on people and also they have extensive like agricultural records So they can say like during this part of you know the country at this time of the year There was a lot of famine or there was a lot of you know, there was a great crop harvest and so particularly this northern part of Sweden called nor button Sweden Back in I think it was like the 1800s they they look back They're during this period of time for whatever reason it was hard to get in and out of there And so people really dependent on the crops that were there So if there was a good a lot of crops and it was a good harvest people really gorge themselves they ate they over eight and If people if the harvest was bad, there was a famine and people really they sort of were colorically restricted they they basically didn't get to eat as much and So a lot of these Swedish sciences have looked scientists decided to look back and see what effects did that have on future Generation so it's kind of like is there a trans generational? You know epigenetic effect on longevity So let's look at these people that grew up during the famine versus feast years And let's look at their children and their grandchildren see what diseases they had or what how long they lived and you know It's not like It's not like a controlled study. I mean, it's very Corollative and there's a lot of factors missing but it's still very interesting what they found is that males that were between the ages of nine and twelve and if they lived during the if they were nine and twelve during the famine years They had children and grandchildren that lived on average about seven years longer than the grandchildren of those that grew up during the abundance years and when they corrected for social economic status meaning Okay, rich people kind of ate well no matter what when you correct for that when you have people from the same socioeconomic status Those those grandchildren of the men that were between the ages of nine to twelve during famine years lived 32 years longer which is like crazy increase in lifespan and they also they had more studies coming out where those grandchildren had one fourth less likely to get Type two diabetes and also cardiovascular disease. So it's like why why do you have to be between the age of nine and twelve and a male to you know Why growing up during that part? You know of the famine? How does that affect your your grandchildren's lifespan and we can't we can't really tell you why but there's some sort of theories as to why and During that time period. There's something you know, you're pretty pbeasant right right before you actually get get that growth spurt and They think there's something to do with the sperm DNA that gets changed a little bit of stress that little bit of poor me says possibly a little bit of stress changes the expression in your gene sperm genes and that gets passed on so it's fascinating So much to learn still about the human body. I feel like we're in a great time in comparison to other Civilizations and you look back at what they used to do for medicine what we're aware of now But I feel like a hundred years now they're really laughing at us right. Yeah. No, it's um You know, I think the future is preventative medicine You know, and there's gonna be some breakthroughs eventually and things like stem cell therapy But I think diet nutrition these things are what we can do now That's what we can do now we have control over and it absolutely has been shown to affect the way we age Period and so we know this so let's let's implement it. Let's educate people. Let's do it You know as opposed to waiting around for some scientific breakthrough that may or may not happen in your child's You know during your child's lifetime. So there's just no telling You know what's gonna happen? But we do know right now that we can control certain things You know in the way we age through through our diet in our lifestyle and and that's That's what we need to start focusing on I Want to mention another really cool thing about this epidemic. I think it turned the microphone a little bit more towards you to be a little bit Yeah, sorry. Yeah. All right. So this Back to the epigenetics study Something even as complex as like learning and memory can be modulated by by your environment This was a mouse study where they took mice that were transginnically modulated to get neurodegenerative disease and So they put these mice usually when we work with mice they're in this cage that's like it has bedding and has some food and water And that's about it. This is not a lot of stimulation a lot of exercise Since really kind sad, but they took these mice and they put them in what we call an enriched environment So they gave them all these toys that stimulated various regions in their brain like the cognitive region motor region somatocensory regions and What they found was that these mice scored better on learning memory test and Not only do they score better on learning memory test. They they had increased the expression of a gene that's involved in long-term potentiation long-term potentiation So signal that you're making when you're learning you need to remember things, you know But the really interesting thing about this study was that these mice that were genetically engineered to get neurodegenerative disease had offspring mice that were also Genetically engineered to get neurodegenerative disease But we're not put in a enriched environment so they were put in that boring cage where they had no stimulation But they had still increased that long-term potentiation gene that epigenetic factor was passed on In this case it was through the egg through the female line to the offspring mice which had the same learning Memory benefits even though they didn't really want to expose that environment So I mean just just having Cognitive stimulation just using your brain more and exercising more can affect the expression of your genes and that can actually get passed on That's that's so fascinating So like this is that one of the reasons why athletes tend to develop athletes for children is that one of the reasons why really intelligent people tend to have Intelligent children like is possibly it not just environmental and educational but epigenetics as well Right, I mean certainly in the environment plays a component in those things But you know the epigenetics were just sort of starting to understand Epigenetics and how it works and it's complicated. It's not easy to study but you know, it's Yeah, there's certainly a role for epigenics in that so it's It's fascinating. It's so fascinating. Yeah, it's very fascinating It's it's so fascinating when you stop and think about how much we're going to learn You know what we know now and what we're going to learn. It's incredible It's it's just incredible you just think of the potential for reengineering the human body I mean that's it seems like we're going to be able to do all these things We're doing the mice giving them double muscles and make it in fucking smarter We're gonna be able to do that to people we're gonna make a doctor mind hadn't you know remember from that movie the watchmen We're gonna make a doctor Manhattan. It's gonna happen. There's gonna be a guy one day. That's omnipresent Super being that that becomes a God. We're gonna fuck up and make a God You know, I'm trying to I try to do what I can to make myself work better and you know cognitive wise and You know and also tried to basically age better so You know, it's it's certainly like we can do things like now But just yeah, like you're saying genetically changing someone's like literally like you know Making making someone's muscle grow like that by like giving them an inhibitor of a certain my was down receptor I mean that's like hardcore stuff that yeah, you know, we don't really know what the effects are gonna be doing things like that long-term Comes down army of super beings That's what it's gonna be there's Dr. Minhatton. That's what we're gonna have That guys gonna be running shit in a hundred years. That's our new president You know as long as he's really intelligent. Let's make his brain like super awesome Well, my doctor Manhattan was really intelligent unfortunately too intelligent So intelligent that he sort of like factored in a lot of things like well, you know people live people die You know remorse and guilt and all these things are really just byproducts of human culture and our correlation to you know Cause and effect and our reactions to each other they mean it took away all the joy and fun the zest of life We got a little bit too intelligent right that problems a problem absolutely I don't make people just smart enough but not too smart whether they realize what's the fucking point you live You die you're just a finite organism I mean if you live forever the planet doesn't it forever right so what are you gonna do here? Yeah, yeah, I mean I've had conversations with really intelligent people they talk about the futility of life and I'm like Your problem might be you're too fucking smart and you think it too much or it may be not even too smart But you're thinking too much about stuff that really you can't control and maybe you got to be smart enough to realize this is all silly Yeah, thinking about the things you can't control sometimes that That over like I get these what I call OCD spikes where if I'm driving on the highway I start to imagine all the possibilities that can happen like all the things that can happen with all the cars and It like the there's moments where it's so overwhelming where I just can't do I can't drive like it's too much So and it's like like so my husband ends up driving me around a lot True story it's like though I did that what I often do is like I like to live five minutes from where I work That way I don't ever have to get on the highway because I don't have to think about all the things that can happen when I'm on the highway You know, it's Wow, you're too smart to drive. Well, I don't know if it's that I sometimes obsess over what I can't control and the fact that there's like all these people and I'm like They're doing all these things and all this could happen all these possibilities and you know, then it's like okay It's like overload. I had a moment When My first daughter was born where when I was in the hospital in the the moment she came out of the box I was thinking like how many different people are being born right? Now simultaneously all around the world and if you could see that on a giant screen I mean it would look like an invasion of babies if you could see the millions of people no doubt being born all over the world at the same moment Just Just shooting out of a shyness bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang bang Make just it would be so in that I got over it. I got over it. I'm glad we have that ability to get out some of that stuff because um yeah it's overwhelming. It's overwhelming. It's very overwhelming. Isn't that sort of the issue with um what what one of the main issues with paying attention too much to bad things in the news and I've talked about this many times. I think we have a real problem with digesting seven billion people's worth of problems because anytime something spectacular or horrific comes up from all over the world we get it and we absorb it and it's sort of alters our idea of what the world is. Oh the world is a scary place and it's filled with evil. The really the numbers are pretty against that. The numbers like throughout your day you experience very little violence. Throughout your day you experience very little horrific crime. It's very very rare in most parts of America unless you live in a terrible neighborhood to experience the kind of shit that you see on your newsfeed or your Twitter feed all day every day. It's not an accurate expression because it's based on such an insane number that you're not supposed to be corollating. You're not supposed to be looking at a seven billion people number. So what's we looking at a tribe of 150 people? I mean that's what our brain that's that's with the Dunbar's number is. We don't really know what the fuck to do with seven billion people's worth of information. So we become these paranoid messes when we start thinking about all this horrible shit that's happening but you're talking about a fucking planet worth. I mean literally a planet worth of information now and it's like that's the same sort of thing. Just freaking out, thinking about all the variables that you can't control. We're not designed for that. Is it possible that we will that the epigenetics of living in this life will alter our genes and our expression of our genes so that we can accept this kind of information? Is that something we're going to like we'll start to adapt? Yeah yeah absolutely. I mean they've shown that stress does epigenetically change expression of our genes. So you know it's it's their... So tabloids are fucking us up right? Right. You know I don't listen to tabloids but yeah I'm sure they're or even just fear mongering you know just going on the Alex Jones website just paying attention to all these people that are doom and gloom new world order they're fucking chemtrails they're putting caskets out in the FEMA camps and getting ready to mask kill people. Yeah it is it's definitely changing the expression of your genes. Shit. The stress is doing some bad. Shit. And it's also shortening your telomeres. Ahh! I don't need that but I got a problem too. I fucking eat like a pig. That's a real problem. I'm gonna die young. I eat enough for like two or three people. Like what do you eat? I ate everything. I eat whatever's in front of you. Whatever you want. I'm just out of problem. I work out a lot and because of that I'm always hungry. Yeah. But I eat a lot. I eat so much sometimes waitresses don't believe me. Like when we go like after shows like if we'll do like two or three shows at a night I'll order two like entrees and then a bunch of appetizers and I've had people say that's too much. Oh that's a wager soul say that's too much. Like just keep it coming. Don't worry about it. I'm putting it down. Wow. Yeah. That's a lot of food too entrees. Yeah I'll regularly eat too entrees. And that's after having two other meals. Usually yeah but it's just if I'm working out, if I'm working out and I work at the same time two things happen in a day my appetite is just insane. It's just it's a pit that just can't be filled. Yeah. Well I mean your body needs the I mean I'm gonna die younger. I'm not gonna be like the cool older mouse or a cool older monkey that's got his shit together. Right. Yeah you know it's take it down a notch. They're trying to do some of these caloric restriction studies in humans to see you know what if it's the same. If it's the same and you know of course doing the longevity study is going to take forever so that's the tard so they're doing kind of like a year-long study and looking at specific endpoints and they're finding some things are a little different actually from the mice and from the monkeys. Oh I'm sure and there's got to be a difference between monkeys and human beings. They're pretty profound difference as far as what our needs are. Nutritionally and also the idea of stress because we can sort of conceptualize stress in a way that they can't. I mean they're dealing with immediate threats only. Right. They're not conceptualizing man. I'm not gonna live forever man. The long answer is man. That's not there. Right. I don't want to dive canes or hurt. Oh shit man. What if my wife's cheating on me? They're not thinking about any of these things. What if I get fired? They're not thinking about any of these things. Right. They don't have anything other than immediate concerns which is kind of what we're designed for. Right. I mean when you look at the genes of human beings and the amount of time that we've been in this particular type of a society and the amount of time that we've been essentially hunter-gatherers. I mean there's no comparison. We have just long stretch of time where we were just living a very specific way. Right. And then over the last couple of hundred years things radically shift in the very strange and new direction. And then we find ourselves where we are now from the invention of the printing press to the fucking Twitter feeds and their next pictures. Oh three printers freak me out man. They're just going to start making guns. They're actually a NASA was funding a study. They're trying to 3D print non-living biomolecules like wood chips and like dental and ammo and I know it's kind of cool. It's very cool. Yeah so that's kind of NASA's funding some really cool stuff. Another really cool study I saw recently where they took they took cancer cells and they cultured them in space because they wanted to see if space could epigenetically change the expression of genes and if this would have any effect and they found it did. That gravity did effect actually genes that are involved in metastasis and when you culture these cells in space it down regulates genes involved in metastasis and that cancer cells become less aggressive. So then they like took these cells and like okay well there's a million different things that could be happening in space. Is it the gravity or is it the cosmo rays or something? And so they like culture them and they centrifuge them. I mean they spin and they spawn them at a certain rotation per minute to like copy or mimic this microgravity and they had this they found the same effect. So literally like the gravity changed the expression of these genes involved in metastasis. So yeah so if you have cancer or maybe you know go to space. Wow or it's very least the top of a mountain. I'm just wondering where they're going to go with that next. I mean it's like okay well that's interesting finding but so what do we do? We're going to rotate for you know if you have cancer. It's just some interesting stuff. Well then there's also the issue where you can't really go to space for very long anyway because if you do go to space your body doesn't really the body is really not designed to be in a zero gravity environment. We had Dr. Chris Commander Chris Hatfield on the podcast one of the guys how long did he go to space for? 166 days or something crazy like that and he came back and he was describing the horrific moments where he first stepped out of the pot or whatever it is that you land in and was walking on the ground for the first time getting nauseous and throwing up and your body is just so not used to being in gravity and standing on the ground and you've just been floating around for so long that your body is just totally baffled and he said it was horrific. I thought it would be a wonderful experience like what is it like when you finally touch them the ground you been up in space for so long. He's like it is unbelievably awful. Wow yeah your body is just in chaos doesn't know what you've been doing this whole time. Yeah it's pretty crazy. The body's crazy. It is very crazy and it's very it does adapt I mean there's things that are you know it does adapt it's so endlessly fascinating. It's so endlessly fascinating when you find out what has been learned about the body how many studies have been done what what information is out there and then yet how much we need to learn how much there there is to know how much there is to discover it's just we're not even close we're not even close we're just learning which is again why it's so infuriating when you read you know vitamins don't work case closed right fuck you right no it's not it's not that simple a lot of vitamins do work and there's been a lot of studies showing that they work. Well it's not an accident that we've isolated vitamin C it's not an accident that we know that vitamin B12 gives you energy I mean these is a science that created all this so all these no nonsense people there is a lot of fuckery when it comes to vitamins there's a lot of fuckery when it comes to nutrition you you're always reading about some you know false claims that you know this company has or that company has or these pills however though you we hear about things all the time and it comes to nutrition supplementation especially when it comes to athletic supplementation things that are you know purported to deliver you know amazing muscle growth or you know they found that a lot of those things that are purported to give muscle growth or erection pills here's a perfect example you know what those things are when you there's a cialis and viagra they just sell that they sell it as some herbal supplement but they put in pharmaceutical drugs they get they buy that shin and bulk and they sell it and it actually does work but they're pharmaceutical drugs but because of the fact that the restrictions are so small and the ban or the the punishment of doing that is so small we had a Aubrey Marcus in from on it who is describing the whole process of one of these companies gets caught selling viagra as one of these herbal sexual stimulants they just get like a little fine so they change the name they open up under a different company go right back at it and they just have you know rocket dick or whatever the fuck you're right I mean there was a study that came out not long ago they showed that like 70% of like herbal supplements on the market aren't actually what you think they are so in a lot of cases people are just putting some other plant in there it's like you think you're getting you know a canacia or you know and it's like some other crap and so that's like I think there's a whole you know an opening for people to actually do like some DNA bar coating where you can actually test you know what's an isopel man and start a company where it's like I've I've tested these supplements and they're actually what they're saying they're supposed to be you know because it's like you've got a huge problem when people are trying to buy certain supplements and then they're not even getting what they think they're buying regardless of whether or not there's any science to back up with what they think they're buying is doing anything I mean the point is they should be getting what they think they're getting and then of course there's a huge issue of homeopathic cures which are mostly nonsense there's a huge homeopathic industry that's essentially selling you sugar right so you total bullshit they've there's a recent study on homeopathic the the actual ingredients and some homeopathic cures and a lot of it was sugar it's like they're literally selling sugar pills yeah there's a difference between you know not having certain vitamins and minerals and fatty acids in your diet and things that can you know it it affects your immune system it affects all these different things and then taking all this other crap that I don't know people like the idea of some exotic thing isolated from somewhere and it's like oh it does this because it's exotic and you know the reality is people they should be focusing on what they're not getting that's essential for you know things that we know that's essential for the you know proteins in their body to work and so that yeah a lot of that homeopathic stuff it gets mixed in with the vitamins and minerals too and that's really irritating because it's really they're two different things yeah there's a lot of nonsense if you're interested in that just google homeopathic medicine sugar pills and there's all there's studies there's a lot of different stuff on on sugar pills well actually they've shown they've done placebo effects studies using sugar pills where they've published like they've given someone a placebo I mean it the whole point of the study was not for the person conducting it to not know who had the placebo it was okay let's see if the placebo effect is real and it absolutely is real I mean there are people people if they think they're getting something they will experience something you know and it's real to them and actually they they don't get sick as much or they feel better you know so there's there's something to be said for a sugar pill and maybe that's part of the success of things like home you know yeah that's really confusing isn't it the placebo effect is absolutely fascinating that you can send the mind a signal or instill it in a mind by taking a pill and then the mind believes that medicine is there and then conducts business as if this newfound healing property exists yeah no and it's it is real to see what effect is real and we don't know why right I mean I haven't really done a ton of research into understanding why but yeah it's it's it's interesting how your your brain can you know make your make yourself think that something's working and you you actually can force yourself to to be healthier I mean so it's it's fascinating it is very very very fast standing endlessly endlessly so I mean the human being is like a human body is to me essentially like the most incredibly complex computer ever and we don't have a guidebook for it right and then this we're just talking about the physical aspects of it forget about managing your mind ranging your thought process which also can lead to a lot of ailments and incorrect thinking and thinking with you absolutely absolutely I mean when I started getting when I started researching these studies on the effects of you know depleting tripped a fan from your brain and how like normal people all of a sudden become like impulsive impulsive like you know violence and impulsive behaviors and recidivism so they like they'll do these tests where they they're punished for doing something wrong and they'll keep repeating the same thing I mean I was like I can't believe you can change someone's behavior by depleting tripped a fan like that's that was really you know amazing to me and and you know the way that nutrition effects your brain function in general in behavior is really interesting to me because it it suggests that we have to some degree some control over our cognitive function behavior and I think that we should be optimizing that as much we can to you know perform better to have better cognitive skills and to also better society by behaving better you know so you know they've they've done studies with like school children where they've given them like omega three fatty acids and multi vitamins and it's absolutely you know affected their IQ scores in some cases by like dramatic effects and even affected juvenile delinquency and juvenile yeah it's it's affected affected juvenile delinquency there's been studies showing that giving these these people a multi-vitamin and omega three fatty acids so it's hard to pinpoint what specifically in it but I think it's a combination of everything because these pathways are all working together but it's affecting their what I think is happening is you know it's also affecting their serotonin and so they're you know they're not they're not as impulsive they're they're you know it's more like long-term thinking they're it's it's absolutely fascinating that you can actually through nutrition affects someone's behavior there's another study where they'd given prisoners omega three fatty acids and it affected their aggressive outverse um you know because that's a whole other topic you know you've got a population of people that's incarcerated and knows what they're getting fed probably deficient in multiple micronutrients including omega three fatty acids and vitamin one questionably we had a guy on recently is kid war machine of mma fighter john copanaver is real name war machines is fighting name pretty cute um and he was talking about a year that he did in prison where they they gave him 1500 calories a day and it was horrible nutrition and just how his body just felt like it was wasting away because of it yeah see this is I would like to see you know we're spending money to keep people in prison you know absolutely why not give them give their brain the proper nutrients they need to try to heal itself to try to make it work better you know you're talking silly because you're talking about a person wants to fix people they're just trying to make money I mean they don't really care when you're dealing with privatized prisons you're also dealing with you know prison guard unions that are trying to keep people in prisons so that they have prison guards that have jobs I mean you're not dealing with a whole system where the entire system is dedicated to actually rehabilitating people that sort of bullshit they pretend it is there it's just a system someone someone can start a company you know that that donate that basically is a charity that we give them to these people donate money and we give people these vitamins these omega-3 and vitamin D and multi vitamins in prisons people are not going to buy it they're going to say listen if you want to give people nutrients and vitamins give it to poor people give it to poor people that haven't committed crimes don't give it to prisoners don't try to fix prisoners I see what you're saying I see your point of view but I see how people are going to say if you're going to start somewhere don't start with people that have already fucked yeah we should definitely start with we should definitely give them to poor people also I mean you know we need to make sure that that these people that can't afford to you know eat all these greens and fish every day they we can at least give them you know a fish oil pill and you know vitamin D pill and multi vitamin to help give give them some of those micronutrients particularly the children that are not doing well and on their cognitive tests and having behavioral problems and it's like people don't want to ever think about the fact that nutrition plays a role in that it's not just all genetics it's not all environment and you know in terms of being like abused or I mean that definitely plays a role for sure yeah there is there is a component of nutrition that we can you know control to some degree and it's a cheap it's a cheap solution vitamins aren't that expensive I mean relatively speaking you can you can get a omega 3 pill vitamin D pill multi vitamin and it's not that much money a month now there was something else you said that you wanted to talk about the Dave Asprey said that was incorrect oh that was the epigenetic test oh yeah the Swedish study I listened to the podcast that you had some time ago and you know he's got good information I don't want to you know say otherwise but I just I wanted to correct that because he had said that the the children from the well fed the ones that were grandchildren of the well fed children lived got type two diabetes less and that was completely wrong it was it was the opposite yeah he's a collector of interesting ideas and although I like the guy he gets shit wrong and I don't know if he's always that good about recognizing when he has done that and correcting himself we we've had a real issue with him as a lately because of mycotoxins I don't know if you're aware of the whole issue of mycotoxins a little bit about it yeah I'm not concerned about mycotoxins and coffee I'm more concerned about not getting my omega 3 and all the other micronutrients involved in and I mean ophthaltoxins certainly something I don't want but that's you know peanuts yeah so mycotoxins in peanuts are a real issue as well and corn that's another real issue here's the issue this guy is selling coffee and now we're selling this coffee through on it that was supposed to be the cure to this issue is this the coffee mycotoxins no you're actually drinking Hawaiian kona coffee that I started drinking I started drinking right after we got our results back on the mycotoxins tests uh-huh okay so his his contention was that 70 plus percent whatever it was of all coffee is infected with mycotoxins and they make you sick they make the coffee taste bitter they make you taste bad you know they make you feel bad I took too much of this at face value and parroted a lot of the things that he said and then we decided to start looking into it ourselves well they've known about mycotoxins and coffee for a long time there's a pub med study from 1980 among mycotoxins and coffee it's always been an issue but they've been able to resolve that issue with wet processing wet processing the they know how good coffee providers know how to eliminate this from coffee we tested four random coffees well two random one starbucks one random back from Whole Foods uh one coffee that we sell which is the upgraded coffee that they've produces which is a good coffee good single source coffee another one called caveman coffee none of them tested positive for mycotoxins and so well 70% of all coffee as mycotoxins and we had three bags other than the upgraded coffee none of them are taking his upgraded quote-on-quote bulletproof process which he won't result you know he won't reveal what this process is publicly and so I kind of feel like it might there's some bullshit there for sure it's not it's there's no way we're just gonna find four bags of coffee and test them um so our friend Tate who runs bulletproof coffee he tested two bags and his coffee and this upgraded coffee and allegedly he found below threshold levels of mycotoxins in Dave's coffee so I didn't you know I didn't conduct that test I wasn't a part of that test I don't know if it's right but what the fuck you know like I feel like when you're a guy who's running on and doing these kind of interviews and spewing out all these facts you have to be really fucking careful you know you have to be really fucking careful what you're saying is true and if what you're saying turns out to not be accurate and I find out you're profiting from what you're saying it becomes it becomes bad it becomes a real problem and where that's where we are with this upgraded coffee thing um we still sell it at on it because it is really good coffee but we've removed all of our all the literature on the mycotoxin issue all the literature on that because when you talk to the people that are in the know in the coffee industry coffee growers people who grade coffee and rate coffee they actually have a rating system that is uh you know like you get a 94 95 you have excellent coffee well your coffee loses points of a test positive for mycotoxins they test it you know so he's he's sort of created this issue and you know and made this issue out to be like there's a reason why you have bitter coffee it's mycotoxins well no it's not it's fucking burnt coffee man yeah yeah you if you leave it on the pot and it stays heated it gets it gets bitter I mean that's they've known that for years there's there's no studies out there that show that coffee with mycotoxins in it test bitter and you also like this shit of him saying that all these different coffees have tested positive for mycotoxins there's no tests he's got no results like you can't just go around saying that without producing the data publicly you have to yeah yeah it's um I have never I mean I certainly like I said Aflotoxins one thing where you know I don't that certainly can cause cancer I've never really been that concerned about mycotoxins in my coffee uh being a carcinogen I'm more concerned about my own metabolism generating reactive oxygen species because that's generating more you know react box in species than in some micro toxins uh in in the coffee and that's that's you know well mycotoxins most certainly exist they existed human breast milk how about that they exist yes sure they exist I mean I've gone mycotoxin loopy after all they're starting to read of the the different areas where mycotoxins have been found or aspects of mycotoxins that can affect human health but the coffee one they seem to have licked they know what the fuck it is they know what causes it and they know how to deal with it it's called wet processing they know how to not store beans where they can get moldy they know how to prevent these things for happening so this guy they have incentive to do that exactly so so this guy is sort of he you know he used my platform in a way that I don't think is totally ethical yeah and you know he claims that he's telling the truth and he claims that you know if you sign a non disclosure agreement he'll show you always you know all his testing methods like but it's all it it seems to be bullshit and I feel bad because uh I like the guy and I think that first of all he's not I mean he's a collector of ideas he doesn't have a formal education in education in nutrition this is not something that he's you know got a PhD in right he's not you right essentially is what I'm saying so you know when I talked to you about it I'm getting it from someone who went to really good schools and you do research every day for a fucking living yeah I do um and like I said I'm not an expert in microtoxin but I've sort of not really been worried about it in coffee just based on the little bit of reading that I've done I haven't what seems like it can be an issue if you have microtoxin infected coffee but if it did if it's really infected we're talking like you know if it's like if there's a trace amount of it you know I don't really think it's that's the well that's what what we found well that's not what we found and what we found is zero but what tape my friend Tate and caveman coffee found in his is below threshold levels of two different types of microtoxin which is not going to affect you at all well not only that they say that if anything it's going to increase the expression of genes that are involved in stress resistance can have a little bit of a dramatic effect possibly that's interesting yeah well the other thing was that the actual process of roasting the beans destroys a huge amount of the microtoxin a huge amount of the mold gets it gets killed yeah you know another 70 to 80% in some cases this reminds me there's this whole lectin thing is another thing when you're saying heat you know that something destroys the roasting process destroys that microtoxin well this is whole thing with lectins too that's a big I don't know you know who started this lectin thing I think maybe Mercola Mercola but I think he he talks about it also and it's like oh you can't eat beans because beans have lectins and and lectins causing immune response in your gut and this is going to cause leaky gut and that's that's not the whole story it's a little more complicated for one lectins are an activated by heat and so unless you're chewing raw kidney beans or raw lentils you're probably not activating in a immune response in your gut and actually beans are really high in fiber and fiber gets you know broken down into short chain fatty acids which actually prevents the immune response in your gut so it's actually doing the opposite you know so there's there's people some people have good information but they also have some bad information and yeah I agree with you you got to be careful I mean anyone that's offering you like a magic bullet like this is this is it this is the cure this is there's it's complicated and there's trade-offs you know I should be clear when I say that Mike that roasting the roasting process supposedly eliminates microtoxin it's just destroys the mold that causes the microtoxin which is source yeah it's upstream of it yeah your roasting doesn't actually destroy microtoxins but it does destroy the mold 70 to 80% of it in some cases so it's another one of those cases where there's too much to know there's too much to learn and I have a guy on who says he's an expert and some of the things that he says seem to be bullshit and that's the big one that everyone has molding their coffee except me I know how my super secret way of of getting but I fucking bought it so here we have a problem that we've allowed to be creative but I don't I'm not drinking them anymore because of that just at a general principle we'll probably eventually stop selling it it is good coffee it's good single source coffee there's nothing wrong with the coffee just for me I prefer the coffee from Hawaii I love kona coffee it has a really great taste to it so I'll start drinking that this upgrading coffee yeah well well not only that a lot of you will buy it based on this premise that has not been proven that most coffee has mold in it with no fucking evidence whatsoever to back that up I haven't seen any evidence that most coffee has microtoxin and I haven't seen evidence that it has levels of microtoxins that are harmful so you know I think there was one test that showed that in the bitterness area there was one test that showed that mice when they were given saccharin infuse with microtoxins tended to avoid that saccharin with with microtoxins but but saccharins a sweet thing I mean it's a sweet product like I and who knows why they're avoiding the taste of the michael toxins who knows if their bodies have figured out that it's fucking poison I don't know yeah but running around saying the reason why coffee's bitter is because of michael toxins just better than the tannins the the same thing that's in t cannons that's what that's why that's the bitter part of coffee and but heat causes that uh no they're naturally in in the those plants but when it gets burnt that burnt taste you know I don't know that burnt taste is a good enough research to know what the heat does to that process it's possible yeah well that's what they say and then the coffee experts say when I fucking read more about coffee over the last three weeks then I've ever wanted to read or thought I would ever have to um but coffee experts here's where it gets pretty clear all call bullshit all of them call bullshit in what he's saying they all call bullshit across the board not just coffee providers not just coffee growers with coffee tasters coffee experts across the board think that what he's saying is horseshit that's usually a good sign this one guy who's not even a fucking nutrition expert and he's not it doesn't have a PhD in nutrition he comes along with these incredible claims and also has this incredible method to alleviate this ailment I mean it's one of those classic examples you know create a problem and then offer a solution profit yeah you know and that's that's it seems to be what's been done here whether or not it's intentional or not I don't even think it was intentional but I think that he's one of those guys that once he goes down a path to say he was wrong or to to try to once you have a product on something it's hard to then say you're wrong yeah you fucking probably yourself in this situation where it's yeah it's tricky because it's not bad coffee it's good coffee it tastes good it's you know from our testing it's michael toxen free it's single source coffee if he just sold it as that it would be a really good product there's nothing wrong with it yeah the other thing about coffee experts is they want to know when it was when it was roasted they want to know they want to know like he's like there's a time between when the coffee's roasted and how long you should you know keep it while it's still fresh that he doesn't offer that it doesn't have any of that so they're calling bullshit on that too they're like if you really cared about coffee you would let let us know when it's roasted should have an on a roasted by date you know roasted on date yeah yeah yeah sounds like it's pretty freaking complicated it's too complicated I have children and jobs yeah to do I don't have time to deal with this shit but I you know I am obligated now because I got thrust into this situation yeah it's it's nice to talk to someone like you to clear up some of the misconceptions of health and nutrition and to find out what's real and what's not what are issues when I talk to a guy like Brian Donning was like you don't need vitamin C you know you don't need this you don't need that but look at him he's fucking totally out of shape yeah it's fat yeah just not taking care of his body's a no nonsense guy who got fucked because he was a kid and he was raised in Mormon and now he's trying to counteract that by being a skeptic I mean that's really essentially what's going on but that guy can fuck with people's heads because he's not an expert right clearly not an expert in a lot of things so he really shouldn't be reviewing scientific literature in my opinion like he needs to get some people that like really know how to do that if he's going to start trying to critically analyze science that's my opinion because I've read some of his stuff where he's trying to critically analyze it for example this this line is Pauling he's got something on his website talking about how vitamin C can't has no effect on cancer incidents or can you know help if you already have cancer can help you know kill the cancer cells and he puts up these studies by the myoclinic that you know couldn't repeat these early studies studies that were done by Linus Pauling and Jane Cameron I forgot his name anyways in the late 70s but you know anyone that's a scientist will look at that and go oh Pauling and Cameron gave their patients or cancer patients vitamin C intravenously and they did that for a reason because you can only orally absorb so much vitamin C you know get into your bloodstream but intravenously you can like you know raise it to like minimal or you know concentrations and so the two myoclinic studies that repeated it repeated it and quotations gave him orally and so you know you can't you can't repeat a study and change the method of administration from oral to intravenous and say oh yeah we repeated the study and didn't work so when you're critically analyzing data you need to focus on those sort of details because they're actually really important and a recent study just came out like two weeks ago that where they took patients female patients ahead ovarian cancer and they gave them vitamin C intravenously and they're doing their standard chemo it's really hard nowadays to do any sort of unconventional cancer treatment that's not you know because it's like you don't want to just kill someone I mean it's it's hard so anyways they did it with the chemotherapy and it actually it killed they killed the cancer cells better and it also alleviated a lot of the negative symptoms associated with the chemo and this was to study published in science translational medicine which is a pretty good journal for translational research in fact so well Brian Brian has several problems with some of the things he puts out you know he's accused me of being a pseudo science shill and even after the podcast even after the podcast where he came on and had all these really ridiculous accusations that he threw at me on his website and we talked about them one by one what I believed and what I actually didn't believe what I said and what I didn't say and even after basically just tapping them out mentally for three hours just over and over and over again you're wrong here you're wrong there this is silly this is dumb this is poor thinking he went and wrote this really distorted thing on his website it's like really bizarre account I mean he was very kind to me said he was I was nice and funny but here's why things I still promote dangerous pseudo science well if you look at the videos that that guy puts out himself he's got this video on fracking and how safe fracking is and how no no need to worry about fracking and he's got this really hilarious smug video on the reality of fracking or hydraulic fracturing fracking fucks up environments permanently all throughout the world there's been over a thousand instances of poison wells in this country because of fracking documented instances of poisoned wells I mean they've fucked up huge parts of this country pretty much forever because of fracking so what does fracking do like how do they what's a very complicated process of getting getting this stuff out of the ground getting oil natural gas out of the ground mostly oil right and it involves water hydraulic fracturing and they they pump water in and I'm not the guy to be describing is this his his thing on fracking here flammable and fox blamed the fact that fracking was used in the area an investigation into this family first of all your music makes we want to kill babies discovered that their well had been drilled directly into a shallow natural gas deposit this is common it's not a problem if the well is properly venting theirs wasn't so gas got into their water how do we know it had nothing to do with fracking water wells range in depth from a few meters to a few hundred at the very deepest but fracking takes place kilometers deeper past numerous layers of bedrock years of study have proven what geologists have always known there's just too much distance solid rock between the two regions for any seepage to take place to stop at the start of your that's such total horseshit yes he's just parrying the words of the people that have been paid by these companies that are making fucking trillions of dollars to say I mean that's what he's doing these these piss poor studies these these people that have been documented on all these various documentaries like there's there's there's the two ones on the gas land wall and gas land too but then there's also people that have done interviews and showing how they can light their fucking water on fire now and showing how their their wells are poisoned people who've been really made deathly ill by drinking what they thought was filtered water but it's not filtered enough because some of the chemicals from fracking got into the water proven that those are the specific chemicals that are in their water that got there from fracking and this is he's just one of those fucking guys there's no nonsense guys don't worry the government says it's okay we're fine but even his tone that's such an affected tone that's like a fake way of talking he's talking like this like reassuring you that's such nonsense fucking talk that's well you know I don't know much about fracking but I can tell you just from reading like his trying to criticize science like he's got a very topical understanding of it and you know when I was reading some of his stuff like I was just like this guy shouldn't be doing this like you know it's very very naive understanding and so if you're going to try to criticize something and turn and say it's not true then you really need to know what you're talking about or get some freaking experts that really do he's got some real problems with this thinking and I think he knows it he sent me an email asking me about psychedelics asking me about psychedelics in mind expanding I think he knows he's fucked up I really do he's also indicted by I mean he's going to jail he's involved in an ebay scam he scam them from millions of dollars he didn't want to talk about it on the podcast but after he talks shit about me you can go fuck himself wow he's he was involved in this ebay scam where they were they were cookie stuffing they were you know stuffing cookies you you would go to use an application and I don't I don't know the full details of it but he's in real trouble and you plead guilty and he's a bellon see he's asking you about psychedelics that's just very well I think you also try to figure out what the fuck's wrong with his thinking you know well I think I really think that it has to do with growing up Mormon I really think that there's there's there's it's not a small amount that it fucks your head up when you grow up in a fundamentalist mindset when you were told that there's a man in the sky that you know Joseph Smith told his disciples about and that there's golden tab let's the lost work of Jesus and this guy found him when he was 14 I mean all the shit that you have to believe to be a Mormon this guy bought into that hook client and sinker and that's how he grew up that's how he grew up as a child that's how he grew up as a teenager that's how he grew up as a man until he refuted it and and your thought process now you just doesn't believe anything I mean it's like okay well everything that I was told throughout my life is wrong so then everything else if you just google dangers of fracking there is a tremendous amount of information out there about fracking about what's bad about fracking about the dangers and why had Peter Schiff on the podcast who's a you know economic genius very smart guy but also owns fracking companies and he was talking about it and when I brought it up to him he didn't deny the dangers of it what he said was look those people got money and they got millions of dollars because of that like that's a great thing for them like in his mind millions of dollars is okay to poison places forever I mean it's I'm no fracking expert I don't claim to be a fracking expert but if one fraction of what is said about fracking the negative aspects of fracking is true it's a tricky thing it's a very tricky thing yes we could use the natural resources yes you know it would be nice to not be dependent on foreign however if you really are destroying thousands of wells if that's really is documented if really people are getting sick from drinking water that's contaminated with the very chemicals that they use for fracking you know that doesn't seem like it's good that seems like that's something that most people are not aware of and when you find out who are the people that are that are funding these studies they're saying it's safe and where does the money all coming from a lot of it's coming from these oil companies a lot of it is coming from these oil companies and the reason why these laws are in place in the first place a lot of it is because people have been greased a lot of his people have been paid off they understand that there's a lot of money to be made in this and they've allowed the doors to be open for these companies to come in and fuck up giant parts of the country forever not according to Brian Dunning don't worry hydraulic fracturing takes place kilometers into the earth it's no concern sleep tight don't worry about eBay poor bastard poor bastard I like them he's not a bad guy too but you know he said after the podcast he said he would remove me from his list he said you've convinced me I'm gonna remove you for my list then from just getting crushed by people online the poor poor guy got destroyed on Twitter because people listen to the podcast were so frustrated by him and the ridiculous way thinks and the ridiculous things that he was saying yeah the same podcast must have been the same one has the only been on one yeah okay that was so infuriating yeah yeah that's yeah you know I I haven't seen all your podcasts but I can tell that you're you don't seem to be a promoter of pseudoscience you seem to be an inquisitive person that likes to critically think about things and you're also very open minded so it's like well what if this is you know let's think about let's think about how this could be working and what if it is true it's not you know it there's there's a difference between thinking like that and pseudoscience where you're just like you know you're just crazy and like you're thinking all you know it there's the I don't think you can see the difference yeah the difference right between someone that's actually just inquisitive and open minded and you know it doesn't see things as okay it's either this or that and you know maybe there's something that we don't understand and you know what there is a lot that we don't understand like you know it's even even for just back to nutrition you know like taking eating a plate full of green vegetables where we think we're getting vitamin K and folic acid and magnesium but there's a whole bunch of crap in there we don't know what it's doing we don't know what it's in there and what it's doing and how it's affecting you know you know processes in our body and we do know that there's good stuff going on in there and things that we don't even understand so yeah there's a lot of stuff that we just we can't explain yet we're trying to yeah I'm not concerned with looking like a fool so if something comes up and I go where is that possible is that true let's let's think about if that's possible there's a lot of people that are very concerned about looking like fools that won't go down those roads they won't say something absolutely ridiculous you know like you think the CIA really did kill Kennedy let's think about it you think it's possible for them to kill Kennedy there's a lot of people that go oh come on now look Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone case closed we're done here you know they want to be that no nonsense guy that doesn't look like a fool but the problem is there's a lot of nonsense in the world there is and if you you've really looked into things open-minded you find that there's there's some gray and everything and almost every subject there's some fucking weirdness I agree 100% you know or Brian dying yeah I just all have to say to him is um how are some people that like know how to you know read science and critically analyze it if you're gonna call yourself a science writer god sake you know yes well in the people like that along with people like Dave Asprey who got the information on the the study the the dietary study incorrect there it's a real problem with those guys because they're not a guy like me who's not a fucking expert in anything look if you ask me questions about martial arts if you ask me questions about stand-up comedy I can give you the opinion of an expert I'm a true expert in those very small areas that's it me talk to me but anything else I'll go off I can read some shit online right I read a book I'm not an expert but when people start spouting shit out as fact I'm learning on this podcast that there's a big responsibility that I'm learning how how the pitfalls of having people spouting things as fact that aren't necessarily factual and you know what I know a lot about nutrition and science and hell of a lot that I do not know well I love that you're honest about it though like when I asked you about amino acids and taking them without water you're right away I don't know but that's great that's how the world should be the guys like Dave Asprey asked him they come up with a fucking answer because they don't want to look stupid and that answer my booth why is it what is coffee bitter Michael toxins are you fucking sure there wears your test that show Michael toxins make coffee bitter you don't have anything man you gotta stop doing that you gotta stop you're confusing the fuck out of me and then I'd parent what you're saying I confused the fuck out of a bunch of people and that happens a lot like I said you know he he also talks about the lectins and the beans and it's like yeah and recall it as the same thing where it's like you know these they have some good information you know these people have there are some good things that they say but there's also some information that's totally wrong and the problem is people think because they have one good piece of information that everything they say is right and it's not you know and that's where you know it's you get this parenting where it's like well there's a meme now it's like I don't know who started it but someone started it and it's not accurate right they didn't dig deep enough they don't understand enough of the science behind it and so then you get everyone following this this big following and it's like of you know like how do you come in and say okay look this is how it's really happening and that's kind of what I'm trying to do in some degree it's not easy you know I'm doing it in my spare time because I'm also still doing research so I'm like on weekends I'm like writing articles and making videos instead of going out and enjoying the Bay Area you know but I freaking love doing it so well listen I've really enjoyed this conversation I think you've opened up a lot of people's eyes and you've educated a lot of people and provided a lot of information almost too much information it's I'm definitely seeing people writing down all these different things and googling all these different things that you've said but I think we could have this conversation a hundred times I really do and if you ever want to come on again I would love to have that again and tell people you know your videos where can they find them there are your tubes so yeah I'm if you go to my my page found my fitness.com and really just kind of ski down the social media slopes you know I've got really there's three ways people can help me one is by by subscribing to my podcast or my iTunes and my YouTube channel to really help me keep going and also found my fitness on my podcast that's the name of the podcast that's the name of my that's my Twitter name that's my podcast I also have a Patreon campaign they could help me with that's kind of like a Kickstarter but it's you can contribute like 25 cents a month and that's to help me pay for my podcasting like to to host my podcasting and it's really just to help me continue doing what I'm doing like on weekends and in my free time and lastly is signing up for my newsletter I know that's not that cool these days but I actually put a lot of good information my newsletter I'm going to put this link to this new study on on the sauna that I was talking about that's coming out in a couple of weeks that's awesome yeah so I'd love to come back and talk about you know absolutely everything and this paper on seertone is coming out in a couple of weeks actually six days so look for that and I'll probably send you a link on you. I'll send me anything I would be happy to tweet it it's so important to me to have people like yourself that are actual experts with legitimate credentials that can separate and clear the fog on a lot of these issues and I'm I'm fucking not tolerating this anymore if someone comes in and they have all these claims and they don't have information to back up the claims I'm just gonna fucking keep do you hear me up anytime you have a question I will I will dig into it like I'm gonna look into some of the stuff you talked about today that didn't know about beautiful um so thank you very much it's really is it's so important to have someone like yourself who's an expert that's willing to take the time to come on a podcast and educate us so I really appreciate it so you can follow Rhonda on Twitter it is found my fitness on Twitter and that is also the name of the podcast found my fitness anything else you want to say to people yeah let's just what I said the three ways they can help me out and I would really be great go help her out folks help her out this is a hugely entertaining and educational podcast you're really good at this you're you could you should appreciate it you have your own podcast oh you do it's found my fitness and it's on iTunes go get it folks thanks to our sponsor thank you to ting go to rogan dot ting dot com and save twenty five dollars off your mobile device with a lovely network ting rogan dot ting dot com thanks also to on it go to o n n i t use the code word rogan and save ten percent off any and all supplements that's it for this week next week though lots of cool people coming in ladies and gentlemen we got a lot of shit happening and thank you for all the love all the love on twitter all the love on facebook and all the positive responses that we get and all the cool people that I meet that tell me how much this podcast enhances your life enhances mine too and it would be nothing without you guys so thank you so much keep it together we're all in this as one biggest mop