If you can judge a man by his enemies, former Congressman Ron Paul of Texas, the long retired obstitrician, the 90-year-old three-time member of Congress and three-time presidential candidate, is a very, very good man because he has the best enemies. Here, for example, is an exchange between Jeffrey Epstein and one of his friends. This takes place in early 2012 when there is conversation as there pretty much always is in the United States over the last 30 years about when and how we should bomb Iran. Bomb Iran. And Epstein's friend's friend writes to him this. During an election year, everyone in Congress is falling all over themselves to show support for Israel except for that dinkish Ron Paul. [laughter] Ron Paul. Yeah. Jeffrey Epste and his friends did not like Ron Paul. But what's not to like about Ron Paul. Ron Paul is, and you're going to see him speak in just a moment, probably one of the most manifestly decent men ever to serve in the Congress. Married to the same woman since 1957, beloved by his children, grandchildren, now great grandchildren. A man who spends his spare time riding his bicycle and tending roses. A person who has articulated the principles of non-violence throughout his entire public career. A guy who thinks that it is not just unfashionable but totally immoral to judge people on the basis of their blood. Who thinks racism and anti-semitism are anti-Christian. Guy has never said a single thing against a group ever. Not once. In short, a thoroughly decent man of principle. Why does everyone hate Ron Paul? Well, there are a couple reasons. In fact, I personally discovered this way back in 2007 when I covered Ron Paul. He was running for president that year. I'd actually voted for him 19 years before in 1988 in college for president. I knew nothing about him, but it seemed like an amusing protest vote. He was running as a libertarian then. But fast forward to 2007, he was running in the 2008 presidential campaign. And I thought, "This guy looks kind of interesting." I really didn't know much about him. So I went on the road with him for a week and I wrote a long profile for the New Republic magazine. I was working in television, but I thought it was it's kind of interesting to write magazine stories again. So I did and I learned a couple of things about Ron Paul. One, as noted, enormously nice person, gentle temperament, decent, not flashy, not greedy, not dishonest. Two, I learned that Ron Paul is very sincere about monetary policy. Paul would give these stemwinders about fiat currency and the gold standard and why the Fed was a scam and he drew enormous crowds at least relative to the topic. Now, at the time, again, this was 19 years ago, no one was talking about the gold standard in public and getting anything but laughter and jeers. You were a gold bug. You were insane. You were a Gold wasn't even a topic. If you could check the transcripts from CNBC for the year 2007, gold probably not even mentioned. It seemed crazy to care about monetary policy then, but Ron Paul did and his audiences responded. That was the first thing I noticed. I had no idea this was a resident issue. I knew nothing about it, so I assumed since I lived in Washington and was pretty well informed that no one else knew anything about it either, but I was wrong. Tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, in the end, millions of Americans were thinking about the stability and the strength of the US dollar. And they were convinced that excessive money printing since the early 1970s when the dollar was detached from gold, which is to say from reality, when it became a purely fiat currency redeemable for nothing. They were convinced that the US dollar was weaker than their leaders said it was. And they knew this because the price of goods they bought every week seemed to be going up over time and no one was mentioning it or the goods themselves are becoming smaller. There was shrinkage. This is a well-known phenomenon now. Back in 2007, people weren't talking about it quite as quite as much. If you were 37 in 2007, when you were in first grade in this country, a Snickers bar cost 20. By 2007, it cost nearly a dollar and it was smaller. In that and countless other ways, it was obvious that actually this currency wasn't worth what they told us it was, and it was becoming worth less. and only Ron Paul was talking about that and he was making a number of other points too. One was that the United States wasn't actually deriving any benefit from all of these foreign wars that it just wasn't helping us at all and that in the end maybe violence isn't the solution. He wasn't making hostile points. He certainly wasn't attacking anyone. He was merely saying this foreign policy, the foreign policy that led us into say the Iraq war and into Syria and into Libya and into Vietnam for that matter, isn't helping our country. It's incredibly wasteful of money and human lives and it doesn't bring the result they claim it does. And that's basically all Ron Paul said. He mostly wanted to talk about monetary policy and gold. But for the crime of saying what he said about foreign policy, he was truly hated. And the word went out, time to discredit Ron Paul. Well, I had no idea any of this was going on until I filed my story to the New Republic at the end of 2007. And it was kind of skeptical but amused and affectionate. I liked Ron Paul. Who wouldn't like Ron Paul? What a nice man. I didn't understand some of what he was saying. I didn't agree with other parts of it, but it wasn't hostile. It was kind of detached and amused and sometimes beused. So I file it and the editor says, "Oh, I like the story. Good job. We're done." Then two days later, I got a call from that very same editor of The New Republic who said, "We have a problem." Ron Paul, it turns out, is a racist and an anti-semite. And I said, "Really? I'm not working for Ron Paul. I've got no emotional attachment to the campaign, but he didn't seem like a bigot to me. He seemed like a nice Christian man. Oh no, the editor said, "We sent out a reporter called Jamie Kerchek, a recent Yale graduate and a fervid neoconservative, to go check into Ron Paul's background, and it turns out that he had newsletters back in the 1980s that used racist terms, and we think he's an anti-semite based on his foreign policy." I said, "Okay." And so then the author of that piece, Jamie Kerch, called me and kind of grilled me. you spend time with this man, this bigot said Jamie Kerchett occupying the moral high ground immediately. I said, I've got nothing to do with that. I didn't hear Ron Paul say anything about it and they tried to kill my peace, but I pushed hard and it ran at the very end of 2007. Not that anyone cares. It's the New Republic. It has a readership of like 1900 people, but I cared since I wrote the piece. And then the very next issue, the first issue of 2008 and a cover story by Jamie Kerchek on how you may have reached the wrong conclusion about Ron Paul in the last issue. ACTUALLY, THE GUY'S A RACIST, AN ANTI-SEMITE, probably can't prove it, but of course he is. White Christian guy, right-winger. The piece was actually called Angry White Man, written about the least angry white man this country's ever produced. People have called Ron Paul many things and some of them may be true. Angry they've never called him because he's definitely not angry as you're about to see. But they went out of their way and by they I mean organized neoonservatives to smear Ron Paul not simply as wrong on the issues. In fact not as wrong on the issues. They didn't bother to engage on the issue philosophically or practically but wrong as a person. Unacceptable. You are not allowed to like Ron PAUL BECAUSE HE'S BAD. He's Nazi adjacent. In fact, his family may be German. That was 2008. By the time Ron Paul, totally undeterred, by the way, ran for president again in 2012, they were foaming at the mouth. Not because the Ron Paul movement had become huge or inevitable. He was never in danger of being elected president, but because his decency itself was his calling card. Ron Paul was clearly not a bad person no matter what they said about him and his ideas made a kind of inherent sense. There was a coherence to his worldview and that was a massive threat to the members of our media and commentariat who'd like to use your tax dollars to fight wars on behalf of Israel. That is just a fact. And so the reaction to Ron Paul in that campaign was how to put it over the top. For example, here was a young Ben Shapiro live tweeting a Republican debate that year that included Ron Paul. We'll quote selected portions. Quote, Ron Paul is manifestly insane, wrote a young Ben Shapiro who somehow got into Harvard. You wonder how. As in previous debates, he's now gripping the pen as he would the neck of a Jew. Imagine writing that about somebody accusing someone of wanting to murder, in fact strangle to death, quote, a Jew. That's a pretty serious thing to say about a person. In fact, that's slander. And on what basis did a young Ben Shapiro of Harvard, fresh off his deal with Facebook, which he got somehow, on what basis did he make such a claim? Well, unnone. Ron Paul never attacked the Jews. Has never attacked the Jews. I bet my house Ron Paul has never had an unpleasant thought about the Jews or anyone else. Again, you'll judge for yourself in just a moment. But that played no role in Ben Shapiro's slander. Again, this is December 15th, 2011. Ben Shapiro live tweeting. Gingrich almost drops his pen. Ron Paul grabs it and rings it like the neck of a Jew. Rick Perry had the memorable moments of the evening other than Ron Paul's corpse leaning toward the grave and strangling the Jews. Again, Ron Paul says sentiment is mixed about Israel and taking action against Iran. Um, does Ron Paul know a Jew? You can go check the transcript. Probably unlikely Ron Paul used the word Jew. He wasn't talking about Jews. He was talking about the nation state of Israel, the secular country with borders and a military and a government and a very sophisticated lobbying arm of which Ben Shapiro was a part trying to get the US taxpayer to foot the bill for another one of its wars. It's that simple. And he objected and everyone else on stage of course was for it. New Gingrich obediently getting behind Israel as always. He knows who pays the bills. But Ron Paul who doesn't really care about money and doesn't believe in fiat money anyway standing apart independently saying I don't think this is a good idea. and Ben Shapiro among many others attacking him as an anti-semite. Whoa. Our new partner dose is a way better option than big pharma. That's not damning with vain breaks. Anything's a better option than big pharma. There's a much better option. Some things are just out of people's hands and cholesterol is often one of them. Everyone gets blamed for getting bad cholesterol because they eat [music] crappy food. But the truth is a lot of it's just genetic. it runs in your family and there's not a lot you can do. So pharma decides the only option is take some pill and they can help but a lot of them have unintended consequences to put it mildly and if you don't quite trust that plan no one can blame you for it. That's why you should think about dose very different. Dose for cholesterol is a clinically backed cholesterol support supplement. Targets triglycerides, HDL, LDL, total cholesterol. A lot of people use it and the results have been remarkable for them. And it's easy to take. It's a daily 2 oz shot that tastes like mango. So that means no pills, no powders, no injections, and it works. And it's filled with natural ingredients like turmeric, not a bunch of weird chemicals that you can't pronounce and may again have unintended consequences. Visit dosedaily.co/tucker and use the code Tucker for 35% off. If you want to try it, we recommend it. dodaily.co/tucker /tucker code tucker 35% off. So I guess as you assess this, you see that this isn't the first time this dynamic has been in play in this country. In fact, it's been in play every single time anyone in the professional commentariat dares to question the military alliance between the United States and this foreign country and the wars that the United States is fighting on its behalf. that is somehow an attack on an entire religion or on an entire people. That of course is slander. It's untrue. It will inevitably get people killed when you say that, but they say it anyway because it's effective. So, they hated Ron Paul. And a big part of the reason is because he opposed their wars. But there's another reason. It wasn't just on foreign policy that Ron Paul made people mad. What really enraged the entire Washington DC commentary class about Ron Paul is that he was right. Not that he was lying, not that he was hateful, not that he was a secret racist or Nazi. All untrue, but they wouldn't care if those things were true. What really made them mad is that Ron Paul precisely, crisply, and honestly diagnosed the problem and predicted the result years in advance. Ron Paul in political terms is what we call a prophet. And if there's one thing we know about prophets is that they usually get stoned to death by angry crowds. In fact, almost always. People hate being told the truth about future events, particularly when they're implicated in the causes of those disasters. They just hate it. Nobody wants to hear about how they're on the wrong path. And so people who call it early are 100% of the time hated for it. They're not rewarded. They're not given some prize. There's no Nobel Prize for predicting the future. There's only a jail sentence or slander from Ben Shapiro and Jeffrey Ebstein's friends, the New Republic and the rest of the liars. And Ron Paul of all observers of American society may have gotten it more precisely right than anyone. And if you don't believe it, here's a selection of Ron Paul predictions from 2002. Keep in mind that was almost 25 years ago. and Ron Paul saw it clearly. Watch. >> Mr. Speaker, our government intervention in the economy, the private affairs of citizens, and the internal affairs of foreign countries leads to uncertainty and many unintended consequences. Here are some of the consequences about which we should be concerned. I predict US taxpayers will pay to rebuild Palestine, both the West Bank and the Gaza, as well as Afghan Afghanistan. US taxpayers paid to bomb these areas, so we will be expected to rebuild them. Peace of sorts will come to the Middle East, but will be short-lived. There will be big promises of more US money and weapons flowing to Israel and to Arab countries allied with the United States. Federal Reserve policy will continue at an expanding rate with massive credit expansion which will make the dollar crisis worse. Gold will be seen as an alternative to paper money as it returns to its historic role as money. Military and police powers will grow satisfying the conservatives. The welfare state, both domestic and international, will expand, satisfying the liberals. Both sides will endorse military adventurism overseas. During the next decade, the American people will become poorer and less free while they become more dependent on the government for economic security. The war will be will prove to be divisive with emotions and hatred growing between the various factions and special interests that drive our policies in the Middle East. agitation from more class warfare will will succeed in dividing us domestically. And believe it or not, I expect lobbyists will thrive more than ever during the dangerous period of chaos. I have no timetable for these predictions, but just in case, keep them around and look at them in 5 to 10 years. Let's hope and pray that I'm wrong on all accounts. H >> it makes the hair on your arms go up. Imagine having a vision of the future that precise. Would you be able to sleep? Somehow Ron Paul has been able to. He's 90 years old. You'll see in a second. Looks like he's had a good night's sleep in the last 24 hours. But those predictions are so precise that it's spooky. He predicts massive credit expansion before the global financial crisis. This is 6 years before 2008. He predicts the inevitable expansion in both military adventurism and domestic police powers. He predicts that both sides will support this. He predicts that the dollar will become weaker and the gold will rise in compensation. He predicts every major trend of the last 25 years precisely. And so you have to ask how did he do that? He's not into witchcraft. He's a conventional Protestant Christian. He doesn't have a gypsy telling him the future. No, instead he relies on principles that he believes in and a very simple moral framework. Ron Paul is often described as a libertarian, but that both over and understates the case. In fact, Ron Paul is fundamentally a moral voice. Ron Paul opposes lying, stealing, cheating, and murder. It's that simple. This isn't complex Joseph Fletcher situational ethics. It's no lying, stealing, cheating, and murder are wrong. They're always wrong. They're wrong when you do them. They're wrong when the US government does them. They're wrong when a client state in the Middle East does them. They're always wrong. Period. That is Ron Paul's framework for the world. That's his actual ideology. And it turns out if you stick to that, you can see the future pretty precisely. So, the new year is here, but that does not mean you've got to overhaul your whole life. Despite claims to the contrary, you don't have to take drastic measures. Make a few changes here and there, and you'll be a lot better off. And you can start with the snacks in your pantry. Now, products from standard American chip brands are, let's be honest, pretty repulsive, filled with chemicals. They make you feel heavy and bloated. They don't even taste that good. They're not good for you. We recommend an upgrade with Masa chips. Masa is the easiest way to eat clean without feeling like you're on a diet. The chips contain three ingredients. That's it. Organic corn, sea salt, 100% grass-fed beef tallow, and that is it. No seed oils, no mystery chemicals, just food, actual food. And they're amazing. and you feel great after. You don't feel weighed down. We particularly enjoyed the coanero flavor lately, but they're all great. You want to give them a try, visit masachips.com, masach.com/tucker. Use the code Tucker for 25% off your first order, or you can click the link link in the video description, or you can scan the QR code to claim this outstanding offer. So with that, we want to show you a hourong interview we did today with Ron Paul, who as we said is 90 years old and he's in amazing shape. More evidence that clean living and clear thinking pay off over time. But we also thought it would just be worth pausing and saying congratulations Ron Paul and shame on the rest of us. Him for his genius and us for not recognizing it at the time. And I'm definitely in that category. But the key to getting better is repenting. We're going to repent of our skepticism of Ron Paul's predictions. They have been proven true. And now the man who predicted them, Ron Paul. Congressman Ron Paul, thank you very much for doing this. I >> It's great to be with you. >> Oh gosh, it's it's an honor to have you. Um, I remember traveling with you on a campaign that you did in the fall of 2007 and you gave speeches about the Federal Reserve and I remember thinking, I I know nothing about the Federal Reserve. I don't see how this is a big issue. I was completely wrong. Um, how were you able to tell almost 20 years ago that monetary policy would determine the future of the country? Well, it's because I got fascinated with this issue a long time ago and I studied Austrian economics and uh they emphasize these various things. They teach you to think about uh the ramifications of policy and they also warn us who are involved not to try to protect the day things are going to happen. Uh but trends are very important and if you for instance if you print too much money the value of the money goes down and history shows the history is very important because countries have have have practiced these issues and trying to get a free lunch and you know they've been doing it even before Roman days you know of the abuse of the monetary system. So monetary policy became fascinating with me and it was especially emphasized you know on August 15 1971 because the predictions of Austrian economics uh during the 60s when I was reading about economics and especially economics mises and hayak and others uh they they said this would happen and that was when we that was our first declaration of of of bankruptcy. We said, "Yeah, we printed money. We passed it out. We said it's as good as gold, $35 an ounce." It was all a fib. They knew they they they had to know what a little bit about history, but they always think this time is going to be different. We're smarter than they are. We have computers and they they talking to themselves and they convince themselves that they can get by and uh and and and keep the keep from the trouble that printing money and right uh and subsidizing big government always fails. >> So can for those who haven't followed this and may not know what you're referring to August of 1971 the Nixon administration what happened that day that was the declaration of bankruptcy. Well, I can remember it precisely because I had been very much involved but not anticipating what I heard. One Sunday night, I was sitting in front of the television watching watching the news come in and oh, a special a special news clip and uh uh they put up President Nixon and all of a sudden, boy did my eyes open. boy, the the longer that short speech went, the more my eyes open. And I said, "This is a big deal. It's going to have an effect. It might be one of the biggest things that ever happened in monetary history." And it was a just a major date uh for what our country is against. And and it was so clear-cut to me that bad stuff is going to happen from this. And we're approaching that time when bad stuff will really be happening to us because you just can't print money and lie to the people forever. It's all based on a lie. And it's fraud. It's a it's a it's counterfeit money. And people without computers uh know better. People with computers are probably distracted because they think the computer is going to solve their problem. It doesn't. It gives them reassurance and it doesn't work. So that was the day that Nixon disconnected the dollar from gold. You could no longer redeem your dollars >> for for gold. Um I have to ask you, the United States claims to have the US government claims to have the world's largest gold reserves. Some of them are held in Fort Knox. They haven't actually been audited in a real way in almost a hundred years, despite the the lot of lying about it. Why haven't America's gold reserves been audited? you know, bar forbar. And what do you think that tells us? >> Well, it's sort of a characteristic of what we're dealing with today in the current events uh that uh you can't tell the truth because uh you know, truth is treasonous, you know, to empires. >> Yeah. >> And and that they they can't tell the truth, but they also have to have the people behind it. Somebody has to get something from it. and the deep state uh the military-industrial complex and you know the uh drug companies all they get something from it but it finances bad things and they and and therefore they're talked into it so the people support it and then other people say we know better and we'll be cautious and we know how to run a mon monetary system you know better than ever but they don't it it looks like you know a free lunch but it isn't it's based on they should if they But it dealt with it in a serious way in a moral sense that printing money and telling the people that it's backed by gold and it's it's steady and we could have the currency, the reserve currency of the world and we're going to get rich over. Well, that was half true because it wasn't true, but it worked for a little while and it still works to a degree. But I think the handwriting is on the wall. This is not going to continue. And I think that's why we've seen an explosion of our problems. And uh the one thing that I look at or two things because they're one and the same. It's the debt going up and what the price of gold is because the price of gold although it can be rigged and delayed and but ultimately the price of gold is telling you there's pro problems out there. So there's something big going on but it's just sort of a catchup of all the things that we've been doing. you know, pretending that we can police the world, threaten everybody, drop bombs on people, defy the Constitution, and then punish the people who want to tell us that, the few we have in Washington. They want to reveal the truth, but uh but they don't want but they they they suffer the problem because they get blamed for treason. They're defying what we said. And uh you know I I was there for a little bit and and they would charge you. They I felt though they didn't bother me too much. They sort of left me alone. But they would say, "Oh, you don't help the president. You don't do this." I said, "Yes, but uh why don't you measure things by whether or not we're following the oath of office?" And that that made them mad. They didn't that didn't that. So, I think uh what they're putting up with now, the few we have uh is they [laughter] they're putting up with something much worse because the danger is much worse and people are gathering around to pick up the pieces. Who's going to run things? So now we see people talking about well we elect fascists and we we elect communists and all and that's out of fear because people were sensing the people are always a little bit smarter and ahead of what the members of Congress uh are doing. But most people think that this congressman are smart and they know what to do. No, the the people the people are ahead of the uh the people are ahead of the government and the Congress. And believe me, if you just listen to them, you know, they they tell you they tell you things that you never hear when you hear people who are in office. And when times get tough, the sad part is some of the people who know a little bit better and might want to associate with, you know, this radical idea that you take your oath of office seriously. Uh they they know better. But uh ultimately though, I I'm always encouraged. I'm not discouraged because I always think truth wins out in the end. Truth truth works. And I figure, well, if they don't listen to me now, maybe somebody will scratch something down. Maybe somebody will read it because I think that the majority of the people want to hear it. >> You know, they they do want to hear it and I think that's why when I would say some of that radical, he can't go. He's going to be out of office in no time. And and you know, they and they put us down. But uh I think basically uh the nature of mankind is they they have this they have this challenge between good and evil. And I think that uh you know you know the good part of a free society is a rocky road to go. But I think ultimately people will come down and right now we're in we're in the interim of it. We're trying to sort it out and there's a lot of people really mixed up and it's going to that that uh difficulty is going to get much worse because uh the system that we've lived on and off, you know, uh special interest running things. That's coming to an end. I'm convinced of that. >> You can feel these people here. >> They just came out of the dunes. There's got to be around a hundred of them. And now a boat's going to try to come around and pick them up. >> In a single generation, Europe has changed forever. This is the result of decades of mass migration, more than it has in the last 2,000 years. >> Whoa, easy, easy, easy. Whoa, whoa, whoa. >> We followed one of the deadliest trade routes on Earth. From Africa to the Canary Islands to Spain, France, ending in the UK. In many cities, natives are now the minority. This was not an accident. Didn't happen organically. You're not imagining it. The governments of Western Europe and the United States and Canada, New Zealand, and Australia did this on purpose to their own people. They opened their border and [music] they paid for the rest of the world, the third world, to move into their countries. >> This is what happens when you let a bunch of foreigners completely overtake their country. >> Along the way, we uncovered the entire [music] system of criminal networks, NOS's, and criminal governments coordinating together to destroy the West. Watch Replacing Europe only on tucker carlson.com. Well, I think you're right. And part of the problem is it doesn't work anymore. Part of the problem is everyone knows what's going on thanks to the internet. It's hard to lie to people in the way that government used to. What happens then? So if our monetary system, our political system, the social fabric, all of them come undone at once. Where does that leave us? What what happens next? >> All depends on what the people who think and are the thought leaders who have written about it and describe the society. you want the people who promote liberty and uh you you know that that the people will recognize that we see a couple people really getting the grief in Washington that are in office and they're saying the right thing uh and you have to be able to pick that out and find out what they're talking about. So it is it is education against the politicians and uh I think that uh I think basically that uh people if they have the information they will do the right thing or lean in that direction but uh I also think you have to pay the bills and to pay the bills now is what our national debt recognizes you know they say it's uh you know uh a few trillion dollars here and there is going to be $40 trillion but it's it's much bigger than that everything is based on the falsehood of the paper currency and the printing of money. And now now people are waking up to this. People are starting to realize that just having a lot of money. They haven't seen the the direct correction yet because they're still saying, "Oh yeah, my prices are going up. I need more money from the government." You know, the connect the lack of taxes. And I think what I see my responsibility as an individual is that if if I think that that I'm on the right track, I should try to share that with other people. And uh I think it's very receptive the little bit of opportunity I had with running for the president. I was so impressed with the willingness of people to listen and uh and there was a there great support. It's the thought leaders of the country what we have on our you know our universities are you know a strong detriment you know to what we have the foreign policy and the power in Washington you know a lot of good people when the conditions get tougher or you have a charlatan that can bamboozle people they drift over so right now Washington is not helping us out but there's a lot of other people that are that I I I I'm I'm happen to be an optimist because I think the information is getting out. We have good talk show hosts out there and things listen and uh I think people want to do the right thing. But it is a big job and I think it's uh the most important thing is not to have more guns and more more government. you need more education on understanding what freedom is all about and what why we've had greatness in this country and the information is available there. That's when I get excited when I realize that uh so many good things do happen [clears throat] but uh we're still have the majority of the people who got hold of the government power they have gotten us into this mess. So it's up to the people to wake up and make sure our ideas get out there. You made reference a couple of times to good people in Washington. You said there are a couple of truth tellers in Washington who are under attack. Who are you referring to? Who are those people? >> Well, the list is so short. I [laughter] don't >> Yes, it is. >> I don't I don't like to pick out then because somebody else might be 95% of what I like. Some might be 80%. So, uh No, there there's only there's only a couple. Most people most people know that uh you know I'm very prejudice and I very biased because I think my son's doing a pretty good job. Yes. And uh I think he knows what's going on and I I think there are others that are doing a but I think I don't think the answer is in Washington. I think the answer is recognizing why we have to get away from Washington and we have to get people to understand. So the educational system is good, but our educational system goes goes in the wrong direction. They're they have for 100 years have gone completely away from the original intent of the constitution. So I see as an educational system. I never dreamed I'd ever go to Congress. I never dreamed I'd stay very long. I never dreamed that anybody would pay any attention. But people were starving. They're starving for somebody to talk straight with them. And that I think is I think that's there's some very good things going on but we have to recognize the truth of what's happening and I think it's ideological and and I I really deep down uh I see a lot of good things happening but most important is that we recognize you know the good and the bad. And uh I I think that uh I sometimes I wonder how we did get some attention in the presidential races because young people I was so I got excited about young people would you know they they were so positive and excited and I I would ask a young person I said I just lectured to you for an hour. I said uh and uh uh I for 40 45 minutes all I did was tell you WHAT A MESS WE HAVE and you're here talking how wonderful it is. But I always wanted to finish with what the answer is. But uh you got to see the problem if you want to convince people to do something else. But when the educational system is all biased against liberty, against these principles of individual responsibility, it it's pretty tough. But in that area, I get I get optimistic with recognition of how dangerous it is because we still Republican or Democrat, the foreign policy is really very very dangerous. There's too many big weapons and I I think we need a better understanding. But most people do. Most people don't say you you know uh I'd like to go to war. I want to I want to carry a gun and shoot people. Most people worry about why are we doing this? And they're asking question, but they've been able to win the psychological war because if you object to it, you're unAmerican, you know. uh but I I think it's education is the most important thing that we do and understanding and some some moral basics that uh people should understand like uh if you if you and I can't go and steal uh why don't we let the government steal all the time take stuff from them it's not rightfully theirs and they and then they want to have all the power so uh the the the problems are complex and that's what delighted me when I would talk to young people they seem to understand it. It seems like yeah the uh the young people you know would respond even against all the propaganda of the college universities and all the media practically and the movies and everything else if you talked to him straightforward uh you know I would ask a student who was excited about what I was saying I said you know but so and so just said that too you know when we had our debates I said he he said the same thing he says yeah but he wasn't telling the truth. you know, people can recognize it. So, I I come down as being an optimist with a lot of caution about what we have to go through to restore the principles that most people would endorse if you just offered to in principles. There's too much political power and money involved. But uh I I think that uh I think the number of people that I meet are very decent people and uh and yet we have nothing. Just think in my lifetime how many wars we've had, you know, and they're so unnecessary. So look looking at some of the basic principles of what a liberty society would do. Uh it's not that difficult and that's really what is in my heart and what I want to promote. Well, I have to ask you about wars. So, you were born in 1935. You were 10 when the Second World War ended. So, you've seen all the wars, Second World War, Korea, Vietnam, everything since war on terror. Have any of those wars made life better for Americans, do you think? Probably not. I can't argue the case. And uh it's it's this it's control of patriotism that if you don't do this, you're not a patriotic person. And and people people do that and and they're so easily convinced that I have to sacrifice something. You have to defend what you believe in, but you don't have to sacrifice any of your freedoms to get it. And they say, "Well, we have to do this to get along." People in Congress say, "Yeah, you're right, Rod, on this issue, but we can't get there." So this only give them half of this pie right now. So they see themselves as being being able to work it out with the problems we have. But uh I I don't I think that's wrong. And I think uh especially young people. Well, I like to I talked to a lot of young people and even people that are a little bit older who have a younish type of an attitude, open-mindedness to what the country should be all about and what liberty is all about. So, I think it's so fantastic. But I also recognize that the world is imperfect and uh we're not going to see a perfect society. You just have to sort of help guide it in certain directions. And the freer we are, I think, uh, the better. The more tyranny we have, the worse off we are. But it takes, uh, it takes a moral understanding of what our relationship should be with the government. And that's where it gets touchy because people want to use it of the few want to own control, the deep state, whoever they are. They they have they're the ones who, you know, controls the politic and the all the legislation and the spending. But that's coming to an end. We're broke and everybody's starting to know even though we knew it was broke. And that was my discovery in that uh in in 1970 uh well uh when Brentton Woods broke down, you know, and 197 and when Nixon gave that speech, uh I I I kne I knew that but took a long time. We were so wealthy. We were spoiled. And we could defy the principles of liberty and and decency because we were so rich and still are rich. We're still consuming, but we're not producing. I mean, we we're we're we have a moral crisis. But that's where I'm optimistic because I think that number is growing and I think there are a lot of young people looking at it differently. Uh I think our technology is helpful. I think people who have interesting talk shows and get good views of and share some of these views makes it different and I I think there's some very good things going on and I also accept the idea that perfection is not achievable but it is definitely available to us to go in a certain direction and we've been as a country going in the wrong direction for a long time. Well, there's this very strange phenomenon we're watching right now where as the country becomes poorer. We're we're bankrupt, you said. I think everyone agree with that. We spend even more on foreign wars. We spend more now than we did 10 years ago and we're poor. Why? Why do you think that's happening? Well, I think our effectiveness uh isn't uh being pursued through intellectual means and philosophy because you know our universities are crowded by by this false illusion that it's the government's responsibility to do everything and uh that [clears throat] and and people don't uh I think they basically accept it but they have trouble you know challenging the university system. When I was in college, I was I was asking a lot of questions. Then it finally dawned on me I wasn't getting very many good answers. So, uh but I think that I also have a a very favorable thought that everybody is born with a chance to come to a a right decision about nonviolence. You know, you know, no lie, cheating, stealing, and killing. >> Yes, >> that's pretty simple. And you don't need this many laws. You you just shouldn't beat people like that. And most people say, "Well, that sounds easy." Yeah, but the trouble is most of the individuals do. Oh, yeah. I don't lie, cheat, steal, or kill. But the government does. You have to apply those rules to the government and then we we get ahead. And uh that and [clears throat] some there are some there. But boy, I'll tell you what, just look at the people that hold the line for no lie, cheating, and stealing and take it to the government and and tell the government. They can't do it either. They get into big trouble. They might be the most libertarian, freeloving people in the world, and they will get the the rest of them. Oh, but they're challenging our system. And you don't want to ruin our system because we have to help people get along and solve our problem that we created. You know, it's it's such a force. But the the s the the good news is the system is coming to an end. The good news also is that there's an alternative. There's a good news that more and more people are looking at at the freedom alternative. But the bad ide going to be a lot of havoc that goes through uh the country finding those people. But I I I was so encouraged with um uh the with what went on in the presidential campaign because uh you know the young people came out and I I I you know for the two times I did that was good several years I would walk out there to the stadium and see [laughter] where do they come from? What are they doing here? They said well they came here to hear what you have to say. I said, "But I don't have a speech, [laughter] so I can talk about liberty." No, but there there's something going on. So, talking to young people, I excites me and uh I hope it keeps me young, too. See, I I want to benefit from it all. >> Well, it it has so far. [laughter] So when you were in Congress and you served in Congress for quite a while as I remember um you were attacked for not being supportive enough of Israel. Do you think that was fair? Why why were you your views on Israel different from some of your colleagues? >> Well because I think that u I do support Israel but I don't support their policies. you know uh is Israel is not uh uh what the uh uh neocons tell us or or or what what is happening now because uh I think I think Israel let's say the west the United States are flat out broke and they're all fighting a war I think Israel is going to be in a worse shape >> so but I I think I think they're uh pampered in a way that all we have to say you know when uh goldier came here She didn't come to the government. She came here to, you know, get personal help. But it turned into this boondoggle of uh of getting stuff for free. I think I think Netanyahu's been to the country with his hands out in the last year four or five times. >> Seven seven times. >> Seven times. Boy, I I got to catch up. I can't keep up with them. And they're always with their hands out. and and and I think that's where uh we're we're under a lot of pressure to how to handle it because I'm I'm I'm cautious because I'm not looking I'm not looking for a fist fight. I'm looking for an intellectual fight, you know, argument. So I the people that get disturbed by this uh you know I I I don't need this and uh but I I think when people hear it and have a chance, I think they choose liberty, you know. I I really do people don't they I think it the the one basic practical enemy was the fact that our universities taught us you know junk economics you know like I said a minute ago you you know the the government the government gets involved and they do it and they they they they claim that deficits don't matter and and and yet I think they really matter. matter and I think common sense is lacking on that but I think uh I think it's uh that Israel's following a dangerous path uh you know in a way because what are they going to do if we're totally bankrupt tomorrow and uh what what's going to happen and uh what if they became more freedom loving what if they did my suggestion for some of our foreign policy problems we're in 126 countries and spending billions of dollars or And I and I have a solution. I says we just marched in just march out. You know [laughter] what would happen then if we just got out of that? I mean it it would reduce the number of problems. People don't have enough confidence in liberty. They've been do indoctrinated and that's why uh you know in spite of the shortcomings of the internet we get to see your show on the internet. Every there are so many advantages you know the internet. So, a message I never dreamed would get more than 15 people out of a college campus all of a sudden. And the message uh is had been spread. People want to hear it. So, and and I think those numbers are growing. I I I really do. And I think that uh I think there's a lot of positive things happening, but uh it's still I think it's an intellectual fight. I think it's educational. Uh I think the fact that uh that uh we have uh so many special interests and so much indoctrination and we have the schools against us the whole works. But now there's homeschooling and uh there's more homeschooling than ever before. When it was started they try to close it down because some some of the the goofy people knew what was coming. So there's a lot of good stuff coming out with homeschooling and we're very positive on that. So uh but I still think it's an education ultimately it's an educational fight to get people to understand because whether how do you go into somebody that they have a family he the the father's not working and they have six kids and they're getting everything coming from the government. I mean you you have to really you know be persuasive but I believe so strongly in it that you can't persuade people because this one we have is failing and they have to see the connection of the failure in this system uh related to bad ideas and uh like maybe government deficits aren't a good idea. That should be too hard. Printing money maybe that's a bad idea too. Maybe telling people how to lead and live their lives is a bad idea. Maybe they can take care of themselves. Maybe more there's more criminality when you have an overly oppressive government that on and on. There's so many advantages to living in a free society that uh you you know I I sort of didn't think I was going into politics. Didn't necessarily want into it. was in for a couple months and they threw me out and then I did it again and and after eight years I said this isn't this isn't for me so I got out and went back to medicine but there then after that I was back in back in the office back in office again I think over 20 years you know but it was always always trying to talk to people about ideas and uh I think it's exciting and I think that the big thing is is uh uh people should enjoy what they're doing and uh every and and I I hate the violence that comes out of what we had. You even pointed it out to a degree about in in my lifetime. All the wars have been going on. I was born in 1935 and uh believe it or not, I was I was a a good student when I was very young. I remember things that were going on in the depression and World War II and Korea and Vietnam and on and on. And uh it it makes no sense whatsoever. And uh it defies logic and good common sense. It defies morality. And you talk to young people in that tone. Most of them say that's that's it. But of course there's always that few. the people who run the show, the people who run our government and designs our go design our government so that uh that that the all the legislation is is in in control. There's not too many that stand up for liberty, but there's a lot of people who that do and they welcome it. I felt like people people like to hear it because even though I might spend when I had bigger crowds at times I talked to a lot of young people. Uh I could spend 45 minutes, you know, talking about how bad things were, how stupid it was and how dumb the audit system was, how ridiculous the foreign policy was. And about after there were 10 minutes left or so, uh, I would switch. I would, uh, say, "But we don't have to have this." Then I had my 10-minute pitch for liberty and whether it's monetary policy or foreign policy, social policy, or living well and all this. And that I was so impressed and so pleased that afterwards uh, some young people would come up. It happened several times. So I think that's important. They would they would come up and and I'd say, you know what I liked about your speech is you were really positive. >> Yes. >> Here I'm 45 minutes, but I had to set the stage. There's trouble out there, but you can do something about it. So uh and that's [clears throat] that's what excites me when uh with when things happen in a positive way. We have but we have to talk to young people and if they're old like a few people I know you talk to them as if they're young and uh I I think that's it. It's a young idea. I mean liberty is still was a young idea and uh and I think that I find out and the other thing people should realize is they should have fun doing it. You know, I I I I think it's a lot a lot of the fun if you identify would when we have conferences and we you know, small things like that. Not not not like a Tucker's conference. We'll have a couple people there and we talk about we talk about you know policies and things and uh it it uh it was wonderful and they were always so positive and and I come away they were making me positive and understanding. So when I found out that telling the truth, even when it was dire, they they reacted in a positive way. And you know, I I still am impressed that if I did that for 45 or 50 minutes and told them what a mess this is, and then give them 10 minutes of what it could be like. The 10 minutes was always uplifting. And I I couldn't believe that. Well, I was surprised. That's the way I felt and believed. But I was always shocked that people came up as boy you are the most positive person I've ever heard talk because there is an answer to and it to me is the principles of liberty and decency. I think they answer most of our problems. >> You practiced as a as an obstatrician for >> right for your career. How many babies do you think you delivered? >> 4,000. [laughter] You know the answer. I and don't hold me to the number. Maybe it was 3,800 or 4,200. I tried. Somebody asked me that and I did it in my head because I started off I delivered a few babies when I was an intern, a resident in the military, my medical practice. When I had my medical practice uh open up in Lake Jackson, Texas, I was the only OB doctor around and it was a whole county. So, I was pretty busy. So, no, I deliver delivered a lot of babies and and uh it's it's uh to to me was a wonderful thing. I I psychologically wasn't as good at um you know, chronic illness as I love the joy of delivering a new life. >> Wonderful. And some of those babies have got to be approaching retirement. Do you ever meet them [laughter] all the time? And I I said, "No, you they'll stop me on the street and he'll look like somebody he's 40 or 45 years old and he'll [laughter] tell me that he was I delivered him." I SAID, "NO WAY." [laughter] SO, NO. >> OH, that's wonderful. How >> it was a joyful joyful uh occupation. >> How old were you when you started buying gold? I I was interested in the monetary issue when I was uh probably 10 years old and then later on I found s I found out why I didn't have any gold coins. Uh I I' I've been interested uh not exactly there wasn't a date that I was always interested in the monetary issue but when I got really excited about it was uh when uh when [clears throat] Brettton Woods broke down you know the Brettton Woods system and uh and that issue and I it was just I it was just fascinating with me because the monetary issue was there and I would look at all the literature I got and it turned out that what I was reading was Austrian economics, free market economics and monetary policy and to me it's so exciting. It's because the other econom the other e economic systems are pretty sterile and they're pretty boring. where Austrian economics takes into the factor of human action. Of course, that's Mises's book, human action. Why do they do this? Why why do people love liberty? Why do they do this? Why do they So, I I thought uh that was early on, but probably I was growing gradually when I was in college because I always had two books. When I was free, I'd read Austrian economics and uh it still fascinates me. So I think ideas are crucial and uh at the CA camp the first campaign I ran in was purely out of just the curiosity. It was in 1974 and you know the Republicans weren't doing very well in 1974. So so I did it because nobody else would run [laughter] and there were only there were only three Republicans in the Congress at the time. So but uh something happened. I tried to quit twice but I kept going back going back because there were it almost was it was almost like an invisible calling and but I had certain rules. I wasn't going to get involved in those fights and uh I I I was I was I wanted to to to share my understanding of how the system should work and uh actually uh it was something I grew to understand and like because uh uh because other people liked it you know it's you know I'd ask people WHY ARE YOU HERE YOU KNOW WHY ARE YOU ASKING me this but but people are interested in ideas and I think they And see like I think I already told the story that uh you you uh you you talk to people and uh you you you you present it to it and they they'll say, "Oh yeah, that's right. You said that. This is true." And they they're they're looking for truth. Even though you say strong things, look, it's your fault. But this is the answer. And then they come across, well, it's a very positive philosophy. So I don't know. Yeah. To me I enjoyed it because young people seem to wake up you know. Yes. And uh young people but even the age I talk about young people but I really people have a young attitude. The young people are willing to think long. So sometimes you get the most youngest ideas from somebody that's been thinking this way and they they might be they might be real old like over 70 or something you know and they would they would be very positive and uh so so I I I ended up uh loving to do that and I love medicine and uh I I love the idea that I had so many opportunities because uh ba basically it's uh it's something that I think is very very positive imperfectly. It's not perfect obviously. And then when I found out that we will never reach that, it's a matter of going which direction. Man is not perfect. But I think people who believe in liberty and believe in these basic principles of nonviolence, they can contribute a whole lot. And uh it's very open-ended. You know, it's open to anybody who wants to think about that complicated philosophy I just described. people shouldn't want to commit violence and if it fits into foreign policy and it fits into our own government. So as the years went on I saw our own government being the the government being violent because I don't think we should have about 80 90% of what we have. We should have a lot less government and uh but the amount of government that's the force that we need but they they always fail. They're failing now. The opportunity is there. people will listen to common sense and uh I think I think when it's based with a moral principle uh people understand it but they're hungry for the message and uh I I think it's delightful when people say they'll come in now I just love it when somebody will come up and say you did this you convinced me of this and this is what I've been doing so there's an invisible group there's a you know there's an you never know who you talk to yes there there's an invisible number of people out there that has uh had has been influenced and I figure that I got the benefit because I was influenced by the people who would uh be interested in talking about the issues and I love doing that. >> Is it strange to be vindicated on gold for example? I remember people made fun of you. I'll confess with shame that I made fun of you as a gold bug because you would never stop talking about gold. And now it's so obvious that you were right. You were always right. And I doubt many people have apologized to you. But how does it feel to be you and to see the world come around to your conclusion? >> Well, I'd qualify your statement. I wish I could say I'm always right. [laughter] No, hopefully I'm always going in the right direction anyway. Yeah. >> So, it's uh No, I I I love dealing with the issue of the ideas because they're more important than what you hear from the politicians. See, I saw I was I was mixed in with a group of people that probably almost opposite of libertarianism, >> but there were people in our history that were very libertarian. Our founders had a libertarian streak in them. But, uh nobody of course will be perfect. But uh if people are moving in the right direction uh I've I've I've really love talking to young people who get excited about this because now I see people coming back and I'll I'll meet them and they look like they might be 22 or 25. I said when did you get started? He said when I was 14 I read something you said. Yeah. So lot young people young people were found interest. One time I had a a mother and a son to come to my office, the congressional office after after we I had a campaign and uh and he he was the one. Oh, I thought uh she would be talking to him. No, it's he wants to talk to you. He's the one that converted me. So the son that was 14 was excited by something I said. I thought, well, this is magic. This is something wonderful. And I think is and it's probably a a something that is powerful, but what about if a person's doing that and saying bad things? What you need to do is get out a gun and shoot that guy if he did that to you. There's some of that, too. So, you have competition out there. But I I came across a lot of people and and the young people, you know, they they tend to be more open-minded and they're willing to open their minds. And that's what I think is exciting. My my last question, Congressman, is about your life and what you've learned. You've lived such a long time and you've lived so successfully. You've made a difference. You've done things you loved. You've got a close family. I mean, you've won. What advice would you give young people about how to live their lives? >> I think I think one, you have to be curious and looking for the truth. >> Yes. And then you have to look for people that you can trust and you could find it because there's always literature and uh you're looking for the truth. And I was always ex excited about it. I remember one of the books I started when I got involved in economics was human action. And that's not a little book, you know. So, I I don't think it's the same for everybody, but uh I think young young people I think we have a a natural curiosity, but the other the enemy knows that, too. And that's why they're in there. That's why they're in our public educational system. They want to influence, too. But in spite of all the power and money they spend on trying to put us out of it completely, I think our numbers are growing. You know, the people who really want to know the truth and that excites me when that happens. And uh and I I believe that uh it'll be a better world, but what you have to take on is no war. And they said, "Well, what are the what are they going to do? I have to go over there and save people. That's why we have a what what do you think we have a our troops in 126 countries for? Yeah. For finding truth and peace. So when when they when they when they see this uh they they get excited about it. But uh the [clears throat] it's it once if you get their attention, it's really impressive to me how they might you sort of turn a switch on, you know, uh you that that that to me mine mine was more mine wasn't a switch. Mine mine was gradual, but I always became fascinated with with reading about history and economic policy. I loved it when I discovered what we describe as uh you know Austrian economics which is the uh free market advice about sound money and freedom of choice and governments that are about 10% of what we have now and uh and but that that is it it is an economic problem and a political problem but it really uh it's really a mor a moral problem it has to be defined and in in moral terms that uh they should have a right to tell you what to do but there's a rule you can't hurt anybody but there there's a morality that you don't hurt anybody else and and then you do what you want. >> Yes. And uh the the rule is simple and uh frequently there will be a problem like right now there are things in the in the market in the political scene and of why why aren't you supporting him when you used to do that and this sort of thing but I think that I think that uh I've always had a rule that uh I offer it they may take it may not want more they'll ask for it. One of the people uh that influenced me a lot about tone. What is your tone is that is Leonard Reid. And Leonard Reid set up a foundation after World War II called the Foundation for Economic Education. I met him, became friends with him. And he said, "It's not a political problem. It's not a political problem. It's an educational problem." And I bought into all that. But when I ran for office, he was for me. [laughter] you know, he was he was just sick and tired of those those those people in government that was doing nothing more than expanding control over over their life. So I I think that uh I I sort of mix a little bit mixed on the internet because a lot of trash is out there, a lot of evil out there. Yes. But just just uh just think you and I might not be talking if we didn't have an internet. >> We wouldn't be. [clears throat] So, so I think I think it's wonderful that that we have it and but I get a lot of questions about uh how how you support a candidate, but no, I think uh I think we all know it because uh I I believe strongly in uh uh in the system of nihilism and uh people people wanting to, you know, write bad laws and do bad things to us at at the same people have an instinct for what liberty is all about people who tell the truth and it's a contest between bad and good and evil and uh it's ultimately a personal choice but you could be influenced by other people too and uh that's part is the part that I really enjoy is talking to people when I think I'm talking to two people or three people or 10 people and I love to go to the universities when I'd get 15 out where' the crowd come from. And now now I now I think it's it's just wonderful that that people that I still can do this but there's a lot of encroachment on this and I'm sure you're aware of it and the control of the first amendment now is not an automatic. I'll tell you what, you can get into trouble uh with the authoritarians who are still in the organization. They may be out there and our numbers may be growing but they still have guns against us. They have the governments and that's that's where the danger is. And uh but uh for fortunately though uh I I think it's an idea ideological uh argument that we have to convince people it's better to live in a free society than in an authoritarian society. Of course that's true. And you you could describe what a free society Yeah. That's exactly what I believe in. Yes. I said, "But you can't you cannot uh give any authority to do what you might want to do to the government." Most people have succumbed and they give it to the government. They live they live what they see as a moral life and they give all the responsibility. But I think when people, you know, are badgered and run by an immoral government, uh, that you ought to do something about it. I thought our government was uh running an immoral monetary system, a crooked I mean A A REAL BAD SYSTEM ALL DESIGNED for war monger and all. But I didn't take a gun, but [clears throat] I did take it on as a as an obstacle for me and people needed to know about, you know, lying about money. And uh and the reception was bigger than I ever thought. Uh you you even said something that your minds have been changed. I'm sure I didn't change your mind. Somebody else did that. That that you saw a difference with Austrian economics later on and monetary policy and all this. So I get excited when uh people say that uh that that [clears throat] they they they've changed their minds because uh they should because liberty should be exciting and uh [clears throat] it's dangerous be in the transition, but it's the lack of liberty that causes all our wars is my my opinion. Do do you have hope that as you said there are some people on both sides calling for fascism, calling for communism. People feel insecure. Our old systems are going away. You said that clearly and everybody feels that. And so they're calling for a central power to calm things down. That's the trend that I see. Do you have hope that we will retain our basic liberties in the midst of this change? >> Well, you you've described the contest perfectly. And uh, of course I don't know the answer, but I know that if we do nothing, I know the answer. It'll get worse. And then the the Hitlers or the Mussolinis, they they will take over and they're around. Matter of fact, they're already in vain. They're now bold enough to run as communists and and socialists and all this stuff. The lack of liberty. So, uh, but but I still am an optimist because we we are getting good stuff out on the internet and there's a lot of people that know this just like thou there are so many people call they want to have an interview and I say, well, what's here is somebody that heard me talk 20 years ago. Yes. And he has his own organization go. It's it's a the war is on but it's ideological for for me. And I think that's wonderful. I think it's wonderful about talk show hosts whether they're on TV or radio or whatever because we have to change people's minds. Yes. And uh because uh just bulldoz it in and say, "Well, he's a bad guy. Let's boycott. Let's shoot him. Let's put him in prison. Let's get control of the Department of Justice and we're going to do good." I mean, it's a vicious bad idea. So that we who believe in something have to present the cause for liberty and that should be a goal. It should be uh a very noble goal to strugg struggle for liberty. Well, what what about our moral bearings? Well, that's going to be up to the individual. But they have a better chance than right now with an authoritarian government. And when you look at the authoritarianist just look at the uh uh the regulations that we have, stack of regulations that that we have, and that's not the right way. But I still think uh I still think uh we're going in the right directions Ideologically there's a lot more people that talk about the money issue you know and things like that that you know well when I got interested in it it was probably a little bit in the 50s. Uh matter of fact it was real early because you know I delivered milk and delivered papers and had coins and I would save my dimes and nickels. Back then the dimes had silver in it. Can you imagine? >> No, it's hard to imagine. [laughter] >> So, silver dollars back then I remember when we had silver dollars, but now now it's all all different and it's not in the money. So, I I think No, that's the one thing I think people should realize that this whole thing I'm talking about, so you can tell I'm a little bit excited. I think I think it's an exciting idea. I can't think of anything more entertaining and interesting and and valuable is to des to talk about describe and work for liberty because that's what that's where you can practice your liberty and practice your beliefs and you can learn forever. You know it isn't like okay I went through 12 grades now I'm going to I I passed so that's it. No, each thing isn't you learn more from it and uh I think uh I I I I think it's all available to us. So I'm very thankful for the liberties that we do have and uh the amount of people we can reach. I I if you'd have asked me this even when I was in college starting to think about to to ever have talked to as many people as I have since then I would say you're you're dizzy. What have you been drinking? I'm not going to. So I started going to colleges and you know there were times I'd get 15 people out on a college campus wanted to talk about freedom and libertarianism. So it's uh it's one of those things that uh I was you know uh uh really involved in and I I think it's so important and it should be fun. That's one thing when I give a talk and tell people for 45 minutes how terrible it is and the young people and you have to do something about it. Uh I said that you you know uh I I think you should in everything you do when we come to a found a found a a meeting a conference that we have uh we we claim that uh you you know you're supposed to have fun here tell the bad stuff and like I said that one person heard all the bad stuff he says afterwards came up boy you're really an optimist but five or 10 minutes was talking the good stuff. But I I think that's great. So, uh I I I think that uh I think there's a lot available to us. I think I think the internet is a mixed bag. There's a LOT OF BAD STUFF out there, but there's a lot of good stuff out there, too. And uh I I try to avoid the bad stuff. [laughter] >> Good stuff. >> I don't want to be influenced. H Congressman Ron Paul, the the joy radiates off you. It always has and it just makes you a very unusual person. I'm grateful you took the time for this conversation. Thank you very very much. >> Thank Thank you. It's a delight to be with you. >> It is a delight. Thanks a [music] lot. Thanks for watching the Wednesday edition of the show. We stream live every week, Wednesday 6 p.m. Eastern on tuckercarlson.com. Members can watch the show live, join the membersonly chat, and take part in the conversation in real time. We're grateful to be doing it and grateful that you watch it. Thank you.