Hey everybody, all of you talking to you. It's going on. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Blue Apron. Blue Apron is one of our latest and greatest podcast sponsors and it's a very interesting concept. What they're doing is they're sending you ingredients, fresh ingredients in like a cooler. It's all chilled and shit and it's along with all of us adjusting microphones here. They're sending you a cooler with all the ingredients for fresh meals along with ingredients they have these step-by-step instructions. The recipe with visual instructions on how to create fantastic meals and here's how it works. For nine dollars and 99 cents a meal and these are excellent meals. They'll send you all the ingredients in the exact right proportions, simple recipe instructions right to your door. Meals are between five hundred and seven hundred calories per serving and when you're eating it you would think that it's a lot more because they're very delicious. See how many stuff? They've done it. They've done a really excellent job and they've made everything completely idiot proof. The step-by-step instructions with pictures. It's fun. It's fun to do. It's really I've enjoyed it. I'm really getting a kick out of it and if you're interested in trying this go to blueaepren.com slash Rogan that's blueaepren.com slash Rogan and you will get your first two meals free by going to that exact website. I love when someone comes up with a new concept like a completely different idea that I haven't heard before and this is one of them. poultry, fish, meat, vegetables, I feel like for this week I got oven fried chicken with corn and bean salad shrimp lobster rolls, lamb pea and mint. I can even say this word. Are we suret? How is that? O-R-E-C-C-H-I-E-T-T-E. I want to tell you something blueaepren. This is America. Okay. America. We demand simplicity. We don't want any fucking foreign names. Please that's pasta or kitty pasta or kitty. Or kitty. Is it look right? Mmm. Or chietty or chietty. Whatever it is. Purple spring onions and lemons. The point is it's not bland food. This is really like gourmet food that you can cook yourself and it's healthy and it's low in calories and it's really excellent and the quality of their ingredients I was pretty impressed by. I was looking all this stuff like the cuts of meat, the fish, everything super fresh and delicious and I love the idea. Like a lot of us are super busy. You don't have time to go to a, you know, store and buy a recipe book and then write down all the shits that you need to buy and measure it out and weigh it out. Blueaepren takes care of all the steps. It's the shopping, the measuring, the weighing, the recipe, everything and you can be in short of eating healthy meals. And healthy meals that are fun to make. You can do it yourself and it's not hard. It's easy to do. I'm no chef. I put them together and like I said, it's quite yummy. So give it a shot and I guarantee you you'll enjoy it. Blueaepren.com slash Rogan. That's for two free meals, Blueaepren.com slash Rogan. We're also brought to you by on it.com. That's ONNIT. ONIT is a human optimization website and what we do is we sell you things that we think can improve your mind, improve your body, anything that we can find that we use that helps physical fitness, helps, there's supplements that help endurance. There's a product called a quarter-seps mushroom that Shroom Tech Sport is based on. This is one of my favorite supplements and I actually get really bummed out. If I go to the gym and I realized that I haven't had it, I didn't put it in my bag. Shroom Tech is based on this mushroom that the Chinese Olympic team started using. They were winning all these metals and the idea behind the quarter-seps mushroom is they found a long time ago these ancient cattle herders where they would go to high elevation. They found that these cows would be noticeably more lively when they would be eating these certain mushrooms and these mushrooms are quarter-seps mushrooms in 1993, the Beijing summer games, the Chinese long distance women's track team was running at a punishing full marathon every day in preparation. Several world records later and after extensive doping tests everything came up and the coach Ma, that's a real name, revealed that it was quarter-seps mushrooms, quarter-seps in e-says. A lot of the stuff when it comes to any grand claims, a lot of the stuff is like understandably controversial and for that reason if you go to on it all the supplements that we sell have research pages for all of them including all the links to peer reviewed studies all the different individual ingredients whether it's for alpha brain whether it's for shroom tech or any of the supplements. There's a reason why people use this stuff and it's not just anecdotal evidence not just based on personal experiences but there's actual science behind all of it. So if you go read the stuff and check it out you'll understand what we're talking about. As far as fitness equipment we're selling the very best strength and condition equipment we can. We're selling all the stuff that has been shown to increase what they call functional strength. Functional strength meaning strength that you can use for athletic endeavors meaning it uses your whole body as an individual unit which is really where strength and conditioning is in the 21st century. It used to be a long time ago the people used to do a lot of isolation exercises like curls and a lot of doing tricep extensions all these different things that would strengthen a particular muscle group and you would do like back on Wednesday and then you would do buys and tries on Thursday people don't really do that stuff anymore. Now it's using your entire body as one unit and in doing so what you do is you teach your body how to move heavy weights how to do large amounts of work and how to do it in coordination. So whether it's using sandbags that we sell whether it's using steel maces which is it looks like a weapon but it's really just this large steel ball at the other this long metal pipe and moving it around is incredibly awkward and doing so you you use all these strange muscles and it's it's really excellent as far as like a direct correlation between the work that you put in the gym and physical performance in any athletic endeavor or just having a stronger healthier body. Go to honor.com. Oh and I.T use the code word Rogan and save 10% off any end all sub-limans. That's it that is the end of the commercials aren't you happy? I know you are. strap yourself in ladies and gentlemen Vsauce from Twitter aka Michael Stevens is here we're gonna land some shit let's get cracking. Joe Rogan flying past check it out. The Joe Rogan experience join my day Joe Rogan flying past my night all day. Hey man come on up to the microphone fella thanks for doing this I really appreciate. It's awesome to be here thanks for having me on. awesome to have you you got a killer YouTube page man and you know I love when I can find out about a YouTube page like if you go to some of your videos and you know you're like well what is this video and you go holy shit this videos got 726000 hits other ones have millions what this one what if the earth stop spinning 4,285,279 hits which is just a testament to how fascinating these videos are and how interesting and I think it's really cool that something that's educational and something that people can learn from and that's it's you're getting incredibly popular because of this. Isn't that amazing? Like for 4 million people wanted to learn about how the earth's spun and what would happen if it didn't it's not going to stop spinning but the physics behind what if the earth stopped spinning or fascinating and makes you think about the world and sort of appreciate the things you don't even think about way more. Yeah the physics of the spinning earth it's very bizarre when you stop to think that the idea all planets are constantly spinning in this weird way around a giant sun and there's outer planets and they're all spinning and like that with that's something that you don't think about on a day to day basis you day to day basis you just you know just walk around and go to the mall and driving your car you don't think about that you're on a thousand miles an hour in a circle at all times. Right and then on top of that the sun is revolving around the center of the galaxy even faster and our galaxy is going around the center of a super cluster even faster. In fact I think in the years oh man either in the year 1600 or 600 I don't remember earth was a light year away from where it is now relative to the center of the galaxy. Holy shit. It's traveled a light year. That's a long time. That amount of time it's either I think it's 1400 years that's how long it takes the earth to travel a light year just by spinning around with the sun. Where are we going? Around. Yeah in hundreds and hundreds of millions of years we'll be back. We'll be back in the same spot. Relative to the center of the galaxy but the galaxy will have moved. Right. There is no absolute reference frame so. The universe is expanding. Yeah. Yeah that's the other thing is there's maybe more than one universe. Yeah that could explain some of the you know things we still don't know yet. There could be parallel universes where every other version of things happen and that would explain things like why we happen to see the universe that we see now. Why this one? Yeah. Yeah it's when you know it's almost kind of stone or talk because it's one of those things like man try to wrap you around that man. But it is a fascinating concept that we are in this essentially infinite universe. I mean they've tried to put dimensions on the universe itself like there's an actual beginning and end to the universe itself. Right. But the infinity comes from the concept that inside every black hole is potentially another universe. That every galaxy has a supermassive black hole. It's one half of one percent of the mass of the entire galaxy and that inside that black hole it's very possible that there's a whole other universe with hundreds of billions of galaxies each with black holes inside of them each with new universes inside of them and that this fractal thing goes on and on and on and on and on and there's literally no end. Yeah and I don't know about black holes but the universe itself we give it a dimension we give it like a circumference or a diameter but that's just the observable universe. We don't really know what's beyond what we can see and it could go on infinitely. It could also wrap back on itself and be sort of infinite in one sense but actually you know if you go far enough out you curve around like an ant on a globe. That ant can just keep walking forward forever. He'll eventually return to where he came from but he's never going to reach a wall in edge. We think that's how our universe works. Is it wrapping back around itself? Well probably not. We've been able to look really far away and we don't see any evidence of things converging as if it's curving. Yeah like we're 3D creatures on this 4D shape that wraps back around on itself. Yeah the idea of the universe having a finite amount of distance it's confusing as hell because then what's outside of the universe? Well nothing. Nothing. So if it's finite then like what's it's sitting in? Right exactly. It's hard to wrap your head around it. It does sound like stone or talk but it's also cosmology talk. I mean it's like real science. Well real science is stoner talk. If you really get down to it. Yeah if you ask enough questions it gets down to dude you're blowing my mind and it's like no that really is just the way this pen stays on the table is incredible. Yeah the earth is spinning and the mass of the earth is pulling everything down towards it and the more mass it has the heavier it'll be and the more it'll stick like what? Yeah the subatomic level then things become magic. Yeah and it's so sad that we're never going to see an atom. They're too small. Like they're smaller than the wavelengths needed for us to like see them. So we're never going to just be able to look at one. I don't think it makes any sense to ask what color an atom is. They're beyond color. They're just too small for it. Too small for color. Yeah. Is it too small for our perceptions of what color color is or is it just really really our too small to trap light? The way color works doesn't apply to atoms individually. So even if we built like a super cool machine that that tried to be better than our eyes there's no color to see. Acting together atoms can have a color obviously. Would it be clear? If there's no color how would you observe it like what would you see? Would you see like Wonder Woman's plane? Uh, number Wonder Woman's plane was invisible. It was invisible. Yeah. Yeah. Had a lot of windows. She didn't make any sense. Like who the fuck should you just flying around with Wonder Woman didn't have just like a fighter jet. It looked really corny. Yeah. She had she was like an economy. Yeah. Uh, no. But that's the thing. There is there's no answer. We don't know. We're not not that we don't know. We just know that that doesn't apply. And if that's the case, okay, if if we can't see atoms, how do we know so much about subatomic particles? Like what are we seeing when we're observing right? Right. We're not not seeing them like I see you were seeing their effects. For instance, in a cloud chamber, we can see individual particles because they interact with uh, uh, gas in the chamber and cause trails and we can follow the trail and photograph it and study it and say, wow, look how it moved because of its uh, because of its, you know, the mass that we were able to detect it was probably a electron or whatever, right? But we can't look at it and say, oh, dude, that was the same electron that I saw yesterday. You know, but if that's the case, how do they understand what when they're measuring things like particles in superposition, which means a particle that is moving and still at the same time, like how are they doing that? Well, this is beyond my purview clearly. It's something that I'd love to learn more about. But I think that it's not so much that we see both. We're just like the only way to explain the way it behaves is that it was doing both before we made the measurement. Do you think that they'll one day have more accurate measuring and they're like, oh my god, we're so wrong. It's possible. Yeah. It's more than one thing. Yeah. There's a famous quote about science being a graveyard of dead ideas. Right. Things were like, oh, obviously the earth is the center. It seems that way. And then someone goes, actually, that does create a problem, doesn't it, with educators? Because if someone's been basing their entire life and their career writing books, teaching a certain principle that turns out to be completely and totally incorrect at one point in time, when new understanding come about, what, you know, that that that that runs into human areas, ego and weirdness when it comes to what people are willing to accept and not one well, sure, but the point is not the facts. It's the procedure, the scientific method, you know, thinking scientifically and always basing these, these, um, you know, theories on things that we can experimentally test, right? That's what matters. And if you can devise better and better tests, you can learn more and be more and more sure of theories, but you should always be more excited about conquering ignorance than just like holding on to the the fact that you particularly like or made up. Yeah, most certainly you certainly should be, but it is, uh, it's got to be a real pain in the ass. If you spent your entire career teaching something, writing books on something and it turns out to be correct. But that sort of comes with the territory, right? I know. And I actually really want to do an episode at some point on like crazy things that people believe that you would consider super smart, like DH Lawrence, the author, he totally believed that the moon created light and refused to be convinced otherwise. Hmm, right? Right. Uh, not not because he was insane, but because it was just like, we had an advanced science enough, right? His science education was not great enough for him to go, oh, it's reflecting from the sun, right? Uh, there, I'm sure there's all kinds of things like that, like William Shakespeare. What did he know? He didn't know anything about black holes, right? Like he knew less about black holes than the dumbest person listening to this show right now, you know? Yeah, right? No kidding. Yeah, it's, it's really bizarre when you think about the fact that people had not only do they have like just a rudimentary understanding of the earth and its position in the stars and the universe, but with that rudimentary information, they were able to circumnavigate the globe. Yeah, they were able to use those sextants and those like look at the stars and measured distances and figure out where they were based on constellations and going to ocean in a fucking wooden floaty thing and just use the wind to take them around a different dirt patches for years. Yeah, hundreds and thousands of years. He mentioned landing on a place where no one had been before. And you're just like, well, I hope we packed enough food. Do you you ever listen to Radio Lab? Oh, yeah. It's great. It's great. It's great. It's amazing. An amazing piece on the Galapagos Island recently. And it's where Darwin sort of landed and partially where he formed his theories about evolution. And because it's such a just incredibly rich with diversity and different kinds of life. But what they were talking about that's really amazing in this is how little we understand about life and life's changes. And they're seeing life changes right now. They're seeing like the evolution of this new fence, there's some new bird is forming because there's a larger fence that's dying off. And the medium fence and the smaller fence are breeding and they're creating this new fence. And it's just unbelievably fascinating to think that all this is, our point of reference is, you know, a thousand a couple thousand years of people writing shit down. And it's in the greater spectrum of life on earth. It's nothing. I was thinking the other day about recorded audio and how briefly earth and humanity have been able to record audio. And that brings up questions like what did George Washington sound like? Right? Did he have a British accent? They say that British accents actually didn't evolve until much later. And that the people that were in England, in fact, had a different accent in like the 1600s than they have today. Yeah. That's true. And I think, you know, you find the right experts. They can perform for you these different accents, not be not by the fact that they've listened to recordings they have there aren't any, but they can look at how words have changed over time and they can look at how spellings have changed over time. And come to a pretty good conclusion about what a guy who lived in England in the year 600 sounded like. What's really trippy is when they go to dead languages. Yeah. And they tried to recreate the sound of like ancient Sumerian. Oh wow. Yeah. I hadn't thought of that. Yeah. They're trying to figure out what it would sound like to hear like Gilgamesh talk. Right. You know, they have this sort of bizarre understanding. I don't know. I don't really get it. I don't know how they could pull that out since nobody speaks it anymore. I don't know how they ever figured it out. Anyway, if you ever look at CUNY form, I used to write back then, right? A bunch of nails, like nails upwards and like old school nails. Like I used to do instruction when I lived in Boston. A lot of the buildings you would come across were really, really old. Yeah. Like they were from the 1800s and they used to the nails that they had back then were essentially handmade nails. They weren't the nails that we see today with like the circular top and the smooth, the cylinder below it, the smooth spike. Yeah. Yeah. They were like, you know, kind of wedges almost. Yeah. Wedges. And they were like crude and weird looking. That's what CUNY form looks like. A bunch of crude little wedges up and down and sideways. And they figured out how what that means, what they were saying essentially with debate, you know, of course. But they also are figuring out like what it sounded like when they were talking. That's weird. I get the translation thing. The Rosetta Stone, for instance, really helped us go, oh, thank goodness, they wrote the same thing in three different languages. Yeah. And we know one of them or two of them. I don't know. I have a lot of respect for people that can do that. Oh, yeah. Well, it's also, it's got to be maddening. There's a National Geographic. I think it's, yeah, pretty pretty natural geographic special called Decoding the Maya. It's all about my in language and trying to under and how difficult that is. Another dead language essentially. But a dead language that's in hieroglyphic form. Right. Images that mean sounds. So like McKenna described it best. You would have an eyeball, a saw like the cuts would you'd have an ant like the bug and the flower like the rose. And that's how you would say I saw ant rose. Okay. Yeah. That's clever. Yeah. But that's that's, you know, that's how their language evolved. Like our idea of, I mean, that is that that would be ridiculous. Like what the fuck don't you have letters? Like can't you say Steve? Where's Bob and Mike? But in their culture, you know, that's what started and that's where it evolved. And that's a grew out of that. And is that going to happen to English someday? I don't know what's going to happen in English someday, but I mean, my friends were sitting around the other day and we're talking about the idea of everything being on hard drives. Yeah. And how bizarre that is that if anything happened and for whatever reason, you know, a good percentage of the population died and everybody that was left was computer illiterate. How long would it take before we lost everything that anybody ever figured out? I mean, there wouldn't be much left unless somehow or another genetically that information is stored or the revelations or somehow or other. If there's a large enough segment of the population, but if not, that shit's gone. We have to leave instructions. Like here's how to play this blue ray. Yeah. It contains information and history of earth. Well, that's a thought that people like Graham Hancock have when they stumble across these, you know, gigantic monoliths that nobody can explain like bow back and Lebanon. And of course, the, the, the pyramids in each ship and all these just bizarre, massive stone constructions that were not exactly sure how they put together. I mean, still to this day, they look at the great pyramid and they just go, well, they maybe we think that they kind of so maybe they I don't know. And they were made so long ago. Yeah. They weren't they're not like ancient Roman style, uh, oldness. It's way older than that. Yeah. I did a video on putting history and perspective. And I've mentioned that the ancient Egyptian pyramids were as old to the ancient Romans as the ancient Romans are to us. There were there were, there were, well, in mammoths still alive when the pyramids were built in Egypt. Oh, yeah. Was that true? That's true. Yeah. On wrangle island. Yeah. Well, I thought William Emma's died out 10,000 years ago. I don't, I don't know when they died out or how we know they died out of the place to see. Right? Didn't they? I think William Emma's part of the great extinction event that they think is connected to, uh, asteroidal impacts, at least some people do. That's one of the theories being done. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. All I know is that there were contemporaries, the pyramids and woolly mammoths. And I can't tell you the exact date that, uh, these all happened. Hmm. That's amazing. You know, it's even more trippy is these new discoveries like this, um, go back, Lee Tappy thing that they're finding. Yeah. 12,000 plus years ago that they thought people back then were just hunter and gatherers and they're finding these gigantic carved stone columns with 3D images of animals that are carved into it, meaning like you have a large stone and you cut the stone down but leave enough of a piece of stone that you could carve in a lizard. Wow. So it's super complicated work. And that the a lot of these lizards and animals aren't even native to the continent. Oh, turkey is, you know, we don't, they don't only think that these animals existed in the spot where this was going on, at least the current knowledge is, but we don't think they existed there. It's very, very strange because they thought people were just hunter gatherers back then and they built these massive like, uh, concentric circles with 19 foot high stone columns. Like they don't even know how to fuck they did it or who did it or what the culture was and saw new stuff over the last couple decades. Wow. Wow. And they're older to the ancient Egyptians, than the ancient Egyptians are to us. Wow. Yeah. By almost seven years, seven, seven thousand years because they're 12,000. So the ancient Egyptians that's 2500 BC, they think they built the pyramids. So these guys are 12,000 plus. That's incredible. Yeah, it's not just incredible, but they don't even know really how old it is. They just know 12,000 years ago someone intentionally covered it up. They've done like carbon dating on the soil and the soil is uniform. Like the data, the soil is uniform, which indicates to them. I think this is how they do it that someone intentionally covered up this area, like maybe like someone conquered these fucking shares that were building these awesome things. Like yeah, these guys are assholes. We need to go back to tents and cover all this crazy shit up. Yeah, so they filled it all in 12,000 years ago. 12,000. Yeah, but humans have been hundreds of thousands of million. I mean, yeah, it's like, I'll never meet those people. Yeah. Well, and it's also the just that number. It's like just saying a thousand years, it's like you try to put that in your head, you're like, okay, but if you could see a thousand years and a time lapse, if you could see it run through a time lapse and then see like seven of those in a row and then see like go backly, tepi, which is seven twice. You know, and just like just run through how much change, much, it must have taken place on this planet and just want with this one bizarre life form that alters its environment. Right. The only one in, you know, in such a grand scale. Yeah, it's crazy. Trying to decipher that. Those people like archeologists trying to piece the past together. That has got to be one of the most fascinating jobs ever. Yeah, I did, I was reading about some of the oldest stuff we found is all about burial and death. But we haven't found so many just like homes. Like the people's day to day lives weren't made to be nearly as permanent. Death was so much more important than where you spent your entire life. Yeah, especially when they didn't really, I mean, not that we understand what happens when people die today. We just know they definitely die. But we, you know, we're still, it's a lot of guesswork about what the process is of shutting off the soul. If there is a soul, whatever that life spark is, that the consciousness, where it goes, does it go to the same place it goes when you're dreaming, you know, like what, what exactly happens? But back then 50% mortality rate for children, if you're lucky, you know, everybody's getting eaten by animals and like. Yeah, yeah, I think it was reading in Jared Diamond's book, um, that germs and steel guns germs. No, it's newer one. He was talking, or, or, or, was that right? Shoot. I think so. Yeah. Anyway, uh, he was talking about how there are, there are tribes that don't believe you're actually human until you're much older than a baby. Like babies are just kind of like almost have souls, but not yet. So if a baby dies, it's like, wow, it hasn't been initiated yet. Or if you have too many kids, you can just kill them because they're, they're just like not like a mirror cats do. Yeah, maybe right. Right. You just sit there and you go, wow, there's a lot of diversity of, of everything on earth, life and ideas. Well, certainly, yeah, we, we're big, we're big copycats, you know, we sort of imitate whatever the hell's going on around us. If we have this idea that babies aren't alive yet, when look at the horrible things that people were able to justify doing to others, just because those others are, you know, thought to be an enemy or a subhuman because they're the enemy. Yeah. Yeah, bizarre, we're bizarre. And is it this? And it's, it's when you really stop and think about what this bizarre behavior patterns people have and what they create like that they create. When you really stop and think about what this bizarre behavior patterns people have and what they create, like that they create these cultures that vary wildly. All human beings all on this planet, but look at the difference between Palestine and Chicago, look at the difference between, you know, Phil and the blank, Liberia and San Francisco, look at the difference between London and Mongolia. It's very strange how much things are different and how much they change, but yet everyone's just a person, everyone can interbreed, everyone can exchange ideas, and once you take someone from that culture and bring them into yours they adopt those ideas. If you took a baby from Nigeria, brought them into, you know, whatever, Atlanta, and raised them there. That's two of them 20 years later, he's going to have an Atlanta accent, he's going to have all the things that young kids are into and video games and young kids are into wearing the clothes. He will look essentially entirely like an American kid. Yeah, but humans aren't nearly as diverse as dogs, right? Dogs can come in huge a huge variety of sizes and shapes and colors, and they can all interbreed. It's all the same species, but humans are pretty much all, you know, we fall within this general distribution. Is that true though? I don't know. Is it? See, I want to make it clear that I have way more questions than answers, right? I asked the questions and then try to find answers. I don't know. I could be wrong. It could be like, well Michael, you know, we all just think humans are all pretty similar because we know them so well or we are them. Well, a female dwarf, a white female dwarf and Chikil O'Neill could have a baby. How is that any different than a Chihuahua in a great day? Is that same difference? It's kind of similar in a lot of ways. There's so different looking. Chikil O'Neill and a female dwarf. Yeah, they're very, I mean, assuming that the parts could fit. Right. I mean, that's about as far up. I mean, if you saw those two things and you'd be like, oh, those are totally different things. Do you think he would? I think so. Totally different animals. Yeah, well, like different species. Here's a perfect example. Yeah. An eagle can't fuck a pigeon and have a baby. You know what I'm saying? Right. So Chikil O'Neill and a female dwarf is a lot like an eagle and a pigeon. Uh huh. I think we're going to have to do some experiments. I would, the eagles and pigeons I hope. Which, oh, okay, yeah, that's what I meant. I meant the eagle. That's exactly what I meant. Well, you know, that's the argument that the ancient alien guys use to the point to the fact that human beings are genetically engineered because of the human beings are genetically engineered because of the human beings. But humans, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So their idea is that this is the proof that humans have been engineered and that there's many versions of us. And that, you know, there's been a bunch of different models that are crazy. Yeah. And that's why we vary so widely as opposed to every other animal that can breed because hybrids in other species are usually sterile. Right. But hybrids with human beings, like if you took Shaquil O'Neill and a white dwarf, you would assume that's a hybrid. You know, you assume that they're not. They're not. It's the same race. They totally, like they're totally compatible as far as the way they can breed with them. Right. Right. Uh, I am being distracted by how much I have to urinate. Oh, go. The other day I was thinking about, I'm going to... This is going to get us to start it, man. I know, but I was not prepared. I had a whole one of these. It's good. And then I had a hundred. Yeah. Stay healthy. And I had a bunch of coffee this morning too. But I was thinking yesterday, this is related. How much would you weigh if you never went to the bathroom? You'd be dead. How quickly? It wouldn't take long. I mean, what if we had evolved to just not ever have to? Like a maybe after just a month would be bigger than the biggest human ever. Don't you think? I need to do the math. Well, it depends on what you need to consume. Like if your body was so efficient that you no longer needed to urinate. Like we kind of assumed that your body would need to urinate. But why? If your body needs water to stay alive, like why are we assuming that it has to... Well, it has to get rid of certain ways that it doesn't want anymore. Well, why? Could we just turn that into more hair instead? But why does it have to get rid of waste? Like isn't it possible that we can become so efficient that we no longer need to get rid of waste? And we can just sort of exist by breathing in hair. Right. Right. Completely just like self. Yeah, we need to get to certain size. And once we get to a certain size, we just, you know, whatever you evaporate off by walking around, like that you have to take back in. Right. I guess. You know, yeah, because they have robots that just dissipate heat. They don't ever make a waste product. Your laptop doesn't create as much waste as a human. But it's also not nearly as like complex. Right. But it's some ways it's more complex. They've been able to make machines that can poop. You put food in and then it's got bacteria and different pumps and reservoirs inside. And it creates something that resembles completely and smells just like a human dump. Whoa. Yeah. The first one I saw was done as a piece of art. As artwork, like an artist created this machine that could poop just like a human. And now they do it. They call it a robo gut. And it's actually a medical thing because when people have GI problems, a poop transplant is commonly used to reintroduce the healthy bacteria. And taking poop from someone else and giving it to the sick person and shoving it up there is kind of like, you know, there's a lot of possibilities for rejection and infection stuff like that, I guess. But the robo gut can make just perfectly clean poop. Just with the kind that you want. Whoa. Yeah. Because some artificial poop put up inside of you to fix any imbalances that you have in your gut flora. That's fascinating. And that crazy can have like a poop farm of robot intestine. Right. That are just... And what do you feed them? Yeah. Do you have to do burger runs for the robo guts and then they totally are ganious. It's got to be totally organic. It's got to probably just like a paste or a liquid. It's like baby food. You wouldn't have to taste good. The robot's not going to complain. Yeah, fuck that robot. Just eat it bitch. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So this is making... Go to the bathroom. Go to your name. There's a million subjects. So don't worry about it. You come back. We'll have many, many things to talk about. And congratulations. You won the award for the quickest guide to pee. Almost everybody. Yeah. It's right there on the right hand side. Almost everybody has a point in time where they go, out. This is how long does this podcast go? I got you to see that look on their face. Like, I think I have to pee. But this dude, he made it Michael made it to 50 minutes. That's not a lot of time. But you got to do what you got to do. I understand. Yeah. Is that his girlfriend? Maybe X-girlfriend. Oh my God. That's hilarious. She's like five feet tall. Is that his wife? I think that's his wife actually. Which is incredible. That he was seven foot. What? How tall was it? Seven one. Seven one. Fifty. Dude, I did fear factor with him. And I stand about pain is high with him. And when we were doing it, it was like I was with my dad. It was like I was with my giant black dad. And he was standing next to me. He did the countdown. Three, two, one, go. Show his fear factor for you. Yeah. That's a big dude. This guy, Michael Stevens, if you have never heard of him and I're interested in this conversation, his YouTube page is fucking amazing. It's really cool. And it's called Tweetsaw or Vsaw's rather. Tweetsaw is his Twitter page. And he's back. I'm thinking he's going to have to pay one more time forward. Do you think so? I think I'm going to be fine. Basically, when I heard that you have a lot of time, I'm going to be fine. Basically, when I heard that you couldn't just cut it out, like my P-brake. I got really nervous. And I all of a sudden had to pee. And to be fair, it was a very voluminous urination. Like it wasn't a nervous one. It was a real one. You might be the first guy I've ever heard you use voluminous when it comes to urination. Oh, I use it all the time. Every time. No. I do get concerned. I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, pain enough. Because I've seen, I've peed next to other guys, in different urinals. Right. And I can tell that they're going a lot longer than me. And the sound that it's making is just so much. The flow is so strong. And it must contain so many just gallons. And I'm like, do you just hold it longer as your bladder bigger than mine? I'm very insecure about how much IP. I feel like it's not impressive. Well, it depends on where you are. If you're at a bar, those guys are probably drinking beer. And if you're drinking beer, you're going to pee massive. Right. And it's coming out hard. Right. And you're probably having a conversation with somebody and you're holding it in for a while. And then when you do let it go, it's like, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. That could be it. While I was peeing, I did think of something that kind of wraps up the whole first part of this pre-pea conversation. And it again goes back to Jared Diamond, who said, he tells a story about Europeans' first meeting, a tribe in Papua New Guinea. Mm-hmm. And of course, if you're this tribe and these guys show up, using technology and materials you've never seen before, and they look very different and they dress very different, you might think that they're gods, that they're a different type of animal. And I think they thought they were gods until two things happened. One, the tribe realized that the Europeans pooped and it smelled just like theirs. And secondly, they could have sex. Those two things solidified the fact that they were all humans together. Wow. Yeah. They had different types of weapons. They had a different way of speaking and dressing, but there were things about them. Those two things that really made both sides realize we are the same animal. Wow. Yeah. Can you imagine being someone who lives in some sort of a tribal environment in the middle of the Amazon and all of a sudden the plain lands, on the water and people come out and you're like, what the fuck is this? No one's ever seen another, especially a white person. It's got to be akin to an alien invasion. Oh, it is. And it's akin to being visited by a god as well. So look up the cargo cults. I don't remember what part of the world they live in, but during, I think during a war, airplanes were coming in and out. And these tribal people didn't know what they were. We still don't exactly know what they're thinking or what they were, but the plane stopped after a while. The war was over. And to this day, they have recreated. Using materials that they find around where they live, a runway and all the things that they associate with, they built a little airplane out of wood, trying to get it to come back. Yeah. Yeah. Vondanikin used that as an argument in chariots of the gods to explain that this is one of the reasons why these depictions of what could be interpreted as flying saucers and all these saucers and all these oceans and modern art. That's what it is. It's like the long lost information passed down generation and generation of at one point in time we were visited by something from somewhere else. And it sounds that's one of those subjects where as soon as you open up the possibility of that, you say like, well, we maybe we're visited, but you're like, oh, just fucking Christ, he's one of those guys. Like it's an immediate reaction. I have it. Like when someone starts talking to me about the possibility of humans being visited, extra terrestrial is coming here and manipulating our DNA and we're okay. All right. I got you. Well, that's fine. But I would like for them to show me experiments they've devised that'll give us evidence for that. Otherwise it's not falsifiable. I could say, dude, you know that there's a blue rhinoceros on some planet that's billions of years away, seriously. Well, there might be. Yeah, there might be. There might be. We aliens might have created the pyramids, right? Probably not, though. Well, they don't. I don't think there's anyone credible that thinks that aliens created the pyramids. But what they do think is that they created people and that they did some sort of a genetic manipulation. Right. And when I say credible, like credible, I mean, what does that mean? You know, there's no evidence whatsoever. Yeah, none. Yeah. I did this show for some time. It would make fun fiction, though. Oh, yeah. It would make an awesome movie. Well, that's that whole base of Prometheus. Yeah. That we're somehow another engineer. The engineers came down here. And that's, you know, when you talk about Sumerian texts we were talking about that earlier, that was the whole premise of this guy, Zechariah Cithen's worth work. They've heard of that guy. It sounds very familiar. Oh, he's the king of all those people who are into wacky shit. Uh-huh. Zechariah Cithen's the king. Okay. Because he believed that the Sumerian text, if you decipher it correctly, proves that we were engineered by something called the Anunnaki, and that the Anunnaki, the literal translation of Anunnaki, is those from heaven to earth came, meaning that it was the same as the Elohim from the Bible. Right. That, you know, these beings came from another planet, genetically altered human beings. And he points to these various images that were in the Sumerian text and Sumerian uniforms and all these different stone carvings that show what looks like the double helix of DNA. Sure, sure. The Caduceus, you know the two snakes that are wrapped on the pole that we associate with medicine. He interprets that as being an image of the double helix DNA. Right. Or it's where they could use the same thing. Or it could be a coincidence too. It could be. Yeah. But it does look a lot like it, right? You know, the double helix and the two snakes wrapped around a pole. But the weirdness is the pictures of like there's one that shows one of these Anunnaki with a, looks like a person with a tail sitting on his lap. And they interpret that as being like this idea that they took sub-human primates and manipulated the DNA, adding alien DNA, creating incredibly intense and bizarre stuff. But what gets me is, yeah, absolutely. Yeah, absolutely. We did to this. Yeah, probably not right. Most people, and there's also a website called Citun, is wrong where other scholars who have studied the CUNY form and studied the Samaritan text completely disagree with his interpretations. But if we could travel to another planet and we could do it successfully and we've done it for thousands and thousands of years, then the other planet is, you know, way to fucking the other side of the galaxy. And we find some primates. I don't think it's outside the realm of possibility that we would manipulate their DNA. There are actually protocols already in place, not officially adopted by any government, but protocols about what do we do if we discover life? Because we most likely would contaminate it by trying to observe it. I think that there are even people arguing right now that Mars has been contaminated by the rovers. By the rovers that have gotten there. I mean, we found, I think, staff bacteria on the moon that had been like, sent to the moon when we visited because we didn't completely sterilize everything. So someone touched, excuse me, someone touched an object, the object, went to the moon and someone observed that staff being on the object living on the moon. Yeah. It wasn't living on the moon, but it was just, it was transferred there. Yeah. And so that's a huge problem. Well, just space junk itself. Just the idea of the rover being on Mars. I mean, if another life form visited Mars, landed there and found the rover, they'd be like, okay, what the fuck is that? Right. And this brings up the whole question of space archaeology or space preservation. So the stuff Neil Armstrong used to get to the moon and walk around, it's all still there. Right? So if we ever start regularly going to the moon, do we set up a museum there? Do we put fences up around it? Who owns that landing site? Well, you know, I was supposed to fly over those sites. Right? And then they made some sort of ruling that any future space flights should not take place over those sites. I didn't hear about that. Yeah. I think they're worried about people fucking it up. You know? I mean, look, if space travel becomes as easy as one point in time getting across the country was a fucking heroic event. Yeah. You know, when the pilgrims landed and I was watching this show last night, that was all about the wagons that they used to traverse the land to get from the east coast to the west coast. Amazing stuff because you know, we have like leaf springs and certain cars. They had them that they would made out of leather. Like they had concocted these sort of suspensions, these adjustable manipul- you know, they would move a little bit as they went over rocks and stuff and they had done all this stuff out of leather. And it's just so strange to think that there were people that had put their life and their faith. You know, some goods in the back, some food and they were hoping to find things to eat along the way. But it's going to take you fucking forever. Yeah. Now you get in a plane and then I got a LA flight. I got a catch. So I land at noon. I'll call you love you. Can I kiss? No, see, yeah, Daddy will call you when he lands. What? You just get in a plane. I mean, that 200 years ago insanely preposterous. So different. The idea is one day, 200 years from now, whatever it is, it'll be that easy to get to the moon. So they're putting these protocols in place like, hey, don't go there and just steal shit. Steal it or yeah, take a roll on with you. Right. Right. Yeah, Lucy K is a great joke about that. It's like it used to be to go across the United States. It took so many years that people died. People were born. It was a whole different group of people by the time you finally got your destination. This is the Lucy K joke and now it's just like you're in a plane. Yeah. Yeah. You're done. And when Elon Musk finishes these crazy high-speed rails, then it's going to be like an hour. Oh, it's crazy. An hour to get to New York from here. Just taking off on some crazy magnetic rail system. Virgin Galactic as well. Right. Well, get into like the suborbital, I guess, tracks. And you can go from here to Australia in just a matter of minutes. They orbit in the International Space Station. They orbit around the Earth 17 times a day. God. So, yeah. So crazy. They have 17 sunrises and sunsets every 24 hour period. Oh, my God. That's amazing. That is amazing. That's booking it. That is so crazy. So it's a little less than every two hours. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that's fast. Yeah. Fuckin' A. And that's just the beginning. A thousand years from now, if we stay alive and don't blow each other up, it'll be even easier to do that. Yeah. And people will say, man, remember back when people used to orbit the Earth only 17 times every 24 hours? This is another, and I don't remember the comedian who told this joke, but he's like, in the future, like everything's gonna be so fast. It's gonna take like two seconds to go everywhere, but the DMV, man, it's gonna take nine seconds and we're all gonna hate it. That's so true. That is gonna be very strange. I think it is very strange now when you, you know, it used to be if someone showed up on your border, no matter where you were, it was usually a fuckin' problem. You know, if a boat pulled up, like very rarely where people just super cool and, you know, you're not worried about it. But today, there's a thing called tourism, and it's a huge part of life. I mean, a huge part of life in various cultures is people showing up and bringing with them money, and you know, you welcome them. Right. The part of the economy of the area. Right. It's very strange how just that ability to traverse distances has changed the way human beings interact with each other. And it's also made the idea of countries and nationalities and your loyalty to those countries and nationalities. A little bit more ridiculous every year. A little bit more ridiculous, the closer we get to this ability to instantaneously travel from one place or another. These borders, these self-imposed borders, like the border between Mexico and the United States is probably one of the most egregious. When you stop and think about the difference in prosperity between like, you know, war as and Los Angeles, Tijuana and San Diego. It's like, fuck man, like that's crazy that a third world country is right there. These poor people are starving to death, and we won't let them come across this little imaginary line where everything is wonderful. And everybody's fat, you know? Yeah. Yeah. And people often say like, oh, but dude, when you're like, look down on the earth from outer space, you don't see borders. But you do. The border between India and Pakistan is lit up so brightly. You can see it from space. What is it? Like is it like, like they're borders at like a fence, like the Great Wall of China? Yeah, parts of it are just, I think, yeah, fenced off, militarized lit up. And I've covered a few other borders that you can see from space in the past. I'm not remembering them at the moment. But it's like, we've, you can look down from earth and tell that we don't all get along. My friend Ari that you see behind you right there and that, or above you, that photo. Ari just got back from doing a tour of China. And it took some photos of himself on the Great Wall. Yeah. And I, you know, I'd rather that you could see the Great Wall from space, apparently you can't. But when he was there, you know, we were talking about the Great Wall and he was saying how fucking crazy it was. So then I started looking up the Great Wall. Right. And it's 5,000 miles long. It's a great wall. That's not a good wall. Yeah. And that really is a great wall. That's a funny joke, by the way. What if there's a wall in China people called the Good Wall of China? It's all right. I mean, it keeps the ceiling up. It's pretty good. The bar has been set so high. Yeah. Good wall would have to be a few thousand miles. You know, the Good Wall would have to be like 2,000 miles. Right. Right. You know, what is that picture, Jamie? Yeah, Pakistan border. Yeah, look at that. I assume. Wow. About 2,000 kilometers long. It's insane, right? Yeah, you could see that border. That's legit. That's a line. That's a highway. So it is. This is what it looks like from the ground. Really. Wow. How fascinating. Two people look similar, live right next door, hate each other, have nuclear weapons pointed at each other at all times. Yeah. My friend Shane Smith, he runs vice dot com. He's been to Indian Pakistan. And he says that is the one place where he's most terrified of a nuclear war breaking out. Oh, for sure. Well, some have been a lot in Pakistan. It's crazy. It was just in Mumbai and at the airport, a plane came in and it was from Iran. Iran Airlines. And I'm like, wow, you don't see that in America. Yeah. They're not allowed to land there. But I actually went over and just watched the people getting off the plane. I was like, hey, fellow humans that I would never run into unless this happened. Also the fact that to go from, I went from Washington DC to Mumbai, we flew over Iraq and Afghanistan. And I'm like, whoa. I didn't know we did this. Then after what happened in the Ukraine, I'm like, that's crazy. I felt like I was safe up there at 30,000 feet. Right. Far and over the earth, but apparently not. What exactly has happened? Are they sure that these were blown up by missiles and not by bombs? I haven't been following the story well enough. Last I heard it was fired from an anti aircraft weapon from the ground. Wow. That's so I didn't know they could do that. I know 30,000 feet in the air. I didn't know they could. There was it that. And just a few weeks before that happened, I was reading some article I found on dig that was all about airport security keeps us from bringing things on the planes. But the real next threat is what people can do to planes from the ground. And I was like, no way. But then if you go to the In and Out burger that's near that, this is your LAX, there's a great view of the planes coming in. And they are close. Yeah, one special when they're taking off. Yeah. That's so true. No one's doing any security to keep you from putting a fucking anti missile or anti aircraft. A slingshot, honestly, they're so close. What kind of slingshot are you carrying? Well, maybe I'm exaggerating. But yeah, really, if you break the window, right? I mean, could you break a window or shoot it into a turbine? Oh, you know, they also had problems with the laser pointers. People pointing laser pointers at planes and that can be dangerous from pilots. Yeah. That pilots, like essentially running almost entirely on autopilot these days. I don't know. No, I don't either. Obviously not. Obviously, they've got some control over what they do. No, yeah. They certainly have some control. Yeah. There's a lot of threat. Like, we're so funny when we isolate threats. Like, I was thinking this the other day while I was traveling. You know, we were going through the airport and, you know, they're going through all your shit and they're scanning you and you're putting your hands over your head and the radio thing checks your body for weapons and you go through and you get the clear and you go, but it's only the airport. There's places where people congregate by the thousands and there's virtually no security whatsoever. Like malls. Most of the last time nobody checks shit at the mall. You go to the parking lot. It's filled with cars. Times Square. Times Square. You go, you know, you walk through. There's thousands of people in these malls. Whenever I pass that security, you know, body scanning, I feel really good. I really, I feel like, yeah, I did it. I pass. Am I the only one? I just, I really love that experience of like, I put my hands up the thing. It's and then I stand there and the guys like, wait. And I'm like, I'm clean. I promise. And he goes, you can go ahead and I'm like, I did it. I get credit for being not a threat and I love it. Why do you love that? I don't know. I think it's like I'm a pleaser, right? At heart, I just want people to enjoy me and be happy with me. to walk into a metal detector and not having it go off. Oh, I just could do that all day. If there's someone there watching going, yep, you're good. You're good. That's an interesting admission. That's fascinating. You don't feel that too. You don't feel this. It's not just relief. It's like pride. No, I don't. I definitely don't feel pride. I definitely feel a slight relief like, okay, this is over. Sure. Because I don't like the whole process. Sure. I'm not a criminal and I'm not a threat. I'm not a terrorist and I don't have any plans on ever being won. So when I'm doing this, I'm like, this is so crazy that this tiny minute, one one hundredth of one percent of the population. If it's even that, you ever have to worry about it. It's probably not even that statistically. Look, 1% of the population means out of a hundred million, you have a million people, right? That's 1%. Yeah. So it's not that. So it's not that. It's very small. It's very, very, very, very, very small what the actual threat is. But because of these fuck heads, these actual threats, everyone has to be massively inconvenienced. So I find it to be incredibly inefficient, ridiculous and almost it almost sort of enforces this idea of instability because although 99.9999, 99, 99% of people are nothing to worry about because there is this minute tiny threat. Everyone has to be inconvenienced. Everyone has to be a suspect. And you have to be treated by these, you know, these people that are getting paid very little money in high stress situations. They're not experts at sociology or psychology rather. They're not, you know, they're not experts in how their behavior impacts people who are being treated like threats. Yeah, that, that a job like that is fascinating. I want to do a documentary someday about people who their job is to do something that everyone hates. Like like a meter made. Was there a movie about meter made? Oh, and what it was like to just be like, all right, time to start my job, which literally is just being hated all day. Same with people who work at complaint departments. Well, I worked as a security guard once for a concert venue. You developed this us versus them mentality. I only did it for a summer. And just over the course of the summer, because we were one of the things that we did was people were always trying to sneak in bottles of booze. The concert venue sold booze, but obviously they were in. over the course of the summer because we were one of the things that we did was people were always trying to sneak in bottles of booze yeah the concert venue sold booze but obviously they were in paper cups and platter cups right right but people would try to bring in bottles of wine like James Taylor concert like we we busted more people with bottles of wine as James Taylor Connell Wow because everybody was trying to sneak them in in their purse right and we would check there be like no there's nothing in here like we have to check the purse right like why do you have to check my purse because you might have a bottle of wine in there right and how do you know I have a bottle of wine because everybody has a fucking bottle of wine it's James Taylor concert right you know like we're just going to come in and just have it nope can't do it but this is expensive well go home you know once you pass through that border right right you can't bring it back you know it's over and we would we would get these people that would be really angry at it yeah like and real confrontational and how to add out just you know three months of me work in there you you develop this mentality where you like you know the fuck these people these people are assholes like and that's just us versus them it's just people right but because you're the one whose job is to enforce it and they're angry at you you develop this very confrontational relationship yeah it's very weird and I noticed it was super unhealthy and I decided after the one summer there like I'm never doing this but someone has to do that job do they though good question I don't know if they do you know I do not know if someone really needs to do that job I think first of all if you just say don't bring any bags like what's the worst thing someone bringing in a flask they're going to start a riot where everybody pulls out their flasks and throws them at the same time and you know falls from the sky these fucking I don't know you know I don't I don't know but the job sucks yeah and everywhere you go people are trying to get over on you and everywhere and that's minor that's just most of the people weren't bringing in stuff it was you know small percentage you know and that that is it there's a distinction between that job and working at a complaint department where the complaint department maybe you're helping people with the problem they're experiencing but if all you do is stop people from bringing in the bottle of wine that they want to have there's you never you don't like work with them to make it work yeah good point that's a really good point yeah and complaint departments they fucking hate it people hate it you know they hate that gig yeah I'm a meter may would be the worst I think or one of the cops are one of the worst I always tell people like you know this people like fuck cops are hate cops cops are just people okay yeah people can vary they can be wonderful and they can be terrible yeah and the if you imagine what it would be like if almost everyone you talk to is allowing to you almost everyone you talk to is in the middle of a crime they don't want you to figure out they're in the middle of a crime yeah everyone's speeding in their lot in no speeding like you're just dealing with liars all day are you been drinking certain no you do you fucking smell like alcohol get out of the car asshole and you just like enough you're tired tired of your life being threatened by these people you're tired of the this having to enforce these laws and nobody wants to listen and and they develop there the worst developing this us versus them mentality yeah you think about 20 years as a police officer the your perception of people you know it would be like asking a proctologist what you know what asshole smell like right you know like you're only dealing with people with like asshole problem yeah exactly yeah it's human beings are very bizarre man we're very bizarre and our solutions for dealing with issues oftentimes create new issues right and I think that is most certainly the case with the TSA and I think that's most certainly the case of police I think are are ways of handling things create greater issues I talk about humans all the time and I often compare us to animals and animals don't have any of these problems or do they but they would they would if what if they would each other if they could lie right can a dog lie if they could they'd be lying like a motherfucker could you imagine if a dog ate your steak like if you put a steak on the counter and the dog ate it and you like did you eat my steak he's like no no right dude but if a dog could talk could it lie that's one the biggest problem with comparing the humans and animals is that we can't ask the animal questions and get feedback from them we have to just think well the dog ate the steak and now he's you know involved in some other act dog activity but how does he lie because I can't ask him if he did it or not can it can a dog be deceptive right and you can maybe teach a dog that like if you if you cover this thing up I won't know but is the dog actually intending to cover it or does the dog just know that this action means this result right is it lying and that's a fantastic question it is do they have a capacity for deception right is that a complex what's really fun is trying to figure out how to even test it how can I prove that this dog can lie that's a very difficult and we still haven't been able to do it well here's one yeah I don't think they can lie but cats when a cat is creeping up on a bird aren't they lying I mean they're being deceptive they're slowly moved because they don't want you to perceive that they're there that's a great point there's clearly a lot of deception in the animal kingdom camouflage sure yeah right but Venus fly traps even in the plant world yeah yeah this is just a beautiful snap right is jail I mean eat you here's another question if I took a monkey like that was in the jungle right and I time traveled him back eight thousand years and I put him up in that same jungle with the other monkeys be like what you're of monkey from the future you're so different maybe not eight thousand but maybe half a million half a million sure but if I took you and sent you back just 200 years you would be from the future and if people would freak out I would run shit you would run right but no no I would run shit this monkey culture does dog culture change the same speed right with the dogs be like oh whatever it's the year 10,000 BC it's fine dogs are still dogs but humans are taking time travel and fit in that well well there's so many less variables in the dog world because they don't communicate they don't have a database of information they're drawing from the right languages so the difference between a person of 200 years ago and a dog from 200 years ago I think a dog would be exactly the same 200 years ago yeah I don't think there would be of course different breeds you know like that people of engineers sure sure pit bulls and poodles that wouldn't exist 200 years ago that have been I mean I have a dog it's called a Regency Mastiff and it's a Mastiff that's been engineered by a friend of mine and he actually took a bunch of different types of dogs and he bred a smaller Mastiff that's more athletic wow and he also made sure that these dogs have no dog aggression no people aggression like this sweetest dog ever like my my three-year-old would just go up to it and grab it and grab her arms around its neck and it would kiss her and it's like I never worry about this dog he's the sweetest and it's because he was engineered but engineered over the course of a couple decades by a friend yeah so I know like the whole lineage I know how it all started it's really really fascinating dogs are technology mm-hmm a lot of ways yeah yeah they don't they don't have you know the database like if you could go back 200 years ago you would be the wizard of the future you know how many years do you have what you have in your head I mean with you what you've accumulated when you're if you could go back in time with a fucking iPad and your Vsauce videos on YouTube my god you would be one king maybe but could I convince people uh just just knowing um something about the moon doesn't mean that they're gonna believe me and that's that's one of the things people don't think about when they imagine being the king if they could travel back in time is that sure you could explain to people that where you're from everyone has a cell phone because you invent one for them no could you put a satellite up into orbit no but you could explain that in the future people will put things into orbit but would you know more about how to get something into orbit than just some uh rando guy from the year 1200 I certainly wouldn't but some people would and you probably wouldn't well I don't know no more than I would but you would wait you would know way more than they would they would have to listen to you if you had an iPad they'd fucking for sure I don't know how helpful I'd be I wouldn't know what kind of propellants to use I would just be like we need something strong enough to escape earth's gravity and they'd be like well okay but what is that and I'm like well I don't exactly know I know that the space shuttle had uh liquid fuel in its tank and it had solid fuel in its solid rocket boosters the SRBs and they'll be like okay but what is the fuel made of I'm like I don't know where do we get the fuel I don't know well you would kind of have an understanding of explosions and propellants and things that are flammable right but does that mean that I could build a rocket that I explained to a uh a culture how to make one well that's one of the cool things about human beings is that we we work on each other's work totally and without like they're you know Obama came under a lot of criticism for this whole uh you know you didn't build it thing like if you built a small business you didn't build you didn't build that infrastructure you didn't build but that is kind of it was I don't think it was eloquently put and it left open a lot of room for counter but the reality of it is every single thing that any human being has invented only took place because someone invented the ability to communicate somebody invented education someone invented a society that's civil enough that you could think and and pontificate on these things and not have to worry about the barbarians coming over the hills with fucking spears like all all this only takes place because all I mean the only reason why you can build a rocket is because someone built alloys because someone filled out figured out propellants because someone figured out contained explosion because someone figured out velocity and speed and how much energy you actually have to have to escape the energy of gravity pulling you down and all those the the pull of the earth and then the you know the resistance of air and all these different variables there had to be untold number of people that had figured these things out before you came along with your next step right so how valuable would I be to people in the past I feel like I'd be most valuable when it came to just like all the jokes that I know that you need is made up in between the past and now but I don't know how helpful I'd be about just like oh you guys didn't know there's a better way to grow corn like we like corn is really cheap from where I'm from and they're like okay but how do you grow it and I'm like well I don't know exactly how they do it you guys know about Monsanto yeah yeah well they make a you know special seeds that their you know their pesticides will own will not kill pests just do that yeah and they can be like what's a pesticide I'm like well I don't know it's like a chemical that that kills pests and they're like well great you're just making up fictional stories right I can do that too Cars fly there you go you can build one over time though you'd be able to explain enough that you would be completely fascinating I was watching a documentary recently about locust about the various times throughout history where locusts and filled the sky like clouds of locust and it was about the old west and the army being brought into a deliver food to these poor people that had lived in you know the 1800s or 1700s or whatever the fuck it was but they had these black and white photos of the army and they're bringing in these these wagons filled with food and these poor people their crops just been completely devastated by these these things that just showed up and filled the sky these grasshoppers and you know if you could go back and talk to those people and explain pesticides and shit and like this is what what what we need to do is find the root cause of the problem and find these bugs and keep them from from breeding and like they be like what the fuck are you talking about like pesticides what is that well it's chemical that you spray on and keeps the brands from me food like cooking like if I went back to before there was pizza I could probably still make a pizza because as long as bread had still been like invented and there was cheese and meat I could combine them in the right way to make a pizza I don't know how to make exactly make pizza dough from the ingredients that have back in the past but that could blow people's mind if I made it really delicious pizza huh be hard to get used where do you get used from the store see that's the problem and this is really well put in a show called connections that was on television a long time ago in the very first episode the guys like what if everyone on earth disappeared what would you do and everyone's like oh why know what I do I'd like you know find a farm and I could grow food he's like really you could grow food when do you plant these seeds how far down do you plan them and everyone goes okay nope I don't know well you you would probably be able to figure out a lot of shit you know if you had a farm if you had a well uh-huh if you had animals you would put you're a smart guy you'd probably be able to figure out a lot of shit you definitely make some errors but you'd be able to figure out a lot of shit that's not right yeah you're right the real part problem would be re-engineering you know the the really complex stuff like communications networks and that would be that would be over I mean if if it was only up to you know if you could get a random group of 100 people just completely random and there would be the only people that survive we would be caveman I mean we literally if we if you only had a hundred people and we removed all the technology yeah we have today and the hundred people had to move forward and progress just based on the information that they have inside their heads fuck good luck we in that's the weird thing about the human organism it really is a giant super organism that needs itself it yeah that's right there there are definitely people you'd want to be in that group of hundred and people that you wouldn't wouldn't be nearly as helpful sure but we need to balance each other out maybe we could get some of the people that were in that group maybe they had some great idea scientifically but maybe they were fucked up socially maybe they couldn't deal with having the responsibility of being the alpha you know maybe it's a bad yeah look we've all seen people that get attention or that get press or rather fame and then it goes to their head and they become crazy and they become cult you know it's a bad mix for them right you know and then other people handle it you know Jimmy Carter style with eloquence and race like him in a position of power and influence he becomes more introspective more you know more passionate more compassionate yeah whereas other people just start believing their own bullshit and like what if there's one out of a hundred believes his own bullshit and he's like ordering us around and like oh well this fucking guy well he thinks just just because he knows how to grow corn he can tell us what to do right like you develop a whole new set of social issues I want to see the first person to become king I was on Wikipedia the other day looking at like the Queen of England I guess and I could just keep clicking back in to find the previous ruler and I was like how far back does this go right where's the first guy who one day was like hey could you get me that thing why uh because I'm king yeah that's a new thing I just invented I girded that come from I want to witness the I can imagine all kinds of scenarios like something happened you know lightning struck in a tree caught fire and someone said I caused that now you all have to obey me I have this like divine authority and that's where it came from but the idea of leaders emerging that way maybe they just were the strongest person I don't know it probably definitely started off with who can fuck everybody up I probably started off with who can pick up the heaviest sword who's the biggest yeah it had I mean that's how it is in the primate world if we run to go back to the primate world the alpha is the one with the sharpest teeth the biggest muscles the the largest body I mean that's that's what they are if you go to champs if you go to lions if you go to any any animal that doesn't have a language yeah that's the the there's the leader of the tribe there's the alpha lion that comes in and all the male lions have to scatter until he's challenged by a new young lion and then he's forced into exile and has to defend for himself right happens with wolves it happens with all sorts of primates you know the alpha being that means the the one leader and that also probably serves a function of the one leader serves this function of there has to be some sort of competition in order for them to continue to progress and so this competition for for breeding rights you know it ensures strength and diversity you know this competition also manifests itself when it comes to the human world if one can figure out how to dominate all that well that's an interesting trait and you can get some shit done if you could figure that out but then others need to challenge this one because you know why you know you can't be stagnant there has to be new new challenges and new competition and then everybody will have to elevate their game accordingly because of this and that's sort of eventually what leads us to 2014 America I mean that's essentially what's going on right now right here we are sort of but now it's become bizarre and it's not really one it's one that's a figurehead which is controlled by other giant groups of individuals which we call corporations and military industrial complex and all these different various points of influence that are trying to change the course of how things are done in order to benefit themselves or their group and that mean it's essentially like alpha male shit but on this really bizarre and distorted scale yeah yeah yeah I mean it's really just the same as monkeys right it's yeah sharp the analogy is still very very clear yeah yeah but also constantly in competition and moving forward and there's folks that want to say well that competition should stop and this is all terrible and morally and ethically absolutely I agree with you 100 percent for the sake of the human race sure for the sake of children and education and poverty absolutely I'm with you but as an objective observer that's standing back and looking at what has got us to this point it has been all of that it has been all this competition for dominance it's been all this weird alpha stuff I mean that's what's that's what's led to this point having these conversations sitting over a laptop and talking on the internet I mean it was some really fascinating people had to figure this out and there had to be a certain amount of compensation for their efforts for their efforts like Microsoft achieve this global dominance as this gigantic promoter of computers because there's a massive amount of reward involved in that Bill Gates is 93 billion dollars yeah I mean it was this was an entirely altruistic people can talk all they want about Bill Gates is the amount of money he's given to charity and he's if you have 93 billion dollars you really need to have some huge charitable programs going on because otherwise you're just going to look like when I was a kid it was always like can't I just write Bill Gates to give me a million dollars like that's such a small amount of his his his net worth couldn't he just give me a million to be awesome would you imagine being a guy that has that kind of money running into people like I'm not that kind of rich by any stretch of the imagination but I constantly run into people that want me to fund their projects yeah yeah and there's not enough time in the world to engage these people and become a part of their life and their world so they just want you to just like listen you don't have to be involved just give me the money and all you have to fuck out of here man yeah you got to get your own money like I don't have time for this like this is well you know you have to think about it but I would because I would if I gave you money I'd be thinking about yep like and I don't I'm not involved in your project but I'm minuscule in comparison to a guy like Bill Gates right I think it really is true that that the whole story about if Bill Gates walked down the street and saw a quarter in the street and he like got went out of his way to pick it up he would lose money if he found a hundred dollars he would get your money yeah a hundred dollars it would cost him more time yeah it's of his time yeah you know the fold it and put it as wallet I don't have the time for that shit can you imagine being so so important and valuable that like just folding your own money was not worth it well also this is a weird thing of you become this bizarre target yeah when you're you're a bank you're a walking bank yeah like also enough to do is grab Bill Gates and lock him in a room see let's all let you out man but I need a million dollars right for him that's nothing right a million dollars when you have ninety three thousand million yeah I mean obviously he doesn't have like a bank account with that much that he could withdraw a lot of it is in other assets and it's not it's not all liquid but I wonder yeah if we asked him to just produce by the end of this week a pile of cash how big of a pile of cash could he produce in a week and how much would that change someone's life or a group of people's lives or a community's life if Bill Gates decided okay I'm going to create utopia yeah I'm gonna go to tijuana and I'm gonna buy it I'm gonna buy everything how much would it cost to buy everything in tijuana and everyone and have them all agreed to this yeah and Lee hire everyone and give everyone you know like healthy organic food and set up farms give people really high paying jobs and like rebuild the entire infrastructure and could he create a utopia with ninety three billion dollars or is that not enough you could you could do something awesome I don't think people would accept the utopia they'd always find a reason to be unhappy well they always want to be the alpha yeah that it was gonna be the Bill Gates's boss a million dollars you know how what a million dollars looks like yeah there's an image of what a a million dollars looks like in stacks of hundreds yeah what a billion looks like and what a trillion right a trillion is fucking a trillion is a lot a million isn't you know it's not as much as you would think yeah yeah I've always wanted to do an episode about that and like actually work with a bank and go to like their vault and say could I show people a million dollars in hundreds and how it's I think it's I think that's just like five rooms of paper like that kind of stacks of a well ten thousand dollars is a small amount yeah hundred dollar bills it's not that much right you know ten hundreds is a thousand right ten stacks of that is ten thousand it's not that much it's not that much no and so when you look at a million in stacks of hundreds it's a relatively small pile yeah and a billion gets pretty big but a trillion is where shit gets really weird the thing about five rooms of paper might be for dollar bills I didn't come prepared for all these perspectives but yeah a million dollars it's less less dollars than you would think in breaking bad the big pile of money that was insane here is it here's the image this is what it looks like what is that that small one that's a million that's a million that's a million that's a small stacks of million that's a billion that's a million oh wow that's a billion that's a billion that's a billion and here's a trillion car power those are double stacks yeah it's essentially a football field filled with cash yeah and it's stacked up you know like Shaquille O'Neill high yeah just a lot of fucking money have you ever seen those um images of those uh Mexican drug lords they bust they go to their house they have like a whole room filled with under dollars yeah these guys I didn't have banks they just have stacks and stacks of money yeah played it gone and often it's in multiple currencies they've got dollars and euros and and pounds and and all because drugs are illegal yeah yeah yeah for it well you know it's really tough to like do a I got really into money laundering during uh breaking bad I like was obsessed with coming up with the best way to to to make money look legitimate what's the best way well I feel like you know running something like a strip club is pretty good because the clients are unlikely to really ever want to tell a lot about how much they spent and what they spent it on so you could easily say yeah I made a million dollars last year at my strip club like I dare you to find the clients that and and and account for all of this and cash and they would pay in cash right right um but also I was wondering what about just being like a life coach I could just say oh yeah someone paid me a million dollars to teach them how to be happier like you would that but that's a write-off someone paid you a million mm-hmm they would be able to write that off it's like educational expenses isn't it coaching so so you're saying the strip club's still a better way yes about yeah yeah yeah especially because it's cash mostly but then here's yeah you've you've got to get make that money look clean it just keeping stacks of it in your house means that maybe you could totally go for like nice dinners all the time but you can't buy a house very easily if if everyone just goes well how are you paying for this I have a room full of cash that I don't want to bank to know that I have could you please do a business with me it's tough yeah well you know they were running into this issue in Colorado with the medical marijuana uh-huh uh then becoming uh or recreational marijuana rather becoming uh legal and then banks were not accepting the money from these oh no kidding yeah and so they didn't they couldn't use credit cards they had to do everything in cash and then they would have to take that cash and they would have to take it when it reached certain amount they would have to buy bank notes so they have to bring that money to the bank in the cash yeah and exchange it so you have essentially have these workers you know I don't know how much you're paying in per hour but they're driving around with insane amounts of money that's how safe yeah it's very unsafe and very easily targeted yeah there's just giant medical marijuana what do you think take the money well because the federal government the federal government is not allowing marijuana not only that here's where it gets really tricky and this is important for anybody who's listening to this that lives in Washington state or lives in Colorado where as a state marijuana is legal federally still not legal so if you go into a national park and you're in a national park in Colorado or in Colorado people getting arrested they're getting arrested by federal authorities I should know more about this is fascinating yeah so the banks because they're federally insured can well can't the bank just not ask where the money came from I guess exactly no I think you have to I think you have to be able to report it because otherwise you're you're helping abiding drug dealers what they do in Florida and cocaine cocaine cowboys well that's a long time ago and that's a good question because they they did it illegally there's more there's more banks per capita in Florida than anywhere else in the world no kidding in Miami yeah and they think that that is essentially because of the cocaine industry and that Miami the cocaine cowboys which is a fantastic documentary by my friend Billy Corbin I've got to watch that Cowboys 1 and 2 it's great and we've been going back and forth on Twitter I got to get that guy on the podcast because he's a really interesting guy on his own and his documentaries are fantastic but cocaine cowboys is in my opinion the very best documentary ever on how crazy cocaine was in Miami at one time the entire graduating class of the police department they either wound up dead or in jail man like there were so much corruption that everyone was selling Coke everyone was doing Coke the money was coming in in such insane piles and it was so unmanageable that banks were popping up left and right to launder it people were just fucking it coaked up and doing crazy shit like Scarface was really sort of a minor version of what was really going on like the reality the reality was crazier than Tony Montana Tony Montana was very mild in comparison to the actual the actual dealings and craziness that was going on during the 80s the cocaine days wow it's amazing it's a fantastic documentary and also all because the fact that it was illegal I mean the same thing that's going on in Mexico right now I mean they kind of put the kabash on it in America or at least slowed it down considerably but the reason why all this illegal violence was going on in the first place or violence is going on in the first place because it was illegal yeah it was only criminals could sell it and then they had to compete for dominance right all violence was going on in the first place or violence going on the first place because it was illegal only criminals could sell it and then they had to compete for dominance right and you had no rule cash all around in houses and stuff yeah yeah yeah this guy was a pilot used to have these uh... holes that he dug in the backyard and would put garbage bags filled with like a million dollars right in his back and most money cash you've ever held i'm really held a lot yeah i was thinking couple thousand i think i mean yeah i think two thousand i bought a couch with cash once because it was a weird deal which sounds so weird now but it was like well you know if you pay in cash it's like two hundred dollars less and i'm like really so i just went to the bank and i'm like i can get two thousand cash or whatever it was and they put it on the rope and i walked back across the street and bought the couch with the cash and that's because they have like credit card fees like i've had people ask me if i could pay with uh... visa instead of american express yeah because american express would give you like a higher fee uh... yeah i've been to uh... well like bars that don't accept american express yeah and it purely because they hate the feed or something i don't know i'm not talking about anything i know anything i think that's what it is yeah because i've i've i have seen that before i've had people say to me is it you have visa like we take this if you don't it's okay but what why don't you want it and i'll tell you will they kill you with the fees all i didn't know that varies american express is always a weird one too because it was one where you paid it all off at the end of the month which i liked you know it wasn't like a visa card where you say if you owe a thousand bucks you pay you know to ten a month it wasn't that it was like you if you spent a thousand bucks the end of the month here's your bill of thousand bucks which i like to just get take care of that i don't want that floating i've been in debt before and it's a gross feeling to have this money just like sitting over your head so the american express thing i like that you paid it off but i guess they charge more for that because otherwise why would it benefit someone to paying cash like why would they want you to give them cash well they could also involved yeah well with cash they could just pretend they wouldn't have to even pay tax on it could just say and you're going illegal i'm not going illegal i'm going to be able to figure out the legitimate reason yes it could have been the fees yeah you have to be right yeah uh gonna forget all the details about this but i'm now remembering that i think i had five thousand dollars in my hand once because i was investing this money in uh... uh... strip cloth raffi r a okay and i didn't have any checks with me i i i i had checks in some other city and and i'm like well how some i going to give this five thousand dollars i so i got the cash and then turns out you can't just show up with the cash to invest in the raffi r a some like a okay crutch can't no they did be they wouldn't even accept it and that i was told by the the wealth management company that if you do that they don't want people coming in and out carrying lots of cash because that can then cause like problems outside for people know that people are coming into this business carrying lots of cash huh so it wouldn't accept it so i had to just go and order more checks but i now i had five thousand dollars i had to put back in the bank uh... and my mom did it for me that's a lot of understanding why this story is so weird but she tried to do it in the bank flipped out and they were like where did you get this money and she had to fill it a form and like tell him how she got it and what her job was and why she had all this money and cash wow that bizarre we we had a guy on recently um... who was a uh... a poker pro and he was talking about poker players who come back from other countries and they win these poker tournaments oh yeah thousands of dollars and a lot of times it gets taken from them at the border because they don't believe that they won this plan you have to prove that you write like you've you've got fifty thousand dollars on you oh yeah yeah you're a fucking drug dealer like no i'm a professional poker player i want to turn it here's my paper where i could not go to court and they would force them to go to court try to get their money back they essentially steal their money and then make that but they why would they have their poker winnings from a professional poker game in cash wouldn't you get well because you get it cashed out like say if you're in macau or something like that uh... you win some gigantic poker yeah you know thing yeah you get your money and then you cash out you know you cash your chips they give you like in vegas like i have a friend who's uh... degenerate camler uh-huh but he's also super wealthy so he uh... he's dano white he owns the uf cities uh-huhs of uf city swarth stupid amounts of money but he'll gamble and win a million dollars in the night day and they give it to him in garbage bags like he has to go out to you leave it goes out to his car they grab bags and they fill like a million dollars they fill garbage bag up with money and he'll leave with a million dollars in cash in a bag always talked about it many times why did they talk about a podcast they should they would direct a positive wouldn't they nope nope they give it to you in cash wow i don't know if you want cash i don't know if they can direct a positive i'm not a gambler i don't understand yeah i don't know any of this the most i've ever gambled on something is i think maybe a thousand dollars on multiple bets like before i used to be the commentator for the uf city yeah um i would bet on fights okay um and usually it wasn't even the uf city was like other organizations and i would go in and i would kind of had an inside line like they're still to this day i have a friend uh... and i give him pics like whenever the fights go like i go this is a lock this is a lock yeah this is a bullshit of this these odds are idiots i don't know how this got in like there's a lot to this day that are really bad really go big guy who's a two to one favorite and he really should be a five to one underdog happens all the time and it's because in order to understand mixed martial arts on a very very high level you have to some competition you have to have competed you have to train you have to do it on a regular basis and you have to know the people and you have to know them inside and out you have to know what they're capable of if they're front runners there's certain people that will fold there's certain people that you know there's certain people that just have a an intangible quality that they know how to pull things off and that's how you sort of formulate the odds and a lot of times the odds makers are fat old white dudes who really don't know what the fuck's going on they just know based on you know like this guy's more popular this guy's more famous or this guy he's beating a lot of tough guys like they don't know the other guy he's fighting like uh... there's certain guys when they enter into the UFC for the first time uh... they the you know a lot of people don't know how they did in other organizations that's when you can get sort of the best odds and so interesting this friend of mine i've given them these picks were like way over eighty percent hmm like way over eighty percent winning so if i was a if i was a real gambling man you know i'm not just because i don't trust myself but if i was a real gambling man i would uh... i'd be fucking killing them with that yeah that's that's fascinating who does get to set odds they have to be pretty smart but they're not they're not some of them are some of them are smart you know i don't know who does it i don't know the people i used to know the guy who did it for u.s.a. today um... very smart guy and it was really interesting talking about odds but again an older guy didn't train you know didn't fight he was very knowledgeable but i think that certain levels there's certain levels of understanding and that the ultimate level of understanding like it there's a certain guys like you know what the shit hits the fan i think this guy folds up and you got a you got a take that in the consideration when he's fighting the guy who's not going to fold up but uh... odds are very bit like i i don't get how do you fucking make odds on a football game like you're gonna you're gonna bet that these guys who like you have to follow injuries you have to make sure houses ankle i heard that guy's gonna bad ankle what's going on with the neck and this guy's got some new surgery for his fucking hip and hmm okay take that into consideration and this guy dropped the ball last week going we got a fact of that and there's x amount of players on this team and why amount of players on that team and you're all trying to move a ball across the line with all these random variables and it's not who's gonna win and who's gonna lose but it's like by how many points yeah and they're right so often no the right so my friend joey dia says you never see a bookie with a part-time job that that's jolly yeah the i don't get it but when you would think about it like if people can understand the stock market which they sort of can uh... and there's so much money involved in the stock market they would be able to figure out the variables involved in any sort of athletic gambling too if there's money involved someone's gonna try to do really well at it uh... insurance is that way you know there's a bunch of people that are way smarter than you who are cranking away at machines going what should we charge to make sure that we come out of this well yeah and how do we fuck these people over when they do win or they do uh... have a legitimate claim how do we draw it out so we make as much money in interest during the time where we have yet while they're waiting yeah i mean that's what they do it's what they they means the more and the more they can get you to give up some people just give up when faced with adversity yeah face with a challenge like you know you're gonna have to dispute this claim oh fuck a lot of people just give up they just fold up shot well maybe they're just picking their battles right there like looks not even worth it to me to fight this one mm-hmm i'm gonna save that energy for something else yeah well there's that there's definitely that and there's other people that go you know i don't i don't care if this costs me a million dollars to win a hundred it's the principal yeah yeah yeah those people were dangerous i had a great experience with the my my cell phone uh it was it was stolen i think and uh yeah insurance fixed it all up i'm just got a new phone really yeah because i'm it i was paying for it though right i paid for like the best insurance like replacement policy and all i had to do is go in and say yeah this honestly was was stolen i you know i'm not lying to you check a box and then the next day they mailed me a brand new phone well it's really crazy it's people that have jewelry and they have insurance and and jewelry like i know a woman who lost a very expensive diamond ring uh-huh and she filed an insurance claim got paid and then found it in a jacket pocket so what do you do later i don't know what she did i don't know where that well she's a friend of a friend but she apparent i hope she gave the money back she gets caught she's a wealthy woman right if she gets caught she's fucked like they you know this is like a seventy thousand dollar ring or something crazy like i've jumped giant fat rock and she founded in her jacket pocket like i think years later like she had made the claim and the whole deal and gotten paying right she thought that some workers stole it right which definitely happened and then you find out that you you haven't actually committed fraud though right and unless you decide to not tell them right away that you found the ring and give the money back but isn't it amazing that you could just do that you could just say someone stole my ring yeah you can't prove who you file a police report and then you get the money and then you could just put the ring on the darkness like fucking go home right right what i saw because this this phone uh i know where i left it and it was kind of in a public place and then it was gone and i'm like oh i'm really sure i left it here i'm sure it was taken hmm why would someone take a phone though too everyone's phone has a lock on it when you what are you gonna do with that thing you well if you can just like reset the whole thing right my phone you know especially with iPhones you fucking it mean people have been busted before yeah that's that's happened many times in the TSA worker got busted because they saw that and i pad yeah good fuck them fucking criminals yeah i took it yeah and they found it they went they traced it to the person's house yeah i watched the episode where the guys like yeah you know i there's like i pet in here and he's like what no it's my wife's and they're like well yeah no it's not that was really awkward yeah yeah super awkward yeah um how do they what do they do with android phones they have a similar yeah yeah they do like a find my phone feature yeah um and i've been using this thing called google now which is uh for really pretty fun i usually never update things i never allow things to know my location you know but this one i'm like i'm gonna just see what it does and it was able to determine where i lived where my girlfriend lived it knows that i like like taco bell so it'll just tell me when i come to new cities it's like okay there's a taco bell eight minutes away uh here's a conversion between the currency usually spend in the currency that they use where you are now here's some things that you might want to do based on where you're standing and i'm like whoa yeah it's getting really squirrely with google it's i love it i love it for convenience but man if you ever did something illegal like you're fucked by who i said if you ever did something illegal you wanted to track your whereabouts like oh oh you're not you mean it's all documented nuts that we are carrying around devices that tell our locations speeds yep our speed speeds yeah if you're speeding it can be determined it from your cell phone yeah yeah that's a fact as you clip these different stations these different cell ports yeah or whatever they are channels yeah towers towers and satellites to yeah satellites yeah well because you're that your uh GPS is all satellite base so even if you have no connection you can still use the GPS to know your location is that true because it's true yeah it used to be that GPS was uh that on your phone essentially it was it is you should calculating it from but it was calculating it from cell phone towers now it's straight you there's different ways that it works but i know that like when i was in the the radio quiet zone in west virginia there's no uh cell phone service but uh satellite in GPS worked oh because they're not talking with the same signals that are like banned out there i said yeah the interference probably behind the times on the information because i know the old cell phones didn't work the GPS didn't work the navigation didn't work when you had no service right i think it can pull up you know where you are and how fast you're moving but it you need the data plan to get the like images of the ground and the roads and the where's the nearest thing that's all from data i think i mean it depends what your plan is and what device you're using but this is gonna come a time where you're not gonna be able to drive it's coming really soon that's another google thing these damn google cars the self-driving cars yeah well it's it's it's way safer right in there if the world take out all the fun i had a panic attack on the way here by the way uh oh yeah i was driving and i just all of a sudden thought what if my sight disappeared immediately that and i was going so fast in this car they would be terrible and that sort of freaky me out that's funny because i had a similar dream recently it wasn't what if my sight disappeared is what if i had a navigate without sight and this is the strangest fucking dream i can't believe i'm remembering this but someone uh i don't know who the person was but they were very familiar to me they were driving by putting their their hand uh across their eyes and resting it on a mattress so they were driving from a mattress looking down like there was no visual whatsoever and then they were steering with there and they were like you just got to go on your instinct so i was like what the fuck are you talking about like and they were they were moving a car from like without seeing where they were going at all like how do you know where you're going like why no the path and i know how fast i'm going i'm like oh this is so fucking crazy and then i woke up it was one of those like this is just too much uh i gotta wake up yeah i woke up and for whatever reason i remember this but the idea of relying entirely on the sense of sight that's the one sense that you use to determine where you are and where you're going and it was just the craziest thing to me that all this was being done without it and i think of it as in terms of submarines like submarines freak me the fuck out because there's no windows in those goddamn things it's just a metal tube it's relying on radar but yeah but open you're in the ocean and you're fucking moving around like all this water pressure and this rocks around and you have to rely on this radar if the radar goes out you're piloting this huge tube through the ocean with no idea of what's around you yeah that's crazy submarines are fucking crazy i mean that they figured out how to pilot things with sound and use radar waves to figure out where objects are and sown are and that's just bizarre yeah it is and in the the suits that we built to like make that all possible or what inspired space suits um never been in a submarine oh crazy is fucking James Cameron speaking about yeah yeah you got to go so rich that's like your hobby deepest depths of the earth he went to the deepest depths of the of the ocean he's like the first guy to do the mariana trench by himself yeah crazy fuck all all to make avatar too supposedly or as an excuse to make avatar too uh that's clever well that's one of those he's one of those guys that were like what would you do if you had x amount of money well that's what he would do yeah and he's doing it yeah I mean a lot of people would say like what would you do you know fucking fifty billion dollars and all the resources in the world and all these engineers working for you and what would you do why it probably devise the greatest submarine ever i was wondering what are the biggest wishes like if you could just have one wish what would you wish for what has anyone surveyed the population and been like well most people actually wish that they could fly or they wish for money or they wish for x-ray vision like I want to see a list of the top ten most wished wished wishes they'd probably wish to have infinite wishes but isn't that like a trick like isn't that in a children's book yeah you're not allowed to wish for more wishes that's always important yeah that's the number one caveat yeah you're allowed to uh what would you wish for it was you well great now I'm having to answer this myself yeah why wouldn't you though um you're gonna ask it why wouldn't you try to answer it yourself before you well mean you know my answer should be that my wish is that there's complete peace on earth and everyone's happy right that's what would be yeah but you know what that's the kind of wish that could easily you had to be careful what you wish for how long right for how long and also what does it mean that everyone's happy yeah is it that nothing changes but everyone's just has this contentness that won't go away everyone's on project yeah it's everyone's got this sss and then I'm like that's not what I meant but um I don't know I don't think flying would be that cool it'd be fun like kind of but it'd be too windy I'd have to build a suit yeah the ability to teleport just I want to be in New Zealand now yeah I'm in New Zealand teleport um how many times did you be able to do it would you be able to do it like blinking did you be able to do it as long as you're alive yeah and then also when you teleported would it still be you that's a huge question about teleportation it's like well wait if I if I assemble a bunch of atoms somewhere else to exactly replicate you is that's that you well here's the real tricky one um our memories memories are always very strange right our memories of just my memories of yesterday yeah here's a perfect example I had a great time yesterday I had a really fun podcast then I went and did two comedy shows at two different comedy clubs that drove around I hung out with my kids I had a great yesterday but my memory of it is quite sketchy sure I mean I can recall things in my hand that I'm reasonably sure I did but it's pretty sketchy and then I went to sleep I shut off and I woke up and I woke up with the memory of this life and how do I even know that that's all the stuff that really happened how do I not know that I just started my life today yeah that's a great question like how can you prove that the universe didn't start 10 seconds or your life didn't start 10 seconds or yeah or at the very least when you arose when your consciousness mean you know for sure reasonably sure that you were unconscious and then you became conscious this morning yeah and when you became conscious this morning you like where am I am in my bed uh what time is it let me check my phone what's today I think it's Wednesday okay what do I do today oh I've uh Michael from VESOS is uh coming over is going to do a podcast that's really cool okay cool and I'm assuming based on my memory that this is the life that I've chosen and that this is the the path that I'm on and this is the events that are going to take place based on my iPhone calendar or whatever but the reality is it's mostly just memory of a life that I've assumed that lived yeah when I was a kid I would freak myself out by just thinking about how I was trapped in my own mind no one else was ever going to see out of my eyes no one one else was me and it really made me feel lonely and trapped but isn't that of all the people I could have been seen out of out of all the minds I could have been on this one that's a weird thing to freak out about that's a very specific way to look at it that you're trapped in your own mind and you felt lonely because you were trapped in your own mind I've never felt that I've never known one would ever look out of my eyes and be my head but maybe they will you know the idea that we can record with a phone yeah you know you can record video and audio you could I could show you some stuff that happened yesterday right right this is a bird landed on my porch look at that cool bird yeah there's a video of it you can see the bird oh there's the video that's sort of timed capture right yeah captured a moment in time there's gonna come a point in time where there's a much more sophisticated way of doing that and I think it's going to be based on like some sort of a virtual reality Oculus Rift type situation where we're going to have whether it would be a Google lens a contact lens or whether it would be some sort of a neural implant that's able to accurately record what you see in which you experience and then they're going to take it to the next level and the really advanced versions of it we're going to be able to record emotions and touch and feeling and and your own the battles that you have in your mind of perception the battles of is this person being mean or they're just doing their job or how do I how do I go with this is this traffic annoying or is it fascinating there's all these cars right you know what is you know what's my take on this and how do I choose to perceive the world because that's a lot of what the world is is the choices that you make in perception it's not just the perception itself but how do you interpret that perception and what do you decide that it means yeah and you know maybe you could like have insight as to why a person's fucked up like there's there's some what was me people that are really annoying like everything is what was me this always happens this bullshit and you know is it could you get in their head and could you find like oh you've got a hitch here right and how you look at stuff like you automatically you develop a pattern where you automatically assume the world's out to get you yeah like I know a dude and he's I wouldn't say he's smart because he's socially very dumb but he collects a lot of information and he believes that he's smart because he collects a lot of information and he what does collect information mean like he learns facts well he runs a podcast and he's a conspiracy theorist on maximum I'm like he believes in chem trails and anyone who disagrees with him's an 80 80 super confrontational about it but he thinks that he's really bright but anybody who listens to his podcast whose objective could say there's something wrong with this guy like he thinks everyone's a CIA disinformation agent and like it's really really bizarre when you listen to like he's accused me of being a disinformation agent for the CIA or the FBI I thought you were are you not anymore okay it's so fucking stupid but he in his mind he makes all these connections right and he believes these conspiracies abound and that they're everywhere and I would love to see what's wrong with his brain I would love to like go on like a schematic tour of the synapses and how they fire and go oh you've got asperger's oh you got a disease yeah conspiracy's are fascinating it's like you can't admit that just stuff happens it has to all be part of some planet it has to all be controlled by some like organization or person well this is why because some of them are real this is why conspiracies are fascinating to people like a lot of folks want to be in the no nonsense crowd and they want to say well you know conspiracy there's people can't admit things just happen okay but here's a good one yeah 9-11 do you think that 9-11 happened meaning do you think that planes flew into towers and people died do you think that happened yeah I do okay well then you believe in conspiracies because the what's the conspiracy that people conspired to do that oh yeah yeah yeah but I'm talking about the like things are being hidden from us okay do you believe that the government has tried to hide things from people oh they have for sure right yeah so then they're real and they invent that those if the vents have actually taken place if the vents like like operation northwards you aware of operation northwards no so one of the ones that conspiracy theorists love to point to because it's pretty fascinating in 1962 this was a this was signed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Operation North Woods was a plan to get the support of the American public for war against Cuba and what they were going to do is they were going to blow up a drone airliner they were going to blame it on Cuba oh yeah okay if you heard this ever I think I read about false flag operations all these things and I know that one came up this is one of the big ones because it was right around the time where we were considering going to war with Cuba because Cuba was allied with the Soviet Union on the whole deal and they were going to arm Cuban friendlies and attack Guantanamo Bay and kill American soldiers I mean this is there was a whole series of events that they were planning this is all vetoed by Kennedy and it was you know a real false flag plan and if you look at that you realize well that's how they think like the people that were running the government at that point in time at least 1962 there was a certain faction of them that thinks this way yeah everything evolves including evil everything changes evolves becomes more complicated becomes more you know they they get better the innovate everything it's just the way things go nothing nothing stays still everything must elevate including its conspiracies yeah I mean if that's the case if operation northwoods was really signed by the joint Chief Sustain and the Freedom of Information Act the documents that have been released show that it was right if that's the case and no one went to jail for that because no one did those are fucking criminals me those guys were planning on killing the children of Americans who went over and were were working as soldiers believing that they were defending freedom and all this jazz but they were going to be killed by other American soldiers or other American you know military people who are working in kahoots with the joint Chiefs of Staff that's crazy it's amazing yeah amazing fact so if that is true you you look at things like that and you got to go okay well of course people believe in conspiracies if you don't believe in conspiracies I believe you're infantile I believe it's a silly thing to think that the government doesn't inspire when you hear that Dick Cheney and George Bush were considering a false flag attack on that they were going to say that Iran had attacked America this was something they had considered before they left office so the problem is that there are conspiracies but then there's another problem is that people see them in everything they see them in things that aren't conspiracies like they see chem trails they believe that contrails that are created when jet engines pass through certain levels of condensation the is actually the government spraying artificial clouds over where where does that idea begin the chem trail idea yeah begins with just well someone said like I feel different now than I did before airplanes flew over I wonder if their government created a chemical that makes us all obey them with just well someone said like i feel different now than i did before airplanes flew over i wonder if. The government created a chemical that makes us all obey them. Have you ever seen prints talk about it. No way prints the artist the musician prince the artist was doing an interview and in the interview he was talking about camtrails and he was talking about growing up and that you know. He when he was a kid he would see these trails in the sky and then all of a sudden everyone would be fighting everyone was fighting and i was like wondering they're spraying things is making everybody fighting like whoa what the fuck are you. Are you all that today. I don't know you have to ask them you have to ask them but it's a see if you can find that it's. You got it okay well we'll pull it up because it's it's quite hilarious like like first of all no obviously. He has formulated this incredibly complex theory right that these people are being quiet that thousands of pilots hundreds of pilots whatever engineers people that have armed the planes all these people have formulated these. Methods of distributing some sort of a unheard of chemical yeah that can cause people to be aggressive and fight and only target the hood. You know you're spraying it 30 thousand feet above it's targeted yeah but he's formulated this but made no attempt whatsoever to understand a is this possible b is there a disbursement way method of doing. See what are these trails that are in the sky what are these artificial clouds that everyone's so freaking out about yeah well they're not artificial clouds they're clouds that are created artificially that's all they are is clouds yeah. The reason why they look like clouds is because they are there water vapor yeah a cloud yeah jet engine passes through condensation it changes because of the jet engine the heat of the of the engine the spinning of the turbines the whole deal and the reason why it looks like they're spraying clouds is because they're making clouds with the engine and it only occurs occasionally it only occurs when certain levels of condensation the atmosphere this is all right. It's not that the point about what's the simplest explanation that's the key thing is like you know they could have also just put stuff in the water like why is it have to be such an elaborate. Can spirits because they see it yeah mick west who runs debunked calm meta bunk rather. He's a former software guy made video games and he became fascinated by debunking like really complex things like this like where people have all these like psychological connections to things and he because of the training wheels of conspiracy theories okay because you see them you see like what is that. They spraying things what is that like not just to get it like god damn it but nobody wants to look into it deep enough to you know to sort of debunk the whole thing but yet Prince will go on television and have this really detailed idea that he hasn't his head here will play it yeah please it's quite. He's still in the back of my head I can't get him out of my head where this conversation is concerned. Who have you felt most often like in the rain fighting the record industry like Jack or the opponent. Like Jack yeah. Well because I knew I was right you know we talked about this in our very first interview conversation together. It's obvious now that artists are supposed to own their master recordings I mean in the future it'll be unconscionable to even think you can take somebody's creation and claim ownership of it. See unfortunately this discussion is going to start to barrel into a discussion about the human genome and the DNA and all the rest of it. When it gets there then we're going to be in the deep water see so it's better to start the conversation now before we get into God talk you know. He sure this is the right video there are four songs that I want to ask you about and I did what I have never done before which is to actually print these lyrics out. Some of them I'm just the record is so new I'm learning some of them I got just go ahead a little bit. The fuck is more about all of us because what he said affects all of it he said online wherever and try to get a copy of it and just listen to it. Okay you're going to listen to this before this is not the right shit. Find the right shit will you. There is a video yeah it is that video and it is in that conversation. He talks about Kim trails but see what he said that like you know the genome and the DNA right people will throw around big words like that. Fascinating scientific terms like that when they talk about really ridiculous shit and you go okay well you've you've researched enough that you understand that there's a thing called DNA. and there's a thing called the human genome this very complex program that has been devised to understand the ingredients the very components of human life but yet you haven't looked at all into this whole plain spring fake clouds thing. Yeah enough to understand that first of what they think it's like aluminum and barium well aluminum and barium doesn't look like water vapor to understand that like if they were spraying aluminum and me saying this right now I will be accused of being a a paid disinformation agent just because I simply I believe there are real conspiracies I believe there's a real threat to security peace prosperity in this world but it's not planes making fake clouds you know and if people really want to look at. chem trails and the dangers of these jets look at all the instances of diseases where people live close to airports that's the real issue the real issue when it comes to air travel is the fact that this is not a free ride no one writes for free in any way shape or form and when you're burning propellant and that it gets dispersed through the atmosphere the people that are on the ground they're breathing that shit and if you breathe that shit that's the real danger there the real concern is not these artificial clouds. The real concern is the fact that you're burning fuel in the sky at a rate of thousands and thousands of flights a day yeah. That's what's going on there's a direct correlation between lung diseases and instances of asthma and all directly related to people living close to airports I mean that's that's the real chem trails I mean that's real there's really are burning people. But it's just pollution it's not a special chemical designed by the government. Who's the government like I got like five guys all in a room where like don't tell the rest of the reptile people don't tell the rest of the planet but we've created a chemical that will make people want to fight because. Did you find a jammy? Okay here it goes. This is this is one of my most favorite clips. Phenomena of chem trails. And you know when I was a kid I used to see these trails in the sky all the time and so that's cool a jet just went over. Then you started to see a whole bunch of them. And the next thing you know everybody in your neighborhood was fighting an argument and you didn't know why. Okay and and you really didn't know why I mean everybody was fighting. So he he started riffing about the chem trails and he started to say things that hit home so hard and I would recommend that everybody try to get what he said online or wherever and try to get a copy of it and just listen to it. Because I was so moved that I had to write this on. Wait which is that? What's on? You're writing about chem shows first of all. If that hits home move. Okay if that's if that hits home. If these chem trail these these panians are making people fight you need to move to a new home because your home is retarded. I want to hear this song. I don't want to hear this song. I love Prince. He's got some great songs but he's a complex dude who's filled with emotions and yeah. Not a lot of critical thinking when it comes to things like this. You know this the idea that somebody told him some nonsense and now you know in his defense pre-internet that was a lot of the ways that information was shared. I mean how many conversations have we're having dude did you hear that the government is doing this thing and some of them. Some of them are so ridiculous they seem like conspiracies but are real like the gay bomb. Did you ever hear about the gay bomb? I've heard things like it. Yeah. The government actively tried to figure out a way to make a bomb where they could ignite it in the air or blow it up in the air, detonate it rather. And it would cause everyone on the ground to fall in love with each other in the gay and that they would lose the will to fight. Right. Yeah. That was like a real point. But yeah before before the the internet and like mobile phones you couldn't easily just like fact check stuff people told you. So urban legends I think were way easier to spread. They still spread. They still spread but it's like if you would just bother to look it up you'd easily find it that's not true. But when I was a kid the thing with the girl and the hot dogs and that well it did happen. It happened right here. The hot dogs? I'm just coming to hear stories this. It's a little graphic but please a girl gets a hot dog stuck inside her. Right. But it wasn't until I grew up that I started talking from people with people who grew up in different cities. And they all knew the same story about this girl and it's like wait a second. Right. This never happened or maybe it has happened but this wasn't something that happened in my community. Yeah. Well that's the story when someone ever when someone creates like like even something that really had like I had a buddy who he's an ophthalmologist and he did his residency in Miami. During the cocaine years. And he dealt with a lot of really crazy stuff. Like he saw gunshot wounds and all but he said by far the craziest things that were the most like wait what were people with things stuck up their ass. Yeah. And he said like everything you can imagine electric toothbrushes, light bulbs. Like they pulled out of people's asses. Like if you can imagine it like the urban legends pale in comparison to the actual truth of pistols, they found a pistol. Wow. That was stuff that this guy's ass. Yeah. They stuffed a fucking 38 caliber pistol in his ass. If you think about it fisting someone can fist. Yeah. If you can fit that in your butt. You can fit a lot of stuff. You can fit a gun. Yeah. Yeah. And did he do that for fun or was it a punishment or was he trying to like sneak the gun in? Good question. I don't think he's going to be honest. Yeah. Why do you have a pistol up your ass? Well, the government is paying me. You can put it in my ass. I don't know. You know, but the reality of pistols in your ass. That mean that that's as bad as bizarre as the durable Richard gear. I remember that. Right. But when I first heard that story, I had no way of confirming or denying it. It was just a story. Well, I can give you a story on that story. Yeah. I don't know if it's true. But what I had heard was that this was when Richard gear had left Scientology and that one of the ways they got back at him was creating this. How do you release that story though? I don't know, but my friend to know. I'd like to know too. It might not even be true, but my friend Eddie grew up in LA and I grew up in Boston. And we met when we were both in our like 30s. Yeah. And we had both heard the same rumor growing up. So somehow or another. That's a rumor got across the continent. That's what I'm saying. I heard these rumors. I had friends who told me a story about a famous fried chicken place in Chicago. And this woman goes up there and orders a bunch of food like a lot like eight chickens. Right. Right. And there's this funny conversation that they have. And it ends with the woman going, you know, no my life. And everyone told this like it, you know, I was told that this happened in this like restaurant. Four years later. I'm driving around with this person who grew up in New York. She tells me the same story. And I'm like, what? Is this just one of those things where everyone has a friend who saw this happen? Right. Which is really strange when you stop and think about the length of time between religious stories being told over campfires and through oral traditions and then actually being written down somewhere. Yeah. Because if that story about the woman at the chicken restaurant, which I didn't even tell very well, but it's not even very funny, but it's just that story was accepted as fact. Yeah. A very specific fact that occurred at a specific restaurant and then I realized that it's just everyone has a friend who had this experience. Well, Hawaii is incredibly fascinating to me. One, because it's just so beautiful and two because it's a volcano that just sort of popped out of the middle of the Pacific Ocean. Most remote spot on earth in fact. So remote. Yeah. It's incredible. I love it. It's my favorite place to visit. But when I was there, I was talking to this guy. I went on this fishing trip and the guy who was the captain of boat, really cool guy was telling me about he actually grew up in California and then made his way out to Hawaii to stay there. And we were talking about the local traditions and the local folklore involving how the islands were formed and how the stars were formed and all their stuff was like in songs. Yeah. Yeah. Their whole history was just oral tradition. I mean, it's a people, you know, the Polynesian people settled in Hawaii first. A people whose entire history was this very, very important stories that they told to each other. But they never really wrote them down. Yeah. Incredible. Yeah. And like the stars were sewn together by the gods. Right. And the maps they came up with were really, really cool. Yeah. I was just talking to someone about how the native New Zealanders put south up in their maps. Right. Not north. And so if you actually look at New Zealand upside down, it looks like a fish and all this kind of thing. And that's what they thought their land was. It was this fish that was coming out of a boat or whatever it is. And then we came and said, no, no, no, North's the other way. It doesn't look like a fish. We decided that North was up. Yeah. That's so subjective too. You've stopped thinking about like what's up and what's down. Yeah. Like if the universe is this huge giant infinite thing and we're on a ball. Who you to say, which way is up? Yeah. The whole thing is circular. It's spinning around another ball. The not balls apart of a giant cluster that's spinning around. What the fuck? How do you know what up is? Which way is up? I mean, we can agree that it's got to be one of two places. Right. Because there are poles that we're spinning around. Yes. But which ones north and which one's south? Meaning which one should we put up? It's just a matter of convention that it's maps easier to read. If you try to read an upside down map which exist where all the letters can be read, but the but the lands masses are upside down, it's very confusing. Oh, sure. But if you're standing in the south pole, up is above you. That's up. Yeah. In every direction you face is north. There is no Easter West standing on the south pole. What? Yeah. How's that work? Well, you've run out of East Westness because there's no there's no more there's no more circle around the earth. Now you're just at the point. Oh, I see. And so, yeah, there's a famous puzzle about this. And I think it goes something like a hunter walks, you know, 10 feet south, and then 10 feet east and 10 feet north, and he's back where he began what color was the bear he shot. And the answer is white because he's clearly at the North Pole. That's the only way you could make, you could do that walking. Like go south, go east, go north, and you're back where you started. It would have to be at the North Pole. Right, but how could there not be an East? Because if you're standing, let's say you're standing at the very point of the North Pole, the very top. If you travel east, you can't. You have to go south a little bit first before you could go east. It's, it's... Couldn't just go sideways? Wouldn't that take? No, that would be north. Oh, I see. Oh, I see what you're saying. I see what you're saying. I see what you're saying. Yeah. Like East West requires a circle. How far would you have to go though before you could go east? A step? Yeah, you'd have to define what's the smallest amount of distance you could travel and still say that you moved. Hmm. Yeah, because like I would say an inch or less, like the tiniest amount, and then you could go east. Yeah. I mean, if we measure millimeters. And how precisely are we measuring the point that is the North or South Pole? Because if you're on that point, your body's already bigger than the point, so you could, you know, but you need to get away from it so that you can go around. What's going to happen? Maybe you can answer this, maybe you can't. What is going to happen if the pole shift? I don't know. I haven't actually read a lot about what that could cause. It could be like a Y2K thing where it's like no one even notices and they're like, oh, but it could also mess stuff up, I guess. I don't know. What about animals that can detect magnetic fields and use it to navigate? Are they going to be all freaked out? What animals do that? Some migratory birds do. That's what they do. They detect magnetic fields. I think so. What the fuck? Rather than having the same five typical senses we have, they've got one for magnets. Oh, bizarre. Yeah. How is that even possible that they have a magnet in their head? It tells them we're, you know, that's what like Wood'sman always talk about. Real outdoorsmen. The true North, like having a good compass. And also they use it as sort of an analogy to morals. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. The other thing to understand true North. You know, this moral compass that they have, it's very similar to the compass that an animal almost have or a bird. They're also cultures that don't have words for left and right. Everything is just a North, South, East or West. Really? Yeah. So you would never say, hey, could you give me that thing that's on your left? You would say, oh, could you give me that thing that's South of you? What cultures are those? I think it's an aboriginal culture in Australia. So this falls into the sapphire worth hypothesis that like the words that you have change how you can think. And if you lived in a culture that did not have the word for left and right, are you like less individualistic? Because things aren't defined by you. They're defined by the earth. It's either North or South regardless of which way you face. Whereas in our society, like left changes. My left changes according to me. So therefore like individual people's perspectives matter and define how I talk about things in the environment. That's fascinating because left and right we associate with handedness. Yeah. As East and West is circumf or you know, position on that. East is always East no matter which way I face. But left. My left is changing. But if you're facing, if you're talking about stage right, would you talk about West? Or would you talk about East? No. Well, it would depend on which way the stage was built. Well, stage is a weird, like say if you were in a building. Yeah. And then I said, hey man, go East. Would you need a compass? No, they just always know which way North is. Because it's so important. They don't have a word for left and right. I don't know how to answer this one. How do you describe left and right to someone who has never heard of those concepts? Well, I try to with my kids, you know, I have a six year old and a four year old. I try to describe left and right. And my daughter, one of the ways that I mean this doesn't make any sense other than showing her. Right. I say make the letter L with your hand. Right. And the one that looks like an L is your left. No. The one that points, like say if it is pointing, if like this is what I say, like if you're looking at me and you're writing, you know, like say you're writing the name of Laura. Yeah. Like where's your thumb pointing? That's pointing towards your left. And if you hold your hand up and your hand makes an L see where your index finger, that's the left. That's the left. Yeah. So this one's pointing to the left. This one is the left. But you've got to make sure that you're not looking at your hands with palms facing me because then the L is made by the left. By the right hand. Yeah. So if you hold your hand up, I guess. And that is the L. Like it forms it. That's the one that is the L. So if you hold your hand up and you see an L in front of you, that's the left. Right. And if it's holding your other hand up and it's making an L to the other person, that's confusing. Like get a little kid to write on a window. Like like steamy like if they're taking a shower, write your name so that I can read it. Do they get that? No, they always write it the wrong way. And then you got to show them how to do it the other way. And they go, OK. But it's so squirrely in their head. Like, oh, it's like, you know what I'm saying? I find that stuff fascinating how kids have to develop some of these ideas about the world. The old, uh, uh, uh, constancy of volume or what is it really called? Um, uh, things stay the way they are when you're not looking. Like a really small kid will even think that like when they don't see you, you're gone. Like Peekaboo was a really terrifying and amazing game to a child. Yeah. I'm talking like a baby. Right. But then, uh, look this up on YouTube. They, they show an experiment where you take two different size containers. Ones really tall and skinny and one's short and fat and the tall skinny ones full of water. And then they pour the water into the other container. And they're like, which one has more water? They're like, which one's bigger now? And clearly the same amount of water is still there. You just saw them pour the water. No water was taken away. But a kid doesn't get that yet. They think that, oh, well, it's not nearly as tall this other glass. So there must be less water. And they'll grill the kid like, well, where'd the water go? And the kid won't even know, but we'll say insist that there's less water now because it looks smaller. Is that a perception thing like an animal thing? Like larger taller things are more dangerous? Yeah. Sure. That it's like that's what matters. And it takes a while to understand the less needed for survival process of realizing, oh, that's actually stayed constant. That kind of makes sense when you think about how animals will make themselves a little bigger. Like they, their hair sticks up on their back in order to give them a sense of, or an appearance of having more mass growing bears will stand up on their hind legs. And they tell people like if you encounter certain animals like mountain lions, you should make, make yourself look bigger, like wave your arms, get larger. If you have someone with you, like a child, put them on your shoulder. Wow. And make it look like it's a bigger thing. Right. Yeah. It like appear more of a larger. And that tricks the animal. Yeah. They're dumb as shit. Yeah. They're dumb in the kids. Well, it's fun to watch these kid experiments because you're like, oh, wow, kids are dumb. They think that, you know, this is any idiot could tell you. Well, it's not that they're dumb. It's that they haven't come across this problem yet to solve so they don't have the data yet. Exactly. Like there's a difference between dumb and a lack of data. When you have a person and they're 50 years old and they still think that the world is flat and they still think the earth is 6,000 years old and they still think, well, that's a dumb person. That's like they're the data. They've processed the evidence. They've exposed the evidence. They've exposed to 50 years of Western civilization and their perceptions of life are insane. Given the data that's available, that's a dumb person. But babies, this bundle of potential that just doesn't have any data yet. And so they're just acting on, you know, like what seems to make sense from an evolutionary standpoint or from a genetic standpoint. Yeah. They're animal instincts. Very bizarre. Yeah. Also, the idea that this is all changing and growing and then your children will have the benefit of the information that you've accumulated over your life, like through epigenetics. Right. And it's going to somehow or another pass to your children and they'll know about that. I don't know about that either. Hmm. Well, they say that certain things like even racism can be passed down to children. You mean genetically. Genetically. Yeah, I haven't seen a lot of evidence for that kind of stuff. But there was a famous experiment where a guy taught worms to move through a maze and then he like ground them up and fed them to some other worms and those worms like knew how to solve the maze without having to be taught. But it's never been replicated. But wouldn't that be cool if we found out that there was like a chemical basis for memory? That would be amazing. Yeah. Well, they have shown that they've taken, I believe it was mice and they used a a certain smell. And when that certain smell was introduced to the mice, they gave them a chemical shock or they gave them an electrical shock on their feet. And the children of those mice, when exposed to that smell is like a citrusy smell, they would have a panic attack. Really? They would have this panicky moment where they anticipated being shocked. Huh. Because it was programmed to the DNA that that smell equals danger. That smell equals pain or discomfort. Right. Yeah. So that's different than just natural selection, where you say well, the mice that just naturally didn't like that smell were the ones that lived longer, procreated more. And so that's why I think that's probably true as well. Yeah. I think it's one of those things like when we're talking about conspiracies. You know, well, people can it just be a random coincidence? Yes, it can be. But there's also evidence that people can spire. So there's both. And we have this tendency to want to wrap things up in a nice neat little bow. So the concept of natural selection, well, there's natural selection. This is very simple to explain. It's natural selection. No natural selection is a factor. That's also a fact. It's not like it's non-existent. No, that happens as well. But then there's also this weirdness. This is weirdness where information is transferred. Like I've done Jiu Jitsu since 1996 is when I started. So and I've also been a commentator for more than a thousand professional fights. I've probably seen more mixed martial arts fights than most of the population ever will in real life too. And my kids, when I watch them roll around, when they watch them play, especially my youngest, she has instinctive moves that I don't think are natural moves. But when they're rolling around, there's a thing called the overunder. And it's what you do when you take someone's back. Taking someone's back is you gain an advantageous position by being behind them and controlling their body in a way that they can't attack you, but you can attack them. You're forced into a very defensive position and they're in a very dominant spot. And the overunder is one arm over shoulder, one arm under the armpit and you clasp your hands together and it's a very dominant mode of control. But I don't think it's instinctual, but my daughter goes to it immediate. When my daughter who's three at the time, when she was rolling around playing on the bed with my at the time five year old, she would go over under all the time and then she would throw her legs around and get her hooks in. Instinctually, I couldn't be trying to do it. These are like traditional Jiu Jitsu positions. And I think that it's in her DNA. I really do. I watch her tip them out. I watch her go from side control to the mount. She slid her knee across the belly. She did it like Jiu Jitsu style. I don't think that that's a natural thing to have a baby to have to do some more experiments. Check, take a look at her genome. I really think that it's instinctual and also I've teaching them striking and the way they learn it is like they're learning it like they already knew it. It's really weird. They're learning like pivoting off the ball of their feet and throwing their weight into things. It seems totally natural to them. It's very strange. I think that if you catch people young enough, they're still plastic enough that they'll just get it like language for instance. And you know, I learned English. How long did it take me to learn English? How long? Maybe two years? enough that they they'll just get it like language for instance, you know, I learned English How long did it take me to learn English? How long maybe two years till you started talking? Yeah, like when was I fluent enough? Someone would say like yeah, you'd pass a test Well, it's also the weird thing where people say that they're youngest learns quicker Because the youngest is around only adults So the youngest is sort of like forced to like try to be like the things that they're interesting Yeah, whereas the oldest has younger people around exactly whereas if you're Are not the youngest? I mean like the first born right not the youngest I should say Learn's quickest whereas the the ones that are born later They have all these little people that talk you know like babies around and Long-right to figure out how to communicate like an adult. Yeah The first born was like oh I'm the only kid here. Yeah, yeah, yeah Yeah, you have to be like you have to imitate your atmosphere. Yeah Were you a first born? Yeah siblings? Yes, I have an older a younger sister. Okay me too. Yeah of younger sister dude We're like wow Crazy probably the only ones probably the only two guys who have younger sisters who would have thought Uh, yeah I'm gonna have to pee again. Hi. This is incredible. You can do it. Yeah. I can do it. Yeah. Go ahead. Go pee Promish your not gonna judge me when I know even say look at that guy. He just can't even do that Think you're off slave to his budget. You will be highly good. Okay. Good. Good excellent. So we'll We only have about 15 minutes left anyway before we turn into a pumpkin. This is a fascinating conversation and if you're high as fuck right now I'm sorry. I'm sorry. We're freaking you out man Um these kind of conversations are always really cool though whenever you're involved in a conversation where you're you know Sitting with someone who you've never talked to before and you start going over weird shit like genetics and What causes a person to be this and that and what what what are the steps that you take to become a human being and It's also like Aruda mentry knowledge of how how he like when he was talking about We're talking about learn things and how much of it is natural selection and then you find out things like the mouse test where they they know that mice Associate that sense of smell that smelling that thing with an electrical shock even though these mice have never experienced that Electrical shock was their parents doing it. That's pretty clear evidence that there's something being Transmitted through genetics Whatever it is they don't know but we'll know someday someday. We'll be like oh well That's yeah, they definitely like we found we've isolated the genes that cause people to transmit certain bits of information to their children that are useful like right now we're Not much different than the people that we mock from a long time ago that thought that the earth was the center of the universe you know like The amount of information that we have I was just saying that as You're back from your potty break. Oh feel so much better. I'm sure yeah the amount of information that we have today is kind of akin to Like we we mock like people that lived in Galileo's time for not knowing that he's correct that the earth was not the center of the universe You know we're like god have to put the torch of the poor guy You know or or Bruno for saying that the universe is infinite they Burned him alive right right, you know, and we think god. They're so stupid but what we know now Whenever you're alive At that point in time is the the greatest moment of knowledge in human history Yeah, it is right. Yeah, and you think oh wow so glad I'm here to not in the past But not giving and taking you collapses of civilizations, which is an art story entirely Well, yeah, it's a little more complicated, but yeah, but yeah, it's not linear entirely But it's kind of like an up and down up and it's progressive So at this point in time, you know, we're talking about information being transferred from parents to children And we're like I wonder how wonder maybe natural selection I want but we don't we don't know one day Whether it's a thousand years from now or whatever it is. Yeah, they're gonna go. Oh those dummies They didn't even know I know look at this We've got audio recording of Michael Steven saying I don't know I think I think so maybe natural selection and like that Idiot yeah fucking prince he thinks that they're spraying Shit over the ghetto and making people fight No, duh, but you know, it's just a it's just well those things Information progresses we'll find out that that this lava lamp by the ways huge that's in this room It takes a long time to warm up. Yeah, well this podcast is almost three hours old and Jamie You probably switched it on half hour before the show Yeah, it takes a few hours, but look at the little one little ones up in cooking. That's cooking really well. Wow. That's a great lava lamp This big one Um, never really gets going. We need to show you have to leave it on all that all day Yeah, but then shit could go wrong. Yeah, we had one that had a crack in it. Oh, yeah We noticed it. We're like is that crack? No, we had like you know lava lamps are used to generate random numbers and they can generate them very very well They're very difficult to Um find patterns in the if you I don't know how they do it But they they'll look at the shapes in and movement of a lava lamp and that'll generate numbers and They don't have patterns in them really yeah So you know you can go to like random.org. I just did an episode on what really is random and Random.org uses atmospheric noise just noise in the atmosphere like radio static to generate numbers pretty good Laval lamps there used to be a website that had a lava lamp and you would type in give me a random number and it would Because based on the state of the lava lamp give you a random number Uh, so if you watched a lava lamp So if we had that lava lamp on and we maintained the same amount of heat coming off of the light bulb and the same water Temperature and yeah, but you but you don't though. That's that's what makes it so random The the initial conditions are so difficult to know precisely enough to predict which way it's gonna float The temperature we only know the temperature to like a few degrees, you know Or a tenth of a degree But that that millionth of a degree difference is what's gonna make it move now rather than neck than in the next second You know would it be possible to make an ultimate lava lamp that was incredibly precise So the amount of heat that comes off of the bulb was Like really precise the amount the temperature of the water was incredibly stable The consistency of the wax was uniform throughout and that you set this like perfectly measured lava lamp With the glass being the exact same diameter or the exact same thickness rather over the entire circumference of the of the bottle that holds the water and the wax in would have Be possible to make an ultimate precise lava lamp well it would you you could predict it better I still don't think that it would be precise like some metric all the time unless you put in special controls that like didn't release the wax until It was ready or whatever is it the rat the wax moving up and down through the water which changes the temperature of The wax because it's not in contact with the heat at the bottom What were you asking what makes it so unpredictable? Yeah Yeah, it's just like every little movement of those blobs is affecting all the other molecules inside that system and those are Affecting how something moves later. It's like a butterfly flap in its wings causing a tornado in Brazil You know, yeah, but that doesn't really work that way. That's sort of dopey I hate that but over the butterfly flapping. Yeah, but a fly nobody eventually lead to your hurricane No, it can't really because no, it's true whether it doesn't it's patterns they cause that right? We're not gonna be able to know like hey have that butterfly flap its wings that'll cause a tornado Right, it's just the point is that that little difference in initial conditions could result in a completely Dramatically different outcome you can do this with a double pendulum and it's pretty insane You you you put two pendulums up and you release them and it feels like you dropped them from the same place And you can use a robot to do this and everything right after just a few seconds they're both spinning completely differently from one another It doesn't mean that the butterfly will always be causing tornadoes. It just means that you have you have no idea How many variables are are involved and one little thing changes another little thing and that can cause an end result that is way bigger and Way more different than if the butterfly hadn't flapped its wings really so a butterfly flapping its wings really can Put into motion a chain of events that could lead to a changing of a wetter path Weather powder. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Really. Yeah. What does a butterfly affect when it flaps its wing Well, it's just it's more of like a yeah It's that this isn't like we've studied it and we found a butterfly and we blamed him for hurricane Sandy butterfly Yeah, it's more like the the principle is that a little tiny Movement of air caused some larger mass of air to actually you know move a bit more and and and this all stair steps up To the point where the hurricane could happen another example would be knowing the position of the earth and in Billions of years or just millions of years hundreds of thousands We could only really predict where it's going to be and and and where all the other planets will be so far into the future and Even though those systems are pretty you know, it's going in a circle run sun like that's it Right, we should be able to guess right, but at a certain point we don't know when I have enough information Just just launching a satellite Causes the earth to spin a little more slowly changes its position a little bit really Yeah, yeah, so Yeah, yeah, Neil deGrasse Tyson did a great calculation in his book Death by black hole. I think where he says yeah, just just what it took to send up that satellite that never comes back down means that earth is going to be a Few degrees in some different direction in a million years And we don't know which direction that's going to be unless we unless we Have an incredible amount of information about that satellite and how it affected earth when it left so every single Peace plays a part there every single variable every movement plays a part in the ultimate end result totally Yeah, and that's what makes the weather so difficult to predict and a lot of Waterflies shit lava lamps fucking lightning storms. Yeah. Wow. You know, we're always trips me out that ancient people were able to figure out the Procession of the equinox right Like every day they were just like checking like yeah, yeah Same time of day somehow. I knew that it was the same time time of day and I marked it or maybe what do they do? They just watch and see where the sun was when it was at its highest point Make a little mark somehow and then they realize hey, it's going in this like a loop thing Well, not only that the loop isn't in like thousands of years like the wobble the full wall right right Like what is the I don't know actually it's a it's a really long amount of time. Yeah, so Precision the equinox is procession I want to say it's thousands of years, but I don't remember the exact 26,000 year cycle. Wow So they figured out a 26,000 year cycle a Pretty good measurement Do that a change year to year that was just one twenty six thousand. Yeah, that's one of the ways that these a lot of these revisionists of ancient Egyptian history point to the possibility besides the erosion of the Sphinx point to the possibility of the Sphinx is far older than we think it is Is that at 10,500 BC it was pointing towards the constellation Leo that this lion Was representative of this this constellation that has sort of been universally Described as being associated with a lion because of its shape Okay, this is the reason why they believe that 10,000 both sides of the fact that there's all this water erosion around the Sphinx That can only be attributed to thousands of years of rainfall and the last time there was a rainfall in the Nile Valley was 9,000 BC Which they think you know they think that they want to tribute to the Sphinx to the same people that they believe built the pyramids Which is about 2,500 BC, but they think that actually there might have been many many many older kingdoms Like there's hieroglyphs apparently the date back to 34,000 BC I don't know any of this. Yeah, they date back as far as their descriptions Not as far as like the actual urban dating. Oh, I see and then this their descriptions of pharaohs Go back thousands and right of years. Okay, and so they get to a certain point in time the Egyptologist go well That was just fiction. Yeah, you know, well, we believe in ramsies We believe in you know, tut-mosis. We believe in all these different cats But all this stuff that was just really Yeah, that was just horseshoes. Just made up. Yeah, but if the the revisionist historians are correct and The geological evidence is really fascinating especially when it comes to this like a guy named dr. Ron shock Robert shock from the Universe Boston University. Yeah Boston University. He's a geologist He's the one who sort of spearheaded this whole thing about the Sphinx because he's he's a geologist and he's like this is clear water erosion around the Sphinx and They they think that if that is the case then these stones had to be cut way way earlier Than 25 really I need to look into all this since fascinating and this procession of the equinox is just 26,000 year cycle Wobble, you know the idea is that the earth spins for folks. I don't know what we're talking about It doesn't spin in a perfect circle. It kind of has a little wiggle to right and every 20 sort of like a top and every 26,000 years That wiggles completed so the sky looks different. Yeah, yeah through the entire 26,000 year cycle Right, and that's that's one of the things that they point to This this constellation neo at 10,500 BC aligning itself with the Sphinx also coincidentally lines up the 10,500 BC lines up pretty close to What they believe 12,000 years ago was a massive Asteroidal impact all over the earth like this nuclear glass. I think it's called trite night Hmm, you know that stuff that they find the they do core samples and they find it at 12,000 years all over the place Evidence of a big impacts not just a big but multiple okay meteor impacts meteor showers that could have led to the Extinction of saber-tootigers Willy mammoths all these different animals that died off at a very very similar time period 60% I think of all Land mammals died off during that one time. Hmm. Yeah, so what's that's the theory that like Human survived some did we didn't have as many predators or no no the theory is that just this huge interruption of life This massive meteor shower that they found all throughout Europe and Asia this nuclear glass that's very similar to the The type of glass that they find after nuclear detonation tests that this nuclear glass which exists all over the places indicative of massive impacts That something happened like and it's not in one spot. It's multiple spots all over the place at the same time much more likely to be a meteor shower than anything else and that that probably was also the cause of the end of the ice age That's what you know at 12,000 years ago More than half of North America was covered in a mile high sheet of ice and so they think that what caused that stuff to rapidly Change was most likely the same thing that caused this nuclear glass to be all over the place Which is a big mind fuck and also Going sides with when this finks was around that you know it could be that there was a fairly advanced civilization at that point time slammed with Meteor showers massive amounts of people die and then they sort of have to rebuild and they kind of learn Like what took him a few thousand years to get back on their feet and right, you know Few thousand years later. They're building the pyramids again I'll have to look into these stories That sounds really interesting and also it falls right in line with that hole What do you do when you have to start all over again? How long does it take to get back up to where you were before? Yeah, well the idea that has been a linear linear progression complete linear progression straight line from caveman to us Seems a little silly when you see all the impacts that we know for sure happened when you know when you look at the clovis comment when you look at all the Different the Holocene crater all these different Impacts that know happened. They know that this you know look at the moon. It's a it's goddamn shooting gallery There's things happen and when things do happen all these stories like the Noah's arc story Epic of Gilgamesh all the different cataclysmic events that have been documented through folklore Most likely some shit went down and that's the idea that that's what freaks me out about hard drives That's it freaks me out about the idea of everything being stored on computers Yeah Including this podcast including this podcast. Yeah, imagine if someone had to tell this podcast and an oral tradition Someone had to take the information that we discussed in this podcast and describe it. Yeah Because they couldn't play the file, but they heard it before they heard it before but yeah, but it wasn't Prince It was James Brown and you know All the all the various things that we talked about get all screwed up Right, but still attributed to us. Yeah. Yeah, but you would be like some information God from the future they'd remember this part about you Going into the past and they would butcher that he who pees a lot. Yeah. Yeah, yeah Had a problem with black. I wouldn't forget that part. No Yeah, you really stop and think we're in the process of something We're right in the middle or not even we're just well We're in the middle in in that it's going on, but it's constantly going on It was going on when there were single cell organisms It was going on when the star supernova to create carbon which created carbon-based life which created us which created Everything that came before us which gonna create everything that comes from us. Yeah, that would be if I could see something I I don't think if I had a choice of chewing going a million years in the future or a million years in the past It just for a visual glimpse a million years in the past is pretty fascinating But a million years in the future to see what a human being looks like a million years from now. Yeah That's what I would want how different would we be we we have We can change our own bodies a lot more now and we've made Changes unnecessary in a way because we can you we have climate-controlled Buildings and we have vehicles and we have medical care that can keep things the way they are Better than we'd had three million years ago better than we have 300 years ago. Yeah So what is the human gonna look like in a million years? I would guess Not that different Biologically, but we'll be doing some pretty crazy stuff. I would guess radically different. Yeah, yeah I think physically we're very different from people that just lived a couple hundred years ago because of nutrition sure look at how tiny people were Yeah, oh my god. Yeah, that's what's really weird and you see how little folks were Yeah, like the average size of people that were fighting in the Civil War was like 125 pounds. Wow. That was an average man Wow, they were tiny little dudes like people are like 80 pounds bigger on average now Which is really pretty substantial. Yeah But I think that the real change is gonna come with our integration of technology in our lives Uh-huh and the symbiotic relationship that we have with this technology which now you leave your phone behind you feel naked Eventually, it's gonna be something much more integrated. Yeah. I think that's where things are gonna get really squirrely Well, I think where people are gonna start to become connected inexorably with this technology Aliens, bro, that's what we're gonna look like we're gonna look like yeah aliens does. Yeah, think about it We ruin our atmosphere. Okay. We fucking holes in the ozone layer. You need permanent sunglasses So what are those big black eyes? Those are giant sunglasses are built in your head no longer need to move things physically because we can do things with Telekinesis we have giant heads because our brains are gonna grow the same way the human brain size double over a period of two million years and You know ancient protohombinids right our brains are huge compared to our body size. Yeah I mean a whale brain is way bigger than our brain, but whales are also huge and they need All of that for all those extra Nerves, but in our little bodies we've got a huge brains off the charts. Mm-hmm. Yeah, yeah And used to be smaller Mm-hmm in other other primates and whatever we came became you know, however we became people That doubling of the human brain size is a massive mystery, right? Aliens we're gonna look like aliens. We're gonna have these big goofy beach ball heads little skinny bodies And we'd be able to manipulate matter Boy this fucking conversation got stupid. I blame me Think you're responsible for science and I took us to the what if stoner stuff. I was like what it? Yeah, what if we? Yeah, we wind up looking like aliens. I Think well if you think about like a gorilla. Yeah, or an ape or whatever monkey type animal We used to be and this is a big stipulation people say oh, you shouldn't say monkeys You know people aren't monkeys or apes actually No, we're all monkeys. This is how it goes All apes are monkeys, but not all monkeys are apes. Is that true? I don't know. Yes Just like all humans are apes, but not all apes are humans monkeys not a real scientific term So when you say something's a monkey like oh monkeys have tails no monkeys aren't even real or silly So people who are who like anal and correct you on that tell me fuck off fuck off grammar police you're incorrect. I like that. It's like it's like is a What's a vegetable scientifically? Because really I think vegetables just a made up word for any other part of the plant Anything's a vegetable that's not a fruit really yeah, well because Fruit has a scientific definition right it bears the seeds and it contains you know the Energy the food the seeds need but a vegetable is just You know, it's the root in some cases. It's the leaves in another case. It's the trunk and another case What you eat is the vegetable right vegetable matter plant matter. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, so again, it's like I Can't tell you whether it's a vegetable or not. It's up to like what the chefs say Like tomatoes. Yeah, there's a fruit. Yeah, they're fruits Bananas are are fruits, but but modern bananas don't have seeds and they're they're not fertile They're not gonna grow you have banana tree so should we still call it a fruit? Well from from a culinary perspective. It's pretty fruity. So we'll call it a fruit It's fascinating stuff. We're out of time We could do this forever though I think you and I can have these conversations until our heads exposed. Yeah, I think so until we become alien until my bladder explodes Yeah, your bladder's not that good dude. You need to work. Well you drank two big things of water. Yeah, I know come on Give me some credit like I had both of those and I had one before we then started I'm a hydrated guy It's very good to be it's good. It's good to be just this morning my urine was a bit dark Oh, I really I was like nope gotta drink some water. Will you flying in? Now I've been here for a few days will you boosin it up no you drinking a lot of coffee? Yeah, that could be it. Yeah energy drinks too. Those can really those will fuck you up those will really dehydrate and Those aren't good. Yeah, those make me people anything. I could drink coffee and be fine But if I drink one red bull I got a pea yeah Fascinating people don't care about my pee listen, but they do care about mine your YouTube channel is awesome And it's been an honor to have you on the show man. I really really appreciate it. Hey, thanks really cool talking to you It's not hard to be here and it's so I just think it's so cool that something like what color is a mirror has 10 million views on YouTube. Yeah, and that's not it's not like a stand-up routine. No, I really do get into the the physics of reflection and Why the answer is kind of green? And it's it's an amazing YouTube channel and I found it out because of someone from Twitter So whoever you were on Twitter that turned me on to Michael Thank you so much because I've learned a lot and been entertained and educated by your videos And I think everybody else should as well so it's V sauce V S A U C E on Twitter and it's tweet sauce Tweet sauce on Twitter. I thought on you. Excuse me. Yeah, V sauce on YouTube tweet sauce on Twitter Michael Stevens. Thank you, sir. Thank you very much in a pleasure Thank you everybody. Thanks to all our sponsors. Thanks to blue apron for for being awesome and you can benefit from blue apron as well if you go to blue apron.com forward slash Rogan you will get two free meals just go in there blue apron.com forward slash Rogan thanks also to on it calm that is o n n i t use the code word Rogan and you will save 10% off any and all supplements will be back on Saturday a special Saturday edition of podcast with my pal Abby Martin from RT. She'll be here and That's it until then enjoy your life my friends big kiss