How I wondered, I've sat and watched you in the stands at the RNC and I don't think I've ever seen anybody give a speech at a convention of very well received speech without endorsing the candidate. How did you convince Trump to do that? Well, I think Trump and I have a good relationship. We've got a mutual respect for each other. Yeah, absolutely. And, you know, I think he knew the struggles that we had with our membership. We've got 1.3 million members. So, you know, that membership is made up of Republican Democrats and independents. And, you know, we knew all along where our membership was trending and we had to do a lot of polling and everything else. And we had a lot of communication during the campaign leading up to the RNC. So, I think he knew the spot that we were in if we just came out and did a straight endorsement. But we really couldn't do that because our process, we interviewed every single candidate that from, you know, the people that entered the race early to the last two standing, which was Trump and Harris. And we interviewed them at a round table with rank and file members and our general executive board. And we provided each candidate with 16 of the same questions. And, you know, the Trump was, you know, like all of them, they weren't strong on some of our issues. And no fault of their own because I don't think deep down they understood what our actual issues are. But at the end of the day, I think he knew that by us representing, speaking at the RNC, representing the teams to June, that he was actually showing America, the American workers, that, you know, he was for labor. He was for working people. And my message was clear, you were there. I saw you standing up with him. And my message didn't endorse the Republicans' Democrats or independence. It was clearly about what the American work and needs from the administration. We feel like you do that. Yeah, you know, it's funny. But it's a political convention. The whole point is to nominate this guy. Right. But, you know, I got to tell you this, it's funny. So, leading up to the RNC, we're writing our speech and we're going through it. And, you know, we're editing it internally, all of us, great team. And we submit it to the RNC, the folks. I think we submitted probably a week prior. And we submit the speech and some of the underlings in the RNC didn't like what we had to say. My bat. And so they wanted to change it, modify it, and everything else. And we took a position. I took a position. Well, I'm not going then. And so we reached out to Susie Wiles and told her, look, we're not, we are not modifying this speech. And she's like, I don't think you should. She says, why don't you call DJAT and tell him? So I called him on a cell phone. And I said, listen, I said, they want us to modify this speech. He goes, I haven't seen it. He goes, I don't give a shit. What you saying? Do whatever you want, Sean. Come on. So 100% true. Oh, I believe so. When we went there, I mean, obviously, we're just like, get here. Yeah. Yeah. So he's like, actually, say what the fuck you want to say? That's exactly what he said. And when we went there, it was great. It was, it was a home run. And I think, you know, part of the thought process from the Republican side was, look, if we get the general president of the biggest, strongest union in the country, that's going to signal to every work in person that how committed, you know, the Republican party is the opportunity the Republican party has to prove that they want to represent American workers. Listen to just, I mean, that is, that is a window into what Trump is actually like. I think that's why I'm laughing because it's just so perfect. And I, you know, whatever you think of that, I happen to love it, but that is never done in politics. Well, you never get a kid to say, say, would it for you want to what? Yeah. Yeah. It was, it was hilarious. But conversely, you know, we asked to go to the DNC at the same time. And you know, and we know that if we ever submitted that speech to the DNC, they would have shit a break. They would have been horrified because the people that we were talking about the corporate elitists and everybody else, those are the people that the Democrats have fallen in love with those are the people I serve instead of the middle class the way it used to be 50 years ago. Yeah. So we know that we would have a tremendous portion. I'm sure I don't even know. Did you go to the Democratic? No, we didn't, we didn't get invited. That is great. That's even a bigger story than speaking at the RNC is not getting invited to the DNC. Yeah. Well, that was, you know, that was the vindictive side of the Democratic party. And you know, I'm a Democrat. But, you know, I'm going to call balls of strikes, you know, they haven't done shift for us. And when we didn't get invited, it's a funny story because two weeks prior to speaking to the RNC, you know, we didn't hide from the fact that we were going to speak there. Listen, I tell everybody all the time. If I get a venue to highlight how valuable our organization is the Team and he wants 550,000 for the SuperPag for the Senate races. No problem. And I said, look, I'm speaking to the RNC. He's like, Oh, great job. You know, that's good. You should represent your members day after I give that speech at the RNC. He gets on Twitter and starts talking shit about my speech. Remember who fixed your pensions. And I'm like, this guy is a fucking joke. Like, why would you do this? You two weeks prior, you tell me when you're taking a 550,000 all SuperPag check. You know, that's great. It's great for your members. You know, that's good. And then you want to get on Twitter like a tough guy and, you know, throwing it on that. Right. Well, because they don't like confrontation. They don't want to hear the truth. When he said, you know, we fixed your pensions, that gave me an opportunity to say you're the same guy in the same party that 40 years ago embraced and dwarfed and signed off on deregulation in the trucking industry, which we lost 400,000 jobs in 1980, Ted Kennedy put the bill forward. Joe Biden signed off and it as a senator or as a representative. And no senator. Yeah, senator, right? So they said, we fixed your pension. And I said, yeah, you did fix a pension. And I use the scenario all the time. I'm like, I played street hockey in my neighborhood. 1980, I broke my mother's window for 40 years. She's asked me to fix her window. And I finally fixed it 40 years later. Should I look for accolades? Problem that I helped create. Yeah. And so we went back and forth. It even got to a point he showed up in our building. Prior to the election, we had a, we had a bipartisan meeting in the hallway of the IBT. And it was attended by a lot of Republican senators, a lot of Republican congressmen. Because look, our goal is to work across the aisle to solve problems. He walks in with this, you know, the Capitol police who do a great job. walks in and walks in late and he sticks his crooked finger in my face. And he says, I fixed your pensions. I said, you should have you broke him. And we get into it pretty hard. And you know, he starts like yelling at me, I go, buddy, listen, there's only one guy that can yell at me. We buried him 12 years ago. I go, and I go, you want to get into this right here right now? We'll get into it. You're talking about your dad. Yeah, I'm telling my dad, right? And so shoomers like we fixed your pension. I'm like, yeah, I'm going to name the things you haven't done for us. When our members were on strike at the rail, you didn't support us. You didn't put a letter of support in that. When we were fighting with UPS in the middle of the street, you wouldn't sign off on a support letter. When we took on Amazon, which we're taking on now, you wouldn't support our efforts in Amazon. I said, you want me to keep going? Because you can tell me what you've done, the one thing you've done for me and my union and my members. But I'm going to tell you all the things you haven't done for us. And then you know, he's like, well, I really want this relationship. I'm like, we're done. We're done. And that wasn't it. He left. And then I'm working out at the building on election day. This is great. And look, I'm not a person that says, I told you so or whatever the case is. He called my phone rings. There's only two people that call me from a private line. Sometimes it's a commander in chief and someone else. So phone rings and I answer it in a structural, and like, dejected tone. It was, you know, high Sean. I'm like, Hey, how you doing? He goes, good Chuck Schulmer. I'm like, okay, what do you want? So I just want to thank you for supporting, you know, the super pack. I go, that was like four months ago. And he says, well, yeah, I just want to thank you. And I'm like, okay, great. It was like a dejected tone. And I was like, good off that, I got off the standmaster. I'm like, this is crazy. But it is what this is. Why was you doing that? I wonder, I have no idea. No idea. Do you think you knew they were getting a green? Well, I think you knew they were getting crushed that day. Yeah. And, you know, I don't know how people, you know, so astute that around so long in politics couldn't see that coming. Was it obvious to you? Oh, it was very obvious to us. Yes. Just by the polling we were doing. And look, the one thing that we do, and this is a gauge that I pride our leadership on, we don't sit in our office and, and, you know, research all these polls, research, you know, all these opinions, the opinions that matter to me are the 1.3 million members that we represent. My general secretary and treasurer myself are about every single day in workplaces talking to members, asking them their opinions, finding out exactly what this struggles are in the workplace. And then you get into always into politics, you know, this presidential election. And just a one on one conversation. We're in three different states three times a week and multiple industries that we represent. And when you're talking to people, we were just talking to people in blue states. We were talking to people in red states all over the country. And we knew just from, you know, the rhetoric out there from our members that, you know, they weren't voting Democrat. And that's when we started designing this, you know, real extensive program and that included the rank and file members. So can you we knew that was coming for people who don't know, just give us an overview of the Teamsters 1.3 million members. What do they do? So we represent 1.3 million members the easiest way to understand it as we represent airline pilots to zoo keepers and everybody in between. We represent UPS as our largest employer. We have 340,000 members at UPS. We represent the grocery industry. We're housing. We represent airline pilots. We represent airline mechanics. We represent motion picture. We represent trade shows. We represent public sector. We represent health care. So we represent everybody from A to Z. So the name comes from guys you drove teams of horses. Yeah, teams of horses. We're predominantly a truck driving union. Yes. Started out with horse and buggy and for evolution and technology. With truck drivers, deregulation, you know, crushed the trucking industry in the 80s. We've been able to rebuild and organize over the last two and a half years. But because of deregulation lost 400,000 teams to jobs. Wow, back in the 80s. Yes. But, you know, we're real progressive union. We don't have all our eggs in one basket right now. We're trying to organize Amazon, which has about 400,000 employees both direct and this DSP model that they masquerade as not being direct employees. It's a joint employer. So we're pursuing them right now. And we also are organizing in the cannabis industry with this 425,000 W to employees. The termination wide cannabis. The guys who trim marijuana. Well, cultivate it. Where how is it? Grow it and sell it. And soon it'll be transported. So what percentage now of your members drive? I would probably say 45% of our members. Really? Between UPS. I mean, UPS is our largest employer. We've got some freight. We've got DHL. Yeah, probably probably closer to 50%. How did you get involved? I'm a fourth generation teamster from Boston. Local 25. My dad was a rank and file member. My grandfather was a truck driver. My great grandfather came from Ireland. He was a teamster as well. What did he do? Drove a truck or horse and buggy? I should say probably. Really? Yeah. And what did your dad do? My dad worked construction and then worked motion pictures. What was he like? What was he like? Yeah. Oh, he was crazy. Polaris, cartoon character, a burly guy, a child's town guy, hard work and worked two or three jobs. You know, just a real family person. Was a street guy as well. He was a very quiet, quiet man, but he was true blue to the union. Always working, making certain that he put food on the table. Great guy and died too young. We had a lot of fun with him, but I had a great relationship with my dad because I went right to work in the union when I was 18. Doing what? I worked in a rigging company, a crane company, Sean Asina Herman, one of the biggest crane companies. Yeah. I was always fascinated with the team's decision. You know, my dad was my best friend. And I have an older brother and a younger brother and they're both in the team's decision. But I was the one that always really liked trucks. I love tractor trail. I love driving them. And but I loved going to the Sunday meeting when I was eight or nine years old, I would go to local 25 and child style. I both my parents grew up there. My mother grew up in the projects. And I just remember being fascinated by the camaraderie of the team's decision. I remember watching Billy McCarthy, who was our general president out of local 25. Eventually, I just remember him being larger than life. And the team's decision was so prevalent in my family. I'm like, you know, I'd go to school with these kids. I want to be a lawyer. I want to be a doctor. I'm like, I want to to be a truck driver for the team's decision. And and that was that's everything I want to do was just because I learned it around the dinner table. I was so proud because everything we had in our entire life was because of the union and that organization through the good times and the bad times. There were a lot of bad times that organization never wave it on my family. And I'm like, if I have a good opportunity, this is what I want to do. And I just moved up through the ranks. It's such an antique world you're describing such an American like archetype. It's like such it's like kind of a movie. I just hit my 34th year. The share. And I wonder, I mean, one of the reasons I wanted to talk to you was, you know, well, for a lot of reasons to get your political analysis, but also just that the life that you grew up in, I just wonder if that still exists. It just seems so thoroughly American, thoroughly New England. Yeah. I mean, I think we're a normally now, I mean, I have friends at my age, you know, that went to college and look, I did very well about the union. I always worked. I worked seven days a week, 12, 13 hours a day. I got laid off hustled, whatever, needed a good college. I went first semester. I played football, you master one semester. But you know, I have my friends that went to school and you know, they could graduate in early 90s, chased a dot com era. Yeah. And you know, they chased a lot of money. You know, there's some of them were in, you know, insurance, whatever, but they were switching jobs every four or five years. There was no continuity. And they made a man's a little bit more money. I had a four year head start on a lot of these people and I bought houses and everything else. But you know, they were always switching jobs. And I remember an old time of saying to me, stay with the union, stay the course. It's not a marathon. It's not a sprint. It's a marathon. And today, like the same friends, you know, they take a snapshot of their lives, they get the big houses to SUVs. But they don't have pensions. They pay in 75% towards their medical. It looks great. Snapchat looks great. But serious debt. Right. And it's never going to change for us. You know, like you said, it's old school, old school values. You learned that around the dinner table. Don't extend over your means. You know, to stay true blue, it's going to pay off at some point in time. And I think to your point, you know, there's not, there's not much of that left anymore. We've got to kind of switch gears and do a revisit. It's not, I mean, I'm 55. I remember that I've never part of that world. But I remember it really well, especially in New England. Absolutely. I mean, Willie Bulger was running politics in this. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I knew Billy Bulger. Yeah. So where my father and my mother from Charleston, it's a white, you know, Irish Catholic community, then over the bridge was the North End. Yeah. And then you had South Boston, which was, you know, white Irish Catholic, the colony projects and the old colony projects. My mother grew up in the Boca Hill projects. Yeah. So yeah, we were familiar with that whole, the whole Bulger tale because some of it's not true. But yeah, I mean, they were pretty powerful people, Billy Bulger. My father's from Boston. And when they, and was it totally legitimate or semi-legitimate person, great man. But when they caught Wady Bulger, I think in Santa Monica, an apartment, my father who was like 78 by this point called me on the phone and said, fuck, they caught him. I was like, gee, pop, you're really rooting for Wady Bulger. Yeah, it was. Well, they caught him, but the government knew where it was the whole time. I'm sure that's true. Because no doubt, don't know. I don't know. It had about it. It was funny though. It was like, they didn't, the government didn't want him to be found. I believe that. It's 110%. I'm talking to my dad about this. It sounds like it's not. But I mean, growing up there, it's funny that when you grow up in that area, you talk to people around the country, they'll always say something. Obviously Wady Bulger, one of a, was not a good guy. Yeah, yeah. Was not a good guy. No one should ever idolize that guy. But the government, he's born paid for. And here, he earned a lot of families. He did, but it was more complicated than just criminal versus G-man. I mean, the FBI was involved. Oh, they were on the dark side. They were in need deep in it. Literally need deep in it. I mean, the agent went to prison for it. So it's not a guest. Absolutely. And it's just funny because growing up in the 80s and 90s, you had a front row seat to what was going on. Steve, the rifleman, Flemmy. Yeah, yeah, those guys all look good guys. Not good guys. And plus they told on their own, hey, it's one thing. If you know, it's right, if you want to be, if you want to be a criminal, like, hey, that's, that's your thing. I wanted to go to work. Right. I want to, I want to provide for my family. So I want to be a criminal, give it 110% but don't tell when you get caught. Don't tell on, don't tell on your friends. Don't tell on your friends and don't blame everybody else. Everything I've ever done wrong in my life is because of me. Yeah, me too. I haven't blamed anybody. You know, it is what it is. I always say does anybody have a better, bad idea. Bad news. Your internet provider is watching you. The provider compiles everything you do into an online profile and sells it to anybody with money. That sounds illegal. It should be illegal, but it's not and it's happening. Why does the government allow this? Because governments benefit from it to this gives government a loophole to sidestep your fourth amendment right. They can buy your data from an internet provider rather than needing a warrant to gain access to that data. They can know everything about you without going to court to find it. These data brokers are infringing on your birthright. Your constitution rights, the ones you were born with, they're taking your freedoms away. But there is a way to get those rights back and it's something product that we use called ExpressVPN. With ExpressVPN, everything you do online goes through secure encrypted servers. That means nobody, not even our internet providers can watch or track your movements or what you're doing online. You have privacy and therefore freedom. Get your rights back with ExpressVPN right now. By the way, you get an extra three months for free when you use our special link to expressvpn.com slash Tucker. Get three extra months of ExpressVPN. Once again, ExpressVPN one word dot com slash Tucker. Do you feel that maybe you're out of step with the modern world with those attitudes? No, I think I think in the modern world's difficult to navigate through, but like anything else, being brought up the way we were brought up with the values we learned growing up in the industries that we worked in, I think it's more valuable today to have that thought process of old school ways with modern modern society because everybody falls in love with anything that's convenient that doesn't take a lot of effort if that makes sense. Of course, where we grew up where you had to provide a lot of effort to make changes and to actually be successful. I think that's important. People have to understand the value of work and the value of maybe having some struggles in your life because it's going to make you the person you are further down the road and you're going to actually appreciate things more. No, I don't think that's a hindrance at all. I think it's a strength to be honest with you. What did you do with O'Shaunas? Oh, Shaunas, in her hand, I was a rigor. I was a steward. What does that mean? So a rigor is, you know, dealing with cranes, hoisten, moving heavy equipment, hauling heavy equipment around on track to trails. Every day was different. So I always tell people, you know, what is a rigor? I'm like, well, it's like putting, you know, five pounds of shit in a two-pound bag and making it look good. And that's where we did. It's definitely like once, you know, for a Sunday, we could be hoisten air conditioners by helicopter onto a building in Boston. And then the next day, we're moving a piece of art with a crane over the Museum of Fine Arts. And the next day, I might be hauling an oversized crane somewhere. So every day was different. You had to use your mind. You had to use your common sense. And it was an apprenticeship program I went through. And I'm still on the seniority list today. Still over, we hold our seniority. So I haven't been there in 26 years. But before I retire, I'm going to clock in for a week just to get my six weeks of vacation. So you like a true team. So your father lived to see you getting to Teamsters leadership. My father, my father lived to see me take over local 25. I was a youngest president who I've taken over. I was 33 years old. And he died in 2012. And I was running for Eastern Region Vice President. And I won the election in 2011, November. I was the highest vote gunner. And he passed away suddenly in January. And it was a funny story on how he passed away. So he was a man of few words. He threw compliments around like sewer caps. But he was a very proud man. He was very proud of his sons and everything else. And so he died. And you know, typical, we go through his pockets, see where he stashed all his cash like fooling around. And my mother went in a suit jacket and he had a ticket to go see me get sworn in at the convention never told anybody what he was calling. So it was pretty good. But he was a character. He was a type of guy. He was growing up. My mother raised three of us, three boys, and we're all very close in age. She raised her three younger brothers in the projects in Charlestown. And then she gets blessed with him as a husband and three of us. It wasn't easy. But, you know, he was a type of guy. You could go home and say, hey, dad, I screwed up. He wouldn't scream in yellow. All right, let's figure this out. Like he was always there that way where, you know, at times he would flip his lid. But, you know, he was just that he was a man's man. Like he always was taught us about loyalty, always taught us about integrity. My mother was, you know, obviously the biggest influence in our life. So it was a great upbringing. You know, tough at times. I mean, a lot of tough love, not a lot of hugs. But at the end of the day, you know, not enough to send it up in jail, not enough to send it up on drugs. And we've been pretty successful and lived a good life. So they did something, right? I mean, the Boston that you grew up in, which I remember a vivid, was, you know, so well, was really, it was an Irish city. I mean, no one would say it. But it's just fact. It was like it was run by the Irish and had been since like the 1850s. Right. Came in and took it over from the Yankees because they were better organizers and more intense. And politics was dominated by culture. And a low key was working class Boston was Irish. Right. But certainly politics, the whole state was dominated by the Irish, right? Really, culture was part of that. That's kind of gone now. Yeah. I mean, you look at, you know, take a snapshot of Boston politics 10 years, 10 years ago, and go back even further like 30 years and see we were out right now. It's a completely different landscape completely completely different. The great fling could never get elected now. No, Ray Flynn, Tom and Edo, Monty Walsh probably couldn't get elected. No way. So, yeah, it's totally, totally different. You know, the priority seemed to have changed. And I think what changed in Boston, which is part of the problem that you see is that no one from Boston that grew up in Boston or in the Boston area like Medford where I'm from, Everett, Somerville, no one in Cambridge, no one that grew up there can afford to live there. I know. So what you have is you have all these transients and these people from the suburbs and out of state that grew up in rural areas a whole life. Now they want to be city people. They move in here. And you know, they pay in the high rents to pay in the high costs. And they're basically controlling the narrative. And that narrative is not consistent with the Boston that I knew. And then I grew up with Boston was a blue collar, the city. They were very proud, very patriotic. And now it's completely, you know, going the other way. And there was a great deal of attention to like the people who lived there. I mean, that's one thing I was noticed about Boston. It was obviously corrupt to some extent. A lot of drunk people in the state house. On the other hand, like they seem to, the quality of life issues was safe. It was clean. You know, it worked pretty well. The real service is there. And that it seems to have inverted like there are almost no working class people in Boston that I can see. Now, if you go down the seatport, Salt Boston, I mean, you go down the seatport and look, development's great for an area. But it's going to be developed with the intent that people that are from there don't get forced out. Exactly. Because if we were to live there, the gentrification that Boston has seen over the last 10 years is crazy. If you went to Salt Boston 25 years ago where I used to report to work every day in Salt Boston and you took a snapshot of the waterfront, there was nothing down there. In my fact, 1995 or 96, I was working rank and file. We were building a crane because they were getting ready to build a hotel right in the seatport, which wasn't the seatport. It wasn't that we know it as, and I remember saying, why are they putting a hotel here? Who is actually going to come here to South Boston? Right. Yeah. I mean, we'd back in our cars, our vehicles, to go to work and would have to look to make sure someone wasn't sleeping in the parking lot that you didn't run over. That's how, you know, how it's changed. But who would think that's so Boston right now? I mean, they got 4,500 dollars a month for studio apartment. And it's not people our age rent on them. It's 25 or 26 year olds that my main daddy have paying for the leverage of the city. So it's changed dramatically. I mean, it's still a beautiful clean city. The politics are crazy. They're far left on a lot of issues. And, you know, I think people are more concerned with social issues and they have the economic issues right now. That's kind of nicely put. That's exactly what I'm trying to describe. It got the city got a lot richer and nicer in some ways, but crappier in other ways. Yeah, the social issues are important. Right. I get it. And everybody should be able to have their own opinions on whatever those issues are. I mean, I think you and I probably have the same opinions on a lot of the social issues. But from what we do every day as representing working people in people in general is we want to make certain that people have the economic resources to buy a modest home, to afford tuition so that kids can go to school, and to plan for a very modest and retirement that's not compromised by debt. And unfortunately, the Boston politics or the Massachusetts politics have taken a road down this social justice warrior path where we're not so concerned with the people on Main Street. We want to make sure that we're fighting these social justice issues that do not put food in the table. Do not keep gas prices normal. Do not compromise people when they go into the grocery store. So a lot of this change, I think as a result of this election, this election was a perfect example of think about the Democrats and again. to the grocery store. So a lot says change. I think as a result of this election, look, this election was a perfect example of it. Yeah. Think about the Democrats. And again, I'm a Democrat. Think about their whole narrative through this election. It was all social issues. Our members who I know intimately and some of them don't agree with me. Some of them don't agree with our policies. And that's the beauty of living in America. Right? You can have disagreements. You can have, you know, difference of opinions. But by talking to our members, we knew the concerns were the prices that the gas pumps, prices that the grocery stores, and the ability to afford a home and maintain and keep that home. Exactly. And then you get into, you know, the issues are important. I get it, the social issues. But I've got to live, I've got to put food on my table. And it was never so proven in this past election that the social issues are important, but they don't matter. What matters is, you know, people, especially the work in class, being able to make ends meet. Well, exactly. It felt like the whole constituency was unhappy college girls and making them feel valued. I'm not against unhappy college girls. I feel sorry for them. But you can't have an entire political party catering to them alone. Like what about like normal people with jobs and stuff? They were just ignored. Look, you got to represent everybody. Yeah, exactly. No matter what. And, you know, the Democratic Party, and I've been very critical of them. And I'm going to continue to be very critical of them because I think it's important that they listen for once. They haven't listened in 20 years. Because they think they own you. They think they own everybody. You know, instead of when I have a conversation with you and I don't agree with you. Yeah, my goal is to not get you to agree with me. But I want you to see that because I have a difference of opinion that it's not going to destroy a relationship. And there's going to be many issues that you and I may be able to embrace together and maybe make some change. Right? This party, once you go against them, they get so vindictive. The party, the Democrats now, are acting the way that they used to accuse the Republicans 20 and 30 years ago. And that they basically become that Republican Party that they despised. Intolerant fell in love with corporate, corporate elites. Right? Don't want to listen to the constituents. They want to dictate how people should vote and how people should think. And that's a problem. And I'm watching all this media and I'm done with mainstream media. I am done with it, especially after the way it affected, you know, us during this election. You know, you watch CNN, you watch MSNBC. That narrative was so scripted and forget whether you're a political person or not. If you are Joe Q public or Jane Q public watching that coverage during the election, it was rigged. It was scripted. And you know, part of being an American is you have, you should have the ability to listen to opinions and form your own and make your own decisions. That mainstream media has proven one thing. They are not relevant whatsoever. I know. And you know, that's part of the problem. I mean, we've got to do a reset, democratic party, especially. Yeah. I mean, I think labor is not the only group that is, I mean, it's not even politics. It's just if you're taken for granted by your spouse or your political party or your employer being taken for granted is bad, you're going to get treated like an object after a while. You know what I mean? 100%. And I think that there are other groups of voters who have reached this. I mean, I'll give you a perfect example. This is hilarious. And you know, I think you know me by now, I call balls and strikes. And I'm going to say what's on my mind regardless. So you're trying to, the Democrats are trying to quote us to endorse Joe Biden in January. Right. And Joe Biden has been a good president for us labor. Has you done everything we want it? No, absolutely not. Again, you get into we fixed your pension. Great. Thank you. Your first owner of business, you shut down oil drill and you shut down pipelines. I got 7,000 members that lost their jobs immediately. The keystone. Right. So, you know, I started pointing out some of that stuff to them, which I was quiet about in the beginning. But you know, you're out there jockeying for our support. And they want us to endorse Biden in January. All of Labor did. And I'm like, no, we're not, we're not doing that. We've got to talk to our members. We're going to make sure where our members are at. So we go through this whole winter getting pressure from, you know, people in the Democratic Party. We stayed the course. No, we're not. We want to interview the candidates, which we've never done before. And we asked every single candidate in January or December to come in and meet with us. The first person to respond was Donald Trump. I'll be in there. Definitely went out of doubt. And all these other candidates, RFK, right away, uh, Ace of Hotchinson, uh, Cornell West, all of them, they came right in. Same format, same questioning like we talked about earlier. And the struggle was getting Biden in here. He didn't like the fact that Trump committed early or the Democrats and like that he committed early. So long story short, we go through this whole process. And we have Biden in there and you know, you could just clearly tell he was, you know, not the man he was. And it was kind of, it was kind of sad, you know, because it's sad because you look at it. And, and I think Jen generally, you know, a nice old man, yes, old a gentleman, right? And what they were doing to him, the Democratic Party, it would kind of like look like elderly abuse to me. Yes. And, you know, we knew we weren't going to go with him. And then after the first debate, we pursued in your meeting with him, it was obvious that he was so weak of 16 questions, two weeks in advance, the same 16 questions to each candidate. So, you know, RFK answered all 16 questions. Private probably most of them didn't answer him how we would like him to answer him. But they answered him. Joe Biden came in and he, he answered, uh, he answered five of them. Donald Trump answered all 16. And then when Biden drops out of the race, but pride of Biden dropping out of the race, he's in the race around June of May. Um, one of my vice presidents, a woman named Joan Corrie out of my local, she sits on our general executive board was at an event with, uh, vice president Harris. And, you know, they go in through the line and get the picture and Joan introduces herself to vice president Harris as I'm Joan Corrie. I'm on the general executive board for the team. She says she goes, teams this, you bet again on board. You bet again on board, bet again on board soon. Sested to my vice president were face to her face. So she comes back. We have the meeting the next day. Yeah. And she tells me that thought I was arrogant. That's really arrogant. So she tells me this. So I call out Mottie Wall. She wasn't a secretary labor, but, you know, he was pushing, pushing hard for us to make the endorsement. I'm like, let me ask you a question, Mottie. Excuse my friends. Who does this fucking lady think she is? Like, if I want to support from any organization, I am not going to point my finger and someone's face and say, you bet again on board or else. But that's the attitude of this whole party. So fast forward, she finally agrees to come after we were putting pressure on her, you know, basically, because I was doing interviews all over the place. Same. We haven't gone invited to the DNC. You know, they haven't accepted our invitation for her to come to a round table. So she comes in the round table. Same format, same questions, rank and file members are asking her questions just like they asked every other candidate. And they were trying to negotiate with us. She only wants to answer three questions. We're like, there's 16 questions here. So she answers three of them. And on the fourth question, one of her operatives and one of her staff slips a note in front of me. This will be the last question. And it was 20 minutes earlier than the time that it was going to end. Come on, 100%. And so, you know, you'll be trying to get our support and her declaration on the way out was, I'm going to win with you. Oh, without you. She thought that or said it out loud. She said that's insane. So that's crazy behavior. Actually, if you think about it, it was insane behavior. Which at that point in time, I knew she was going to lose me. That's just my unqualified opinion. I got a gut instinct and I'm like, well, you turned out to be right someone this arrogant forget anything else. But you put your finger in someone's face at an Emily's list event once you find out there with the team says, and you say, you better get on board or else. That's that's a problem. And then you come before us. You don't answer the question. You want to dictate what you're going to answer. And then you leave 20 20 minutes before it's over. And the one difference between all the candidates that came was that at the conclusion of all these round tables, we had media set up. So after conclusion of meeting with Trump, I did a press conference down in the lobby of my building. Well, Donald Trump did a did a press conference down in the lobby of my building after he spoke. The same offer was extended to both President Biden in vice president Harris and they refused. So you're meeting with the biggest labor organization that you want. And you can, you've got an opportunity for meeting a question you about how you felt the media, how you felt the meeting went and what you wanted to achieve. And you don't want to speak to the media. That's a problem. But Trump to his credit and not building enough for you had a press conference. So you're describing the way like a rich person would talk to the housekeeper, like how dare you question right? You work for me. Right. They don't realize that. And I've said this numerous times. When I'm talking to a member, whoever that member may be, regardless of race, religion, color, creed, I know that they give me the opportunity to represent them and they employ me. Yeah. Right. And I've said this many times. The Democrats can understand who they work for they work for the constituency that they represent in the community. Exactly. And that's where they've lost sight of who their employer is. They think that the constituency should serve them. Exactly. And it's disgraceful. And what we've been saying for a year, now everybody's embrace and saying, well, the Democratic Party needs a reset. But where were you nine months ago? Where were you two years ago? If you were really passionate about putting up a candidate that could actually represent Democrats like they did or represent the party, why weren't you developing a plan two and a half years ago? Because you thought you just had in the bag, you thought people were going to do what you tell them to do. Well, clearly that didn't work. So what's the future? And they don't have an answer. It may be that that period of history is just over. And maybe your state tells the story. Everyone, I look at the results from Massachusetts and it's like the blue state and the nation's most liberal state. I have family there, both sides, my wife and me. I don't know a single liberal in Massachusetts. Not one. I don't know a single Irish person whose liberal maybe one. There's not one Italian in the entire state whose liberal, none. They were all Democrats. If you're still using Verizon, AT&T or T mobile, obviously our condolences, but you're going to want to hear this. Our cell phone company, PureTalk, gives us the exact same service you're currently getting from those big companies, but for half the cost. Not a joke. There's no reason to spend 85 or $100 per month per person on your wireless bill. Now, we can get unlimited talk, text, and 15 gigs of data with mobile hotspots for just 35 bucks a month. You don't have to be a math major. The average family of four saves about $1,000 a year with PureTalk. You enjoy America's most dependable 5G network, support small businesses. We would know that because they are now powering TC and it can probably save you money too. So cut the fan out of your wireless bill. Switch to PureTalk by going to puretalk.com slash Tucker. You'll save it in additional 50% off your first month PureTalk America's wireless company. Back me up, you live in Massachusetts. What was that? You met a liberal Italian. Well, you never. They exist now. They're going to exist, I think. I mean, well, I mean, maybe not exist that way. But to your point, everybody was Democrat. Yeah. Right. Everybody was Democrat. Now you talk to people and look, sometimes people will talk to you and they'll tell you what, hey, I seen you on the hour and see a great job. And you know, like, they've been talking shit online because you see it whenever. But I think the majority of the people are fed up totally, totally fed up. But I'm just saying that whole world of organized, at least in your union, like just the people in it, you know, they were all Democrats, but they were never, they were all kind of traditional social families. Like they care about pensions. They believe in generations. Exactly. Right. They believe in continuity. Right. As you said at the beginning, it's not even political. So it's a mindset. It's a worldview. And that whole group is like so out of step with the Democratic Party that I'm not really sure how that's ever fixed. No, but in that, you know, you make a great so through this whole year, let's say, right, the Republicans and we've worked with a lot of great Republicans in the Senate. Josh Hawley's been great with us. Yeah. JD, JD Vance has been great with us. You know, Roger Marshall has been great. And you know, I'll give you a Josh Hawley, for instance, Josh Hawley was, you know, we met with him. We had a conversation, didn't know how to conversation with me early on. And we were telling him and look, one of our biggest issues is national right to work. And we explained why not right to work is not good for this country. Why it's not good for his constituency. And soon after that meeting, he came out with a statement on X and I met with the Teamsters Union, you know, supportive of working people and, you know, they've basically educated. We've talked about right to work and not all support national right to work. And then we had a we had a strike with a company in his state, Graybar. He went out and walked the picket line. And that strike was settled the next day. And I'm not saying because he walked a picket line, but he demonstrated that that's what he's willing to do because his constituency works there. Those are the people that he represents. Look for him. That's right. And you know, he's been great on our issues, you know, and I think the Republicans have a great opportunity right now to show work and people that what they were saying during the election is going to hold true. And I think Trump proved our early on when he actually listened to us and when we lobbied for Laurie Chavez, the Remar to be the Labor Secretary. Now, you know, I don't think it was a popular decision from a lot of his donors that supported him. But, you know, I went down and I had a frank conversation with the president. I'm like, look, this is important to us. You know, if you you truly want to show that you're going to, you know, embrace working people and work hard on their behalf, this is an early indicator that you're willing to do this. And he did it. So, you know, people that are saying Trump's anti-laboury, anti-worker, I mean, look, he started off on a great, great footing. I mean, he named the secretary of the letter. We're looking for him. I mean, look at who voted for him. He got a rural America, you know, where there are no people who aren't, quote, workers. I mean, you know, most people didn't go to college. They work, they have back problems by the age of 40 because they work with their bodies. They all vote Trump is not any vote. I've got back problems from the last eight months of the knife wounds from the Democratic Party. I've got back problems from sitting in an anchor chair in my hole. Right. Trump, Trump, Trump, set up straight. But, you know, here's one, okay, so obviously the Republican Party is in the middle of this total change. It's sought itself as the party of big business. It's clearly not. Its voters aren't and its donors aren't increasingly. But I think there are a lot of Republicans, especially in the Senate, like Mitch McConnell, who just have not, well, Mitch McConnell is a really bad person. But so he's a specific case. But there are like decent people who just haven't sort of made the mental change that they're not the party that they thought they were. Why they potted that problem is we haven't had the conversations with those folks. Right. So we agree. Because there's been such a line drawn in the sand where if you were on one side or the other, especially in our world labor, if you're a Democrat, you shouldn't be talking to the Republicans. But I'm like, that's bullshit. How are we going to get stuff done in this country? Forget anything else. It's like, you know, if you're looking to truly collaborate and actually make things happen, you've got to talk to people that normally wouldn't. You've got to express your ideals, your opinions. And there's got to be common ground. I mean, I deal with probably the worst employers in the world. I deal with corporate greed. Why call a crime syndicate, like Costco, United Airlines. And there's a list of them. And you know, I could go on and off for days. And you know, a lot of the times you get problem solved by having discussions and finding out you know, where you can work together. I mean, who would think that, you know, Mark Wayne, Malina, I almost fought twice in the middle of the Senate floor. It's pretty scrappy dude. Yeah. And from Boston, man, I don't sweat. I don't sweat anybody. But him and I have had a conversation with actually had many conversations. And, you know, we agreed to disagree on what we can't agree on. But at the end of the day, there's going to be a lot of things that we can work together on on behalf of his constituency, my members. You know, because I don't agree with the old one issue. Should I draw a line in the sand and not talk to you again? I mean, there'd be a hundred percent of us rate in this country. That was a key. Right? But here's the mind shift that I think would be I would like to see. So labor is an ancient institution in the United States. And a, you know, pivotal one in the economic and political history of the country. But I do think people should have caught in this sort of 1930s thinking where it's, you know, workers versus some manufacturing company and the power shift has been so complete. I don't know if we've, it's like, even Amazon is not as powerful as the financial institutions. And I personally think this is a observer. I'm not labor or management. We're going to convey you at some point though. Yeah. Well, I've been a member of the union most of my life, but it's particularly shitty union sag. But anyway, here's the point. At some point, I would like to see somebody with power ask questions of the banks because if you want to know what hurts working people, it's debt and it's credit card debt, specifically 22%, and nobody says a word about it. And I think the fastest way to improve the lives of middle-class working class people is to address that in some way or at least at the beginning of the conversation, like it's bad to hook people on 22% interest. Yeah, it's bad to hook people who depend upon keeping their electricity and the utilities on when they have to pay with a credit card. I agree. But because again, the corporate greed, a lot of these CEOs at these banks, this such a, you know, this such a disparity between the people that are their customers and what the banks are making, that should be, there should be a platform to regulate these banks and make certain that everybody is playing, you know, I have a level playing for like these credit card companies. Like you made a point earlier off the record. You said there should be a union for credit card, people that have credit cards, right? Yeah. And that what we do as a labor organization will not be in treated fairly like Amazon or anybody else when our members are not being treated fairly. What do we do? We withhold our labor. Well, imagine if we to your point earlier withheld our payments as a country to these credit card companies and these banks that obviously support these credit cards. What's that a pretty strong fucking message? Well, I, I've raised this before and been treated as like the unibomber, like that's too crazy. I'm not radical at all. I'm totally moderate person in the sense that in the end. I'll carry that flag. I like Well, so I like it. I think I think you probably want banks in your country. I don't think banks are the root of all evil, but I do think banks hurt a lot of people and they seem immune from criticism. You can attack anybody. No one ever attacks the banks. Well, think about it. That's not in a hundred years. Why is that? Well, we talk about, well, they're so powerful, right? We talk about you know, the old school values have grown up in a neighborhood and grown up, you know, with with with with simple things. Just remember the neighborhood banks that we dealt with early on. They actually cared about the people. They're new. They're new. They're new. They knew them. They knew them. They knew them. No one knows TD bank. No one knows Bank of America. There's no personal connection there. No, it's all about bottom line and how much money they're going to make. Oh, yeah. And you know, that that's what's missing is what they may be selling your debt to somebody you don't never even have many times if you've got a mortgage and you know, the bank you go through sell it to someone else. They're making money every week. We had a financial crisis over this. Yeah, I think it was 2008, 2008. I think I think there's a movie about that. But credit cards especially and the payday loan people have taken a lot of deserved well-deserved abuse. I mean, clear this territory. But I just I remember when I was a kid, my father's report covered them off you. And they I remember very well hearing from him that they put people in prison for loan sharking. You know, all the time put them off you in prison for loan sharking. I don't think they were loaning at 22%. They probably had better rates than the bank. That's what I said. Credit cards definitely. And by the way, they paid out on the motto in full unlike the state governments, which pay you like a percentage of it. They're more crooked than the mafia and no one says a word. Oh, it's it's disgusting. It is disgusting. It's actually criminal. Yes. I liked Josh Hawley had a nice, uh, uh, Senate hearing where, you know, he brought them to task. He brought the credit card companies to task and, uh, you know, it seems like you get punished for being, you know, the misfortune, you may endur in life. So the credit cards to the other thing I don't like about them is, you know, if you if you got a good credit rating and you're, you know, you've been fortunate enough to have a good job, you got a lesser rate. Right. If I have bad credit and I've got a lot of debt, I'm getting that higher rate. So they're, they're praying on the week. Of course. And that's that's that's that's gotta stop. That's gotta stop. At the very least, we should say it's wrong. And by the way, it's prohibited by every religion. I mean, people have thought this was wrong for thousands of years. Right. We're in this weird hiatus where I mean, Judaism, Christianity and Islam all have a lot to say about usury. And they're very explicit about it. But we sort of forgotten that or something. I don't really get it. Yeah. It's funny when, when problems don't affect certain people, they don't want to hear a bottom one. They don't want to do anything about them. Yeah. I don't think it's radical to raise it. That all's not really. No, I don't think so. I mean, it's, I mean, you know, I don't think it's radical at all. I mean, it's a disgrace when people have to pay their bills on their credit card and you know, they're never going to catch up. Never. Never. And by the way, if I can just make this not a partisan point, but it's just true. Joe Biden did that. He made bankruptcy not, I mean, credit card debt not just chargeable in bankruptcy. He did that in the in the bankruptcy bill because he's from Delaware and they paid for his house pretty corrupt. So let me ask you bit AI. This is going to have a transformative effect. Everybody says on labor, what effect will AI have on everything? I mean, it needs to be regulated. It needs to not be a weapon against working people. Technologies, you know, common fast and fair, especially many of the industries that we represent. But again, these are conversations that need to be had before AI is implemented and or dispersed into the workplace. There's a lot of jobs that can be created as a result of technology as a result of implementation of AI. And again, it's, you know, people drawn line in the sand not want to have these conversations. The general public or the general perception of the world is they want convenience. They want less labor, but it's not good for the country. It's not good for working people. And automation is going to be just as debilitating to work in people. Then it's just like AI. And what we've done is we've negotiated contracts where automation has to be negotiated in the industries we were. If they're going to make a technological change or they're going to automate something, they've got to maintain the job levels and create jobs moving forward as a result of this technology. You take grocery warehouses where they're having robots pick orders. Well, we've been able to negotiate contracts where we create jobs. We maintain the robots. We program the robots. You know, we fix the robots. We build the robots in some of these cases. So there's always opportunity. You know, to fossil service, 340,000 members, technology plays a big role in the forwarding of packages and envelopes. And, you know, obviously it's efficient, but there are jobs created as a result of it. And that's what the beauty about being in the union is. But I think people underestimate how technology is going to destroy this country if we don't regulate it. If we don't get in front of it, we don't create jobs as a result of it. I mean, we're dumbing down this society so much. It's, you know, your college students not doing research papers. They use an AI. How is that good? How is that good for your mind? Right? You got people out there, like you mentioned your union sag screen act or screen writers. You know, they're going to be on a job if AI comes in. So, I mean, we've got to take a hard look at where AI will be valuable in this country and where will be detrimental. And I don't think we've taken a good look at it. I don't think we've taken a look at it at all. And, you know, the state of California is betting everything and it's budget. A guy out there. A guy. A ridiculous person. But why shouldn't, if there's like electricity or any emerging technology, a electricity shows up 100 years ago, it's fair to ask, you know, clearly it provides light and, you know, power's machines, but it's right downside. I don't know for any technology, nuclear technology. And AI is as transformative as any technology. So, why is there no conversation about harnessing it for good rather than evil? Well, think about how we started. Teamsters, horse and buggy. Yeah. Then they came out with engines, then they came out trucks. That was technology. Yeah. All of them. But we always protected the jobs. Right? We always made sure that those jobs are protected. And that was technology back then, right? Gavin Newsom and California it should be the poster child for bad behavior when it comes to protecting against AI and technology. He's the same guy that working people through the recall election saved him, right? But he's the same guy then when you work a bipartisan bill to protect against technology, AI and also mandate autonomous vehicles to have a human operator, which is bipartisan gets on his desk for a solar business as he vetoes it. Yeah. He vetoes it. You know why? Because he's looking for his next best opportunity with the captors he found love with technology, tech companies, Google, you know, Uber, whatever else lift all those companies he's bought and paid for. He doesn't care about how that affects people's job. He doesn't care about how it affects the community. He's looking for his next payday. And that's a disgrace. I couldn't agree more. Do you think that in this administration, the AI, ZARS, a guy called David Sacks? Have you talked to him? No, I haven't. But the one encouraging thing that I've seen last week, you know, that long showman. So they had a strike two day strike and it was over wages, two issues wages and automation, which is AI. And they used the ports in China to demonstrate how efficient it is by using robots and artificial intelligence. The one good thing was that President Trump met with the long showman because they've got a cooling off-parent till January 15th and then they'll go back and in negotiations to negotiate that the AI and the automation, which I think they're going to be successful and, you know, maintaining their jobs. But President Trump came on. So that's been studying automation, I've been studying AI for a long time. I don't believe anybody should be losing their jobs over that. So that's encouraging. So I think to your point, I haven't had a conversation with that, man. I'd love to just to express how important it is to have conversations with people that actually perform jobs that could be replaced by technology or AI because that may give a different perspective where we can collaborate and actually create more jobs as a result of it. Yeah. Do you want to stable, happy country? That's the question that has to remain in mind always. I think everybody does. I'm not sure that's true. I think there are people who believe is a matter of religious. Everybody in my world, me too. And that's what I want. But there are people who believe as a matter of faith that you can't stop technology. It's evolution that it's like, it's like God. matter of religion. Everybody in my world, me too. And that's what I want. But there are people who believe as a matter of faith that you can't stop technology. It's evolution that it's like, it's like God, you worship as a God and, you know, you obey its commands. They think that. Yeah. And look, people are entitled, they're opinion, but those are the people that, you know, probably less affected by it. And you get people, people don't engage in any type of fight or protest, unless unfortunately, it affects them personally. I know that my members and I know that work in class people around the country that they're scared. They're frightened. Yeah. Technology. So they will in a fight for it. And these people that aren't affected by it can have all the opinions. Wow. It's common. There's nothing we can do about it. Well, you're son of daughter may be affected by this or your neighbor or relative. You should get engaged and protect the integrity of this country, not just go along to get along because that's where we're going wrong in this country. You know, the attitude is, oh, they can just do it. Well, why? Why can't they do it? Why can't we stop it? Why can't we modify it? Why can't we collaborate to create more jobs? Why do we have to dummy down everything we do in this country? So I think there's an opportunity there, but we have to have these conversations. Maybe the biggest lie about abortion is that it's just not the big deal. That's not true. And studies show it a year after having an abortion, women overall had a 50% higher chance of needing psychiatric treatment in an 87% higher likelihood of personality and behavioral disorders. That's not health care. It's a tragedy. Pre-borns network clinics are different when women choose life. Pre-born commits to treating them body, mind, and soul as well as the future baby. It's the whole picture. And it's affordable. And ultrasound that can save a baby's life costs $28. Pre-born wants to sponsor 22,000 of those by year's end. It's a great investment. Donating is simple. Just dial pound 250 and say the keyword baby that's pound 250, the word baby, or visit preborn.com slash Tucker. We are proud to get behind this. All tax or tax, all gifts or tax, and preborn has a four star chair to rating because they do not waste money. They're totally sincere. What happened to me, Hotha? I don't know, man. Honestly, I don't know. Again, that's, you know, that's a tragedy would happen. Look, there's no love loss between his son, my predecessor, and me. Don't like the man. Never cracked an egg. He was born on third base. Thanks. He hit a triple to get there was bad for our organization. However, his father was a great team, so a great American. And the sad part of society right now is that man was murdered. Yeah, he was murdered. 1975. I'd say the family lost their father. Regardless of how I fell about the family lost their father. And unfortunately, it's like anything else in society. It's a joke. Right? It's a joke. Where is he? What happened? Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Look, the guy was an icon. He created the shooting and he brought it to where it is. But, you know, that's what's wrong with society. What do you think killed him? I don't know. I met a guy once, he told me, there's all kinds of, there's all kinds of theories, and all kinds of... But you think he was murdered. Yeah, I don't think he ran away. No, or putting witness protection. Yeah, that would have been public. That would have been public. Yeah, 50 years later. Yeah. But there's no, when you took over, you didn't hit the archive to find the truth. The archive doesn't really say much about it, other than, you know, it's a mystery, right? That's all kinds of theories. And there's a lot of times I want to go to lunch and not come back. But that's for other reasons. But, you know, that's what's wrong with the media today. You know, I mean, I don't know. I think it's like, he was an icon. He should be viewed as that. And it is what it is. So unfortunate unsolved mystery. What are you trying to do with Amazon? I'm going to put them on the knees. I don't like Jeff Bezos. Oh, I don't either. He also owns the most personal he owns. Not the company. He personally owns the most liberal newspaper in the United States, most left-wing, for the people newspaper. So I'm a little surprised to learn that he's not welcoming you guys. Yeah, now he lost his balls during the election. He could tell that. Well, that's for sure. Yeah, he's pulling a Justin Trump. I mean, I think for a guy that, you know, he did a little growth hormone. We're back in the gym, did some testosterone. You know, he's, he's, he's the man. But look, this guy does not treat his work as Phil, he's 150% turnover ratio in his company with direct employees. He hides behind a joint employer scam. Where you explain that? I'm not sure. I guess so. Joint employer is he hires third parties to move his freight. Right? Yeah, deliver the packages. So you get a company like UPS. UPS has all direct employees, drivers, load his orders, pod timers, whatever. There's all direct employees. They're W2 employees. Yeah. Bezos inside workers, Amazon inside workers, which are going to be on members shortly, direct employees. Right? They make far less than, I remember the UPS, but the delivery drivers are working for a third party, a third party that has to follow the policies and procedures of Amazon has to buy their vehicles from Amazon. We actually got a decision in California that stated they actually are the employer of these third party leasing arrangements. So we've made a demand nationally to, and we've got 22 locations that have organized under this model, a demand for bargaining. And he's refused to do it. And so we've given them all to make them that if he didn't respond by December 15th, that we would take appropriate action. No, when that happens, that's up to him. So yeah, we're going to get him. We're going to get him. How, how do you not just a threat to the possible industry? Yeah. He's a threat to every work and work and job in this country. I mean, they've got grocery warehouses. And look, he should embrace sitting down in negotiate. Think about what he does every day. If you don't concede to his demands to for him to carry a product and sell him, what does he do? He black balls you, right? He basically strikes good companies from distributing the products if they don't agree to his low terms and costs. Well, he should be savvy enough to say that why have an obligation to negotiate with the teams does because I negotiate every single day with these people when I don't get what I want. I strike them. Right. Basically, he strikes him doesn't allow him in his system. And he's trying to do the same over here by not allowing us in his system. So what's going to happen to him at some point? He's going to get struck. And you know, sometimes he's a $2 trillion value of Amazon or M.O. Whoever, but he doesn't really want to reward the people that have made him truly a success. Well, they offloaded their personnel costs onto the taxpayer through social services. Walmart does the same. Absolutely do. So what percentage of their, I mean, that's I think should be illegal. No, it is illegal. And unfortunately, there's a system over there. This is where under this new administration with Trump, we have an opportunity to expose Amazon for what they are and how bad they've been. And again, you get back to, you know, we have all these politicians with rhetoric, right? About Amazon, right? Oh, Amazon, especially the Democrats, but you couldn't get what kind of of rhetoric anti-Amazon. Oh, yeah, it's Amazon. Like, well, we want to be out there for the Amazon workers. And we want to we want to help them organize and all this rhetoric, you know, truck shoom as the world wouldn't sign on to a letter and they later find out his daughter works for Amazon as a lobbyist. Actually, actually, a lobbyist for Amazon. So that's the shoomers daughter's a lobbyist for Amazon. Yes, it is. It is. That's absolutely. This is the so corrupt. Yeah, it's crazy. So this is what you're dealing with. So yeah, we asked, we're going to, we're going to organize them. We're going to make Jeff Bezos or respect his work as we're going to make Jeff Bezos, an example of bad behavior from an employer. How hard is that to organize? Oh, it's going to be tough. I mean, it's not going to happen overnight. We've put together a program that's going to be a four to five year program. But every single day we have building momentum, we're building work of power. And, you know, he has to understand that he's not dealing with an organization that's going to go away. We might not have the money we that he has, but we definitely have one thing. We've got the workers on our side. We got intestinal photos who encouraging conviction to take on the fight. So do you have any idea what percentage of Amazon workers use federal social services to supplement their, you know, I would say the majority of majority of them. I don't have that statistic, but, you know, the part timers I know that I've talked to, especially in the New York area, they're all in subsidized housing. Some of them are in shelters. You know, some of them are on the state health plans. You know, and people don't realize when they hit that send button, they're actually paying double for the service. Yeah. Because they're actually paying for for, you know, social social services. Yeah, for the safety where an organization like mine would demand like we do with UPS, like we do with DHL, like we do whatever other employer, that they only pay a respectful wage, but they also give them free health care. They give them a retirement. They give them a career path to a, to a retirement, you know, and people that hit that send button don't realize that not only the paying for the delivery and the product, they're also paying for, you know, Jeff Bezos, why call a crime syndicate of tax evasion and evading as obligation? Well, I agree completely. I think one of the reasons I'm sympathetic to the Teamsters is because they have competent employees. I do think that's part of the deal. You know, you demand benefits and higher wages, but you know, you got to do a good job. And I think UPS drivers do a good job. They're the cream of the crop. Think about during the pandemic. And this is where the team says, and I've spent two and a half years highlighting how valuable we are to this country. And I mean it with all sincerity. Pandemic was part of the worst thing than anybody's got with witness in a long time, right? Whether it was so much uncertainty, but the one thing that was certain whether you were, you know, delivering packages or sorting and loading packages on a truck, whether you're in a grocery warehouse, whether you're working for a health care company, our members went out every single day, providing goods and services to this country. Yeah. With total disregard for their safety, the safety of their families, some of my members lost their lives. And we were deemed as heroes because we provided these goods and services. And we were heroes. Everybody was talking about us. Everybody's saying, oh, the American worker, the teams, the heroes. Well, when these companies are making record profits during the pandemic, and it comes time to reward our members, their employees, all of a sudden, we're zeros. So women reminding corporate America how important the teams to union up, but more important the American worker, especially through a crisis, because, you know, like you said earlier, you know, you talk about Irish and Italians, you know, I think corporate America has what they call Irish Alzheimer's, you know, they forget the people that provide them the most, but they never forget when they get fucked by on a dollar, right? So, you know, I think, you know, the teams as you know, we do have the best workforce in the country, well trained with safety, conscience, but you know, we fight hard for our members. Are the, I don't want to be vulgar or anything like that, but is it true what they say about UPS drivers being like the most desired men in the world? Men and women, right? Because they have pensions. They got big pensions. No, but I mean, like, you know what I mean? Is it true? I don't know. I mean, you have stories. I mean, everybody like, every like a person in uniform. I never works for UPS. I couldn't tell you. Sorry, I couldn't resist asking that. Yeah, I mean, I've got a face for radio. So I don't know, you know, I sure appreciate your, you're doing this. I appreciate your deeply. Well, listen, I got a venture that I'm going into. I want to, I want to be like you and other people. I created a podcast. I don't want to be launching early 2025. Oh, you like it. It's going to be called a better, bad idea by Sean O'Brien. We're going to have real conversations with real people about real issues that affect America. Are you really going to do that? 100%. Oh, you should invite me on. I'll come. I definitely will. Oh, done. Can't wait. Thank you. Thank you, sir. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. Not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information. That's true. It's not intentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. And you'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say. And we hope you will.