Thank you. Thank you FOR HAVING ME. AH. I LOVE BEING HERE. Thank you. Oh, I know you. I feel like I know a lot of people here. I have so many relatives in Texas that No, it's true. Some of them are from here, others fled as the rest of the country collapsed. I'm always here. It's so wonderful. I mean, I guess no matter where I was, if I was in Bayonne, New Jersey, I'd pretend to like it, but I actually do love Texas. I don't have to pretend. And I'm sure there's great stuff going on in Bayonne. They but you don't even know where that is, do you? Good. Um anyway, thank you so much uh for having me. We have protesters outside. WHICH I LOVE. NO, IT'S AMAZING. SOMEONE JUST TOLD me that. We've been on the road, this is our ninth night. We're going coast to coast. Uh 16 different cities, and the idea was, you know, you want to see the country that you love, that you're born in, that you're going to die in, and that you really care about, but also they can't censor a live event. And there's something about being in the in a room full of people you agree with that is so great. It's like a spa treatment. It's incredible. If you spend your life experiencing the rest of the country through your phone or your television or your radio, they eat people who still read newspapers through the newspaper. You really get such a distorted sense, and it's not an accident, of course. Um they're trying to make you dislike your country and have contempt for it and feel hopeless about it. But above all, they're trying to make you feel crazy, like you're the only person who feels the way that you do. That this is bizarre. You're thinking to yourself, this is bizarre. You know, you're lying. You're insane. And that I think is a normal person's reaction to the news, particularly recently. And of course, they're flipping it around on you and being like, "No, no, everything's fine. You're crazy. You're crazy." AND BY THE WAY, AFTER a while, I mean, the Soviets used to do this to to any sort of dissenter. You know, they put them in a mental hospital, like, "You're crazy. You don't think the experiment's working? It's working just fine." And you know, the truth is, like, they can kind of convince you that there's something wrong with you or that you're an extremist or something because you think what they're doing is nuts. Um and that's one of the real reasons I wanted to get out and just be in rooms full of people who are not crazy at all. They're the most normal people in the country, which by the way is the whole country. I mean, the percentage of people who are on board with the things that are happening now is tiny, and the polls don't reflect them. I mean, the polls are a reflection of a bunch of things. Part of it is party identification. Part of it is fear, you know, convincing people that you know, your side may be terrible, but the other side is really dangerous. Um and part of them are just absolutely fake. I mean, they're not even real. They're designed to discourage you and to tell you a story that's not rooted in reality. But whatever the cause of bad polling, it doesn't measure the truth about the country, which is most people are not mad at each other at all. Most people have more in common than they don't. They live here. They're Americans. They have basically 99% of things in common, and they're not mad at each other. And I know that because I always think of myself as the most hated person in America. Probably some truth in that. But you know, when I show up at your Quiznos or something for my unhealthy lunch, no one ever says anything nasty to me. Everyone's nice. Oh, I love you, too. Were you Were YOU AT QUIZNOS? I THINK I SAW YOU. YOU WERE GETTING THE TURKEY. UM but it's funny. It's it really is a lie. People in this country are not actually at an individual level divided by race or sex or party ID to anywhere near the extent that they tell you. At all. Like, who is actually for, I don't know, inflation or no borders or castrating your kids and having no grandchildren? Like, no one is for that. There are like nine rich ladies in LA are for that. Everybody else hates it. That's just true, and you're just reminded of that when you travel. And that's why I do wish I had had a chance to meet the protesters. I kind of like protesters. Um they're just interesting, and when you confront them in person, they never, you know, they never have the stones to get mad at you. That was like a little embarrassed. "Are you calling me a Nazi? Oh, no. Not you. Well, that's my picture on your sign." "Well, I didn't I didn't see that." Okay. But it's just so funny. It's like I always have the exact same thought because, you know, you try to be reflective, and when people call you names, I do think it's really important to ask yourself honestly in some quiet place. The shower is a good spot. Um you know, is that true? Am I what they're calling me? Because you don't want to be the things they're calling you, actually. And you don't want to let them turn you into the things they're calling you, which is also part of the goal, to upset you so much that you become the hater they claim you are. But so, I have been through this process for, you know, so many years where they call you something, and I actually do try to take stock, like, am I that person? I don't want to be that person. Am I that person? And the one thing that always makes me laugh is when And I'm sure every person in this room has been called a bit an extremist. You're an extremist! I WAS THINKING, YOU KNOW, WHATEVER ELSE I am, you know, a dessert eater some other unattractive qualities, I'll admit it. But whatever else I am, I'm the opposite of an extremist. I hate change. My parents got divorced. I'm totally opposed to change. I don't like any change. It's just I honestly have a really clear vision of America that doesn't strike me as extremist. It strikes me as the opposite. I like to America in 1985, actually, very well. And I'm sure a lot of people in this room aren't old enough to remember 1985. And those of you who aren't may think, "Well, you know, did they have electricity and air conditioning and air travel then? Was the country segregated?" It was awesome. There was very little conversation about the things that divided us. There was a ton of conversation about fun irrelevant things like sports and the weather, and like that really mattered. And in a healthy society, a happy society, people's focus is not entirely on politics, of course. Politics is what you do to make the things that are important possible, like your marriage, your children, your religious faith, your job. Politics is the price you pay for the freedom to continue doing what you want to do, to live your life without bothering people. And in 1985, most people lived lives like that. I never heard of a family in 1985 that was divided by politics. Everybody had some sort of crazy, you know, organic peanut butter on, you know what I mean, who sort of never gotten over the '60s, and she was sort of nice, long complicated earrings, faint aroma of incense, marijuana, it wasn't clear clear what it was, but you know, a musky scent. And she was pretty enthused about the whales, and she wasn't fully in touch with like shaving her body hair, and like whatever, you know. But she wasn't mad at you. YOU WEREN'T MAD at her. You considered her faintly hilarious, and she would like sit in Indian style and ask you about your feelings, and you'd be like, "Okay." But there was no sense in which families that I recall, anyway, and I grew up in California. I'm embarrassed to say that to Texans since you've been invaded by them. You should have built a wall, actually, on your western No, I'm serious. You should have. You should have. BUT YOU DIDN'T. MAN, THEY'RE EVERYWHERE, AND I CAN SPOT THEM. You know, you know your own people. Um anyway. But there was no sense in which politics was the most important thing at all because at the time, and this is the difference in 1985, we had leaders, some of whom I agreed with, some of whom I didn't, but none of them took it as their personal mission to divide the country they led and make people hate each other. That would be unthinkable in 1985. In fact, it would be unthinkable to any normal person. Because the last thing you ever do is divide the people you're in charge of. And if you're a parent, you know this. If you're a parent, your deepest desire, your secret dream, the thing that motivates you above all is the idea that your children will love each other. Because you're going to be gone. As I heard someone day say the other day, we get our you know, we lose our parents way too soon. We find our spouses and our children way too late, but it's our siblings who are with us from beginning to end, and that's true. And every parent knows that's true. And so, the measure of a happy family, I've always thought, is the degree to which the children, the siblings, the brothers and sisters love each other and are united. And that's what you leave behind much more than any real estate portfolio or money that you pass on is the love between your offspring. That's such a natural desire. But it's true in every human organization, the leader's job is twofold. One, to be courageous because the bravest man is the leader, regardless of title. Doesn't matter. Bravery is the indispensable quality in a leader, period. Period. And the second is the unity of the people you lead. And that's true in your office, it's true in your platoon if you serve in the military, and it's above all true in your family. And of course it's true at scale in a country of 350 million people. And so it takes an extraordinary kind of leader, an evil leader, by definition evil, to set out to intentionally divide people he leads, period. And that is what we've seen. And well, you may be wondering, well, wait a second. Aren't you getting to motive? How can you know the motive of our leaders? Because you can't see their hearts. Only God knows what they really think. And that is a fair rebuttal. Now, no one actually said that. I'm anticipating a criticism ahead of time. And I've changed my thinking on this. I've always since I've been in journalism my whole life, I've always sort of you know, kept away from guessing people's motives because honestly, you can't know. But I have decided in mid middle age that actually, I can know. And I know motive by results. The result is the goal over time. In other words, if you keep doing something and winding up in a certain place, you meant to get to that place, no matter what you tell me. Doesn't matter what story you tell me. Doesn't matter what story you tell yourself. All I care about is the effect because I judge the tree by its fruits. You can tell me you're a lemon tree, but if pears come out, I think you're lying. To yourself or to me or both, it doesn't matter. You're not a lemon tree, you're a pear tree. And so if the effect of your policies is to divide the people you lead and make them hate each other and divide the essential organization in human civilization in life, which is the family, you meant to do that. And there's nothing more evil than that. When they sent us home for Thanksgiving 3 years ago, and told us on television, your job when you get home for Thanksgiving, a sacred secular holiday, the only holiday that all Americans share, actually, regardless of religious faith, Thanksgiving, where we give thanks for this nation that we inherited. When they sent us home from cable news to Thanksgiving, they told us explicitly, you go home and you find your uncle, your grandmother, your dad, whoever's not with the program, and you lecture them about whatever, Black Lives Matter, the vax, it doesn't matter, COVID, the mask, social distancing. The pretext was irrelevant. The point was they worked intentionally to turn children against their parents. To turn Americans against their neighbors. To turn the races against each other. They've been on that program for 60 years, and it still HASN'T WORKED. MOST AMERICANS DO NOT HATE EACH other on the basis of their race. Boy, have they failed on that program. I've been called a racist a million times. And yet I have never one time in all the years I've lived in this country, which is 55, ever been attacked by someone of a different race because I'm a racist. Not one person ever said The only person who's ever said that to me are the private equity wives in the ski lift in Jackson Hole. I'm serious. Sitting trying to enjoy my elk chili at the Four Seasons between runs. It's the The only people who've ever called me that are rich ladies. I'm just being honest with you. And I always say the same thing, which is I don't I know, I don't like you, actually. That doesn't make me racist, it just makes me discerning. And you sort of wonder Sorry, sorry, sorry. I will cop to bigotry. That's my bigotry. Sorry. I'll admit it. It actually makes you feel guilty to admit that there's a group of people I just don't like as a category, but it is private equity wives. So, sorry. Now that I've gotten this like an AA meeting, I'm just getting it all out there. I'm just telling you the truth. Those are my sins. But you sort of think to yourself like, what happened? What was the change? And the truth is, for whatever reason, and I think it's clearly a product of a spiritual battle in the unseen world, which is totally real, um I didn't grow up thinking I'm I should also say, since we're being honest with each other, I am from La Jolla, California. Yeah, who said yeah? That's not a town where the spiritual battle was much discussed. We had one topic of conversation in La Jolla, which was the weather. Uh which never changed, uh by the way, which is sort of amazing. I never realized it at the time, but people in San Diego County in 1980 could talk for like all day about the weather. And the conversation would go something like, you know, it's 75 and partly cloudy. Yeah, but this afternoon it's going up to 77 and sunny. And then it's going to go back down to about 74. And this would go on for 12 months here. That was the only topic. You could bring up anything you wanted. It was very sort of open-minded. I mean, if you decided to become a lesbian nun or you know, there was nothing too weird for my neighbors, right? The one thing you couldn't mention was anything transcendent. Like for example, you were not allowed to die where I grew up. No dying. There was no no one ever died at all. And if someone did die, like you could never talk about it. That was like very offensive. People didn't die, they just got in the car and drove to Palm Springs, and you just never you The presumption was they were on vacation. You never saw them again. There was no acknowledgement at all that they died because that would raise the question of like, what happens next? And nobody wanted to talk about that. So, I did not grow up in a world where, you know, the spiritual battle was discussed, acknowledged in any sense at all. I've come to this um by watching empirically, on the basis of evidence, and it's just so clearly true that human beings are being acted upon at all times by forces that they can't see, and that this has been the case since the beginning of recorded history, because all of history is about that battle. Every religion, all literature, all art. And really only people who grew up in La Jolla, California in about 1980 didn't know that. So, it's like a huge SHOCK TO ME. WHAT? I TALKED TO MY I As I said, my cousins last night in Houston, I was telling them about this. They're just nodding. And I'm like, "Don't you think it's unbelievable?" And they're like, "Yeah." Duh. You know, we went to Second Baptist. We knew that. Um So, the people some people have really changed. What's so striking and what I want the substance of tonight to be about is about how so many other people have changed in different ways. And that's the thing that nobody ever acknowledges or not don't acknowledge enough, and that I don't acknowledge to myself enough. And so, I think if you're like me and you've been paying attention over the last several years, like, what is this? This is not politics, clearly. This This is just evil. Let's just be honest. This is evil. There's no reason. You know, Americans are so patriotic and nice and on the side of the little guy and the underdog. And you know, you can absolutely gin up support for any kind of foreign conflict if you tell people, you know, we're on the side of good against the forces of evil. And once again, they're leveraging, as they are with immigration, your best instincts, your decency, your humanity, your compassion, and using them against you. Okay? You're a good person. By the way, Texas has had immigrants since it was a land grant state, and they've been great for Texas, I would say. There's no more pro-immigration state than Texas. And for good reason, immigrants have been great for Texas. So, when they open your border and just like wreck your state with immigration, it took Texans a little longer to figure out this was going on because they're like, no, we're good people. We're for we're welcoming people. And the same is true with foreign conflicts. Of course we're on the side of the little guy against fascism or whatever. And of course. And what you don't realize is that the immigration that they're doing now, the open borders immigration, it's only purpose is to destroy your country. That's the point. That's That's not It's not a feature. That's what it's for. It's an act of punishment. It's act of humiliation. They're trying to destroy the country you grew up in because they hate it. Now, why do they hate it? It's a whole separate question. I'm not a theologian, but it's clear that they do. And on the war question, that's like, you know, sending, you know, a hundred billion or four hundred billion dollars to a country only to see its entire male population killed? That's not fighting for freedom. That's That's killing people, actually. And the fact that you're getting rich in the process is really evil. So, you know things are getting flaky around the world when prices change unexpectedly. Prices tend to change unexpectedly because something has happened to supply chains, global supply chains. All of a sudden, you notice the price of ammunition goes up, or you can't find common rounds. Where's all the rimfire? It's just gone. So, if say the current occupants of the White House want to pretend the economy is doing well, they can release oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, and we'll get a few weeks of lower gas price. Many common medications, life-saving medications, are also susceptible to these forces. So, today in September of 2024, nearly 30 states are reporting very high levels of the COVID virus. Now, as we've seen, what that actually means about individual health is kind of irrelevant. Government posturing can and does lead to stockpiling health supplies, and then rising prices. So, you're downstream, all of us are downstream from all of that, from reckless policy makers. What can you do to protect your family? Well, obviously, you want to be sure that in addition to everything else you've set aside just in case, you have life-saving medications you might need if there were some bigger disruption. And you want to buy them now at a decent, reasonable price. But how do you do that? Well, it's hard. Who knows where to begin? Jase. Jase Medical offers something called the Jase Case. It's a personalized emergency medication kit that contains essential antibiotics and medications that treat the most common and deadly bacterial infections. They include five life-saving antibiotics. You can even add on things like Ivermectin and EpiPens that are sure to become scarce and hard to get if a crisis hits. and it feels like it might. So, to get your Jace case, visit jacemedical.com, fill out a form, it gets reviewed by a board-certified physician, and your medications get dispensed by a licensed pharmacy at a fraction of the regular cost. It's not fly-by-night stuff. These are physicians, pharmacists setting aside what your family needs at a good price. Do not forget to use promo code Tucker at checkout for an extra discount. Go to jacemedical.com, promo code Tucker. Um that's just a fact. But it's taken good people a long time to figure out what's going on, or you know, social distance, take the vax because you love your grandmother. Love my grandmother, I love my grand I would do anything for my grandmother. Good, then obey. And so it took decent people like a couple years to figure out this is not about my grandmother. Actually, you don't care about my grandmother, that's why she died alone. It's like so So, the realization after a while is it wow, evil is real. Like evil exists in the world, it's real. It's really shocking to all people, very much including me. What I think is even more shocking and never acknowledged ex- the existence of good in the world. Like why is that natural? It's not. It's every bit as unnatural as evil. And by natural, I mean like a product of evolution. Like Americans were trained in our secular society for the past 80 years to understand everything through the lens of evolution or biology. People do what's good for them, and what's good for them is passing on their genes to future generations, like all animals. Like all all animals are this way. What do dogs do what they do? Because they're interested in eating and, you know, having puppies. But every species is like that, and we were told that we're like that, too. And so the idea that you would hurt someone for the sake of hurting him or that you would do good for the sake of doing good, those do not fit into the template that we were taught growing up at all. There's no possible advantage that you derive from empathy, selflessness, altruism, deep compassion, that doesn't help you pass on your genes. So, why are you doing that? You're doing that because good exists in the universe as an independent force that acts on us as certainly as evil does. And it's beautiful, and it's all around us, and we see it all around us. We see some people changing their face becoming masks of hate and derangement, saying things that don't make any sense at all, like at all. That moderation is extremism and love is hate and war is peace and the vax is safe and effective, or whatever they're saying. None of it's true, and we're shocked by that. But at the same time, I bet if you take stock of your life, of the life that actually matters, which is the people that God put around you, beginning with your spouse, extending to your children, going out in concentric circles from there, to all of your relatives, to your parents, to your college roommates, to your coworkers, to your neighbors, the people in your actual sphere, the people who you talk to every day, the the people you're responsible for, the people whose duty you have to make happy and to care for, you will find that your relationships with them are deeper and richer and more real and more honest than they've ever been. I know that that's true in my life for all the friends and acquaintances I've lost, which is pretty much all of them. Because I'm so extreme. And I'm sure every person in this room can relate. The relationships I have with the people who are left, or the friendships that I've gained since then are so much more rewarding and richer than they ever were. I don't even have shallow conversations anymore, and I love shallow conversations. I'm from San Diego County, I CAN STILL TALK ABOUT THE WEATHER. IT IS 74 with broken cloud cover, it's incredible. And people like, "No, there's a spiritual war." I mean, people are so deep all of a sudden. And it's just so wonderful. Because what it shows you is that for every person who's decayed inside and been captured by dark forces, which is a lot of people, most of whom seem to live in Washington there's so many more people who become bigger and more open and more aware of what connects all of us as human beings, all of us as children of God who are so much more connected, so much more selfless, so much more willing to lay down their lives for other people. I see that all the time, and it blows my mind. And why does it blow my mind? Because it's not natural. It's not There's no imperative in nature that you lay down your life for another person. In fact, it's the opposite. So, it's not natural, it's supernatural. It is the definition of supernatural. And it's just the greatest blessing I've ever received, been privileged to see. I'm recognizing in all around me, things are changing really, really fast. And so to prove that we snuck in a guest tonight. We were planning to have I was just brooding about this the other day, and I was thinking about this amazing experience I had this summer with a woman called Nicole Shanahan. And all I knew about Nicole Shanahan, I'd like read on Twitter based on New York Times stories. And I should have known. As someone who's been the subject of many New York Times stories, it may be not fully accurate, okay? But the outline of the Nicole Shanahan story is what I thought I understood pretty well. So, she's from California like me, from the Bay Area like me originally, that she had been married to Sergey Brin, who was one of the founders and biggest shareholders of Google, was truly a force for dark, I think, in this world. He's the reason that we're not allowed to be treated as human beings and we're censored constantly, one of the reasons. Um and that, you know, she's a affluent lady from California. And she looked kind of liberal to me, and I'm a judger on that subject, and I was like, "Okay." And then she's running with Bobby Kennedy um who I love, but I didn't know. I didn't know anything about it. So, I get this call from someone who works for Nicole Shanahan, she would like to meet you, and I said, "Okay, I mean, I'm I'd meet anybody, you know, cuz you want to be open-minded and be surprised by people." I've rarely been as surprised by anyone in my whole life as I was by Nicole Shanahan. Who turned out to be one of the deepest and smartest and totally real people I think I'd ever met. And she was that way because and all people you meet, everyone I've ever met who's like truly deep has had pretty much the same story, they changed. They were forced to change. Something happened in their life that required them to look inside and ask the basic questions, like, "What do I believe? Why am I doing this? Should I be doing this? Is this right or wrong? What is right or wrong?" And we can float through life without asking those questions, but sometimes we're forced to answer them. And she was forced to answer them, and she changed in such an extraordinary way that I wanted to introduce her to those of you who haven't met her and are unaware of her. And I'm going to begin this by playing you a video that she made, and I was just talking or she's made a bunch of videos. So, bottom line, just to end a very long story on abrupt and an abrupt and telling note, she is now campaigning for Donald Trump for president. Um and and I I plan to ask her when she comes out, like, of all the things you never thought you'd be doing, that had to be number one, right? That and being like Queen of England or something. It's like, "What?" LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, NICOLE SHANAHAN. That is so good. What the hell was that? Um Thank you. Thank you. So, I got to ask the question that I posed before you even arrived, um if I had asked you at a dinner party in San Francisco go 5 years ago do you think you'd be um in say Sugar Land, Texas campaigning for Donald Trump? Well, hi Texas. I'M I'M SO HAPPY TO BE HERE, and I have a special gift from the MAGA people to the MAGA people. Can you read what that says? Make America healthy again, and check out the back. Unity. Unity. So, what I think is so cool and interesting about your story and your honesty is that you know, at a time when people feel in their gut that something is not wrong right with the leadership of the country you actually can say, "You know, I've sort of been there. I've been around a lot of the people who are making these decisions." So, I just be really interested in taking a minute to hear your story. What convinced you that you should change your mind on some things? Like how did you get here? Yeah, I'm from Oakland. I'm from Oakland, California. Um and I spent my life thinking that Democrats were good people and Republicans were bad people. It's what was taught to me in the school system. Um and, you know, I went out to Crossfire as a teenager. I was always interested in politics. I I and I went out Crossfire, the the fabled CNN program hosted by a very handsome man in a bow tie. Right. And I almost wore a bow tie tonight in celebration. Um and you know, but I was out there to see James Carville debate you. And and you know, I have to tell you, the programming is so strong on the left. Um they they earnestly believe what's being sold to them right now. And I came to this you know, I made that Trump derangement syndrome ad for me. I made it for me. And I made it for all the people I know who are suffering from the lies the media is telling them. Um and it it's an offering. It's an offering to this country to unify, get over this BS, and see what's actually happening here. And I came to this because, you know, there's two things that change people. Um grief and God. And usually grief that comes first. And um my grief was really I always wanted to be a mother. And more than anything I wanted to be a mother. I wanted to be a lawyer, too, but got that out of the way. I was always very smart. Um but being a mother turned out to be a very convoluted experience, it turns out in this country right now. And if you're a liberal woman, you're told go harvest your eggs and freeze them. They tell you that now really really on. Um and so I went through the process and during the process I realized a number of things, but I walked away with an understanding that science is also not what they're telling us today. That there's this corporate world that in the case of IVF runs the IVF clinics. And the science of IVF is actually not based in well-researched, well-documented foundational science. Um it works. It was discovered out of cancer research dollars, but if you actually look at the investment in women's health, it's it's not there. And ovarian function, it's the least studied organ in the body. Arguably the most important. None of us would be here without it. Right. Um and and so I started to fund the science and and that's when I I first came across transhumanism. And transhumanism is very real. It's this idea that technology can replace human function. Um and so I put a hundred million dollars into understand how to make and keep healthy women healthy, but all these transhumanists all these transhumanists, right? What a novel idea. Let's keep women healthy. Yes. So that we can have healthy babies. Most important thing in the world. Um but the transhumanists wanted to build artificial wombs with these grants. They wanted to study IVG, um which is creating gametes eggs out of the human stem cells just from your skin. And there's a company uh called Conception that actually just had mice give birth to five pups um with two male uh donors. And and so, you know, I it's very real. Transhuman I'm I'm I'm in Silicon Valley. I'm in tech. I I see all this stuff daily. Um and it made me question, you know, if we are at a time in human history where we have to pause to really think about where this is all going. And I was slowly being labeled anti-science as a result of that. Um and then the pandemic hit and and like many of us, the science didn't check out, didn't reconcile. So I met Bobby Kennedy and he bravely left the Democratic Party, something that like is really is really hard. It's really hard for a lot of us to do. In his case, it was literally part of his genetics. Um in my case, it was my upbringing and my programming. How I was raised. And so leaving the Democratic Party to run as a third party seemed like a healthy thing to do. I wasn't becoming Republican. Right. Cuz God God forbid, but you know. Uh but I um that experience is when I realized how bad things are in this country. Republicans have out-raised in terms of fundraising Democrats by about four to one. But they don't spend any of that money taking out third-party candidates. Democrats do. The amount of money they spend on undermining the things that make democracy democracy, they do it in ways that I could have never imagined. And I will tell you they hide it very well from the Democratic Party base. And I feel that it it is upon us to really tell the Democratic base what is going on. They're not bad people, but they are being told lies. They're being told lies and they want to separate us and it's not right. It it's so you leave the Democratic Party, you go with Bobby Kennedy, you run independent, you see the party that you spent your life in doing things you didn't know it was doing. At the same time you're being called anti-science for following the science, a familiar experience I think to most people here. But from there, it's still a huge leap in the mind of every sort of college-educated, affluent person I've ever met in California, which is a lot, to be making an ad like that. Um I don't think it is such a jump. You know, I it it it we're not glorifying Trump, but what we are trying to do right now is break through to individuals that have been programmed to see Donald Trump as a criminal. Um so it's it's I I don't I wouldn't actually know how to make an ad glorifying Trump, but what I can make an honest ad about is that we've been lied to about him. Well, I think that's absolutely right. Yeah. Can I just ask you one more question about transhumanism? Yeah, go. I wish we could we had like three hours to talk about this cuz I sense So much. I sense it's the shape of the future and I sense it's maybe the scariest thing most people don't know enough about. Um how common are the views that you described, the horrifying Frankenstein-like views you described among Democratic donors in the elites? It's pretty ubiquitous in the sense that many view it in the same light as vaccines. So there's entire now platforms dedicated to basically mass printing vaccines where you put a virus in, they print it into any disease format. mRNA is a vehicle to deliver it. Um and they think that this is a massive success. Um vaccine injuries in this country have been vastly underreported. Um and I also believe that behind it is this corporatist ideal on the world that corporatism amongst the Democratic elites is the only way towards progress and that is a dead lie. We have so much science we could be doing. Um and transhumanism if you want to hear my real take on it. I I do actually cuz I I feel like we're getting really close to something important, really important. Okay. So I'm a lover of philosophy and I read a very important thing that made me understand transhumanism written by a philosopher Peter Kingsley. And I it actually had me crying in my kitchen. And I was like, where is justice in this world? I was really sad. I was like, where is justice in this world? And the ancient Greeks believed that justice is a goddess that you meet at the gates of the underworld. And you when you die, you go and you meet Lady Justice. It's much like purgatory in in how the Bible explains it, but but I read it in the context of the ancient Greeks. And there justice determines whether you go to hell or heaven and it's it's described in incredible terms. And Lady Justice is not someone you can lie or hide your misdeeds from. And and so I read this and I I cry because I'm like, at least there is justice in the cosmos. Might not be here right now. We can fight for her as an archetype. But the people who are afraid to die, they don't want to meet Lady Justice. And and that's what I think this transhumanism is all about. I think it is a deep fear of death. Well, that is profound and I think true. And you did see this during COVID. The people I lived around during COVID had been forced to ask themsel you know, no one wants to die. I don't no interest in dying at the moment. But people were forced to ask themselves like, is that the worst thing? And the people who decided it wasn't the worst thing, it's worse to live on your knees, right? Um those people had a joyful time during COVID and the people who decided that dying is the worst possible thing were the ones enforcing mask mandates and the vax. And you think that stems from the fact that they're afraid to die because they believe on some level there is justice. I think they know viscerally what they're doing. So, how would you like to cut your cell phone bill in half every single month? It's probably pretty high. Have you checked it recently? Verizon, AT&T, and T-Mobile want you to believe that you have to have something called unlimited data. And maybe you're in the small percentage that do need unlimited data, whatever that is, but for most people you do not need unlimited data and you certainly shouldn't be forced to pay for it. That's where Pure Talk comes in. Pure Talk only charges you for the data that you want. How about that? If you walked into an ice cream parlor and they said you can only buy 11 cones and you said I just want one, you probably wouldn't go back, would you? No. to the place that sold you what you wanted. Talk, text, and 5 gigs of data on Pure Talk is 25 bucks a month. How much is 5 gigs? Well, you can browse the internet for 135 hours, you can stream 1,000 songs, you can watch 10 hours of video. So, it's a lot, actually. So, stop overpaying for data you never use and switch to Pure Talk on America's most dependable 5G network, 25 bucks a month. Pure Talk is proudly veteran led, supports American jobs with their whole customer service team right here in the United States. Everyone speaks English, they're Americans, no offshoring. The average family saves almost a grand a year, a thousand dollars a year. No contract, no cancellation fees, a 30-day money-back guarantee. Pure Talk makes switching very, very easy. Just go to puretalk.com/tucker and you will save an initial 50% off your first month. That's puretalk.com/tucker to switch your cell phone service to a company you can be proud to do business with. Only buy what you need. So, how did that So, I agree with you 100%. Cuz you can run from eternal truths, but they reside within you. Like you know on an animal level that it's all real. All that stuff is real. We all know that. Um, so how does God factor into this? So, you've described the suffering, crying in your kitchen, reading philosophy. By the way, that's something I've never done and I'm impressed that you have. Um, I'm reading like cereal boxes, but I'm impressed. Uh, how did that suffering bring you to an understanding of God? Um, you know, I think that we are all put on this planet to learn things and see things in a very unique perspective. I was living a very comfortable life in Silicon Valley. I was an early AI developer. I was a techno-optimist. Um, so my grief was also a very lonely period because no one around me could be someone I could trust with even this notion that perhaps the shot caused an adverse reaction. This is a no-go for progressives. You cannot talk about these things amongst these communities. Um, and the loneliness plus COVID cuz this happened around COVID, too, um, led me to a place of utter destruction. And and I was alone in that uh process and you know, uh we don't have to talk about my ex-husband. It's very therapeutic to be here. It's kind of like a therapy right now, but um, it's uh you know, coming out of that completely alone with a child that you feel helpless to help. Um, is a position that either leads you to total hermitage, um, or makes you a warrior mom. So, let let me ask you one last question and thank thank you for this. Of course. God bless you. I agree with that. Um, how do you think this ends? This period, this season, and are you hopeful? I'm hopeful because because of you, you, you and I'm hopeful because I believe God is here. He's He's here. And I've I believe that this country wants to heal right now more than anything. And I believe that we can unite. Um, I believe also that Donald Trump minus some of his imperfections is a guy who wants to take us along with him. And so, Nicole Shanahan, ladies and gentlemen, thank you. Thank you. THANK YOU ALL. AMAZING. THAT REALLY IS THE beauty of this moment is being shocked by how much you have in common with people you didn't think you had anything in common with at all. It was awesome. It was awesome and it's happening all around us where people are deciding, you know, this is fake, those categories are fake. I'm going to tell the truth no matter what. And when you start people seeing people doing that, uh, it just it gives you heart and hope. So, with that in mind, I want to introduce our second guest of the evening who is someone who I've known for several years, who I think is one of the most impressive voices in the conversation, one of the smartest, one of the toughest, one of the most interesting, one of the most original thinkers, a totally fearless person who if you live in Texas because he lives in the state, he's very local, but I also think he is national. Uh, you're familiar with him and that is Jesse Kelly, my friend, who joins us now. Ladies and gentlemen, AH, I'M SO GLAD YOU'RE HERE. THANK YOU FOR HAVING me in your state. Ah, I'm glad you get to have me. I have uh very embarrassing European-style slippers on and you're wearing ostrich skin boots and I've never felt more emasculated than I do now, but I'm going to push I'm going to push through it. I'm going to push through it. All my cousins are wearing those boots and one of them said me, "Do you have any boots?" Yeah, but I'm on the road, so I'm wearing my little slippers. Uh, anyway, thank you so much. So, No, listen, I I need to explain before we get into it. I I don't know how to dress myself. I can't I know fashion makes sense to some people. It does not make sense to me. They tell me I'm supposed to match. I walk out in something that's matching and my wife says, "Is that what you're wearing? Are you planning on wearing that?" And I'm like, "They're both blue." Right? So, she decided to simplify things for me and buy me one nice pair of boots. It's the only nice pair I own. And now whenever I'm coming to do something like talk to Tucker Carlson and all these people, I put on my freaking boots. Well, I think you're crushing it. I would never know you got dressed in the dark. Um, you have a very sensible wife. So, where do you think we are right now since you you've got a daily show, you follow the stuff day in and day out. Where are we right now in the presidential race, would you say? What's the truth of it? Well, the truth of it is that they tried to murder Donald Trump twice because they think he's winning. They they wouldn't do that if they thought he was losing. Such a good point. What we have in this country right now is it's something I call the system, but that's just my like I'm an idiot. It's the word I came up with for it. People call it the regime, you call it whatever you want, but what we have is nations are built on their institutions, right? And your your immediate institution, your religious institutions, your government institutions, these are the institutions that determine the direction of your country. And if your institutions are good, your country will be good because the institutions produce other people. It's not about one person. Right. Our institutions have been poisoned poisoned for decades by communist filth and now they've taken over all the institutions. Well, I I like your use of the phrase communist filth. It it doesn't leave much to the imagination. Well, that's what these people are. That's That's what these people are. That they are vile, they are evil, they are demonic. And you know, before I even continue with my institution thing, I just want to make sure you understand something. You're the good guy. They are the bad guys. You are standing for things like the Look Look behind you right now and God is there. Family is there. We are fighting against demons and therefore we will fight like we have to win because they cannot win. They cannot ever be allowed to win. Be clear about that. So So once the institutions got completely taken over by communists filth because we ran God out of the country and then we allowed these people to educate our children. We very naively sent children off to government schools for years thinking they were learning their ABCs when really they were learning to hate America. America sucks. It's evil. You send your kid to kindergarten now he comes home and talks about how we genocided the Native Americans. But it's crazy. So we've managed to poison all of these institutions and now we have a criminal enterprise running the country. Our government is a criminal enterprise. It is. And criminal enterprises do what to protect themselves? Everyone has watched a movie or read a book about a criminal organization, the mafia. What do they do when there's a threat? They kill. Corrupt systems kill. They tried to blow Donald Trump's head off twice because he threatens that and all of us threaten that. That's why they sent the FBI after school board moms. That's why they ran all the people out of the military who didn't want to get vaccinated. The system is afraid and they lash out and they kill when they're afraid. What's What What's inter- What What gives me hope is the fear. And not because I'm for fear. I'm totally opposed to fear, but but fear suggests they know that they're losing and there's not actually popular consent for this stuff. I mean I just I honestly don't think maybe I'm deluding myself that most Americans want what they're getting. Do you think? I think it depends on how we classify most Americans. Are we talking about people who simply reside here or new ones that they've imported into the country? Because that's an important part. I wasn't trying to be glib. That's an important part and it's an important reason why the federal government has taken your money out of every single paycheck and they have flown and bust in foreigners into your country. They pay for their housing while you can't afford houses. They pay for their eggs while you can't afford eggs. They take over your job at the factory for a fraction for pennies on the dollar you were working for and then they will run ads on television telling you these people are so much more hard working than the dirt ball Americans we just fired. This is the greatest thing in the world. The propaganda would not be so heavy if they were comfortable in their position of power. They people think that these people are all powerful right now. They're the furthest thing from it. Otherwise they wouldn't still be lying. They would just be showing up at your house in the middle of the night to shoot you in the face like they did in the Soviet Union. They know they have to lie about every single thing and they're not even good at it. If you want to feel really great about something, we're up against a bunch of tubby losers without girlfriends. We're It's not like we're facing warriors here. We're the warriors here. The most interesting and newsworthy television show of the year is coming here to TCN. We are not bragging. That's actually true. The president's been shot. I repeat, the president's been shot. So our long-time producer Justin Wells and a team have been embedded with no publicity at all with Donald Trump on the campaign trail for months. They're the only crew capturing what is going on on the campaign in real time intimately. They're with Trump as he campaigns for the presidency across the country and they've shot some amazing footage. It shows you what it's really like in there. So if you're a member, you'll soon be able to get this docu-series covering the historic campaign, the fall of Joe Biden, never before seen footage from the assassination attempt at the Butler Township, Pennsylvania Trump rally and a lot more. It's going to pull back the curtain completely. They are embedded inside the campaign. I can't wait to see it personally. But to get it first, go to tuckercarlson.com, become a member. The greatest television event of the year. We're proud to offer it. Do you have I think that's right. Um I think that's why they're trying to take your guns. There's a video that came out of Kamala Harris today um from some years ago in California. She's sitting right next to Gavin Newsom. Um I use the word Gavin Newsom as if he's a human being. That has not been verified. Uh But whatever the kind of, you know, AI bot uh who's the governor of California. She's sitting there and she said, you know, "Just because you have a gun legally and I think I'm quoting in the sanctity of your own home, doesn't mean we can't come in when we want to to check to see if you're using it the way we want you to." So that of course is like a violation of the Bill of Rights. That's That's the definition of tyranny. And I got to think they're so fixated on the gun question not because they're against violence. They created violence in all of our cities including your cities here in Texas. But because they don't trust the population. I mean is there any other explanation? No, they they want to take your guns because they want to murder you like every evil government in the history of mankind and and people can say that that's crazy. Open up a freaking history book. Governments They'll disarm you and then they'll murder you. They'll disarm you and then they'll murder you. And if you think that these Wait a second. That's not on Wikipedia. That is not on Wikipedia. That's not what I read at all. I thought they were disarming you because you might hurt yourself. Yeah. Yeah. That's And you know, this is this is where you can think if you if you're speaking to a normal person like somebody who's not politically involved. They want kids, school, watch the game on Sunday and you start talking like this. They might look at you crazy or think that you're a wingnut because when they look at Kamala Harris or Christopher Wray or Merrick Garland with his weird voice. Why does he talk like that? And and they think to themselves, "Well, he doesn't look like Stalin. He doesn't look like Mao. He doesn't" I'm here to tell you something right now. These people are so sick that kids will be dead in a school and without an ounce of shame they will stand on the bodies of dead children before the shooter is even dead to take your guns and it's not because they've shed a single tear for a dead child in this country. It's because the dirty demons who want to hurt you lay awake at night dreaming about it and and they are so mad that they can't because we are the most armed freaking people on the planet. We have the guns. We have the ammo and that's why they're mad. I do think I think you're on to something that they kind of figured out. I mean they're not stupid. I will say that. And they kind of figured out that you can't give the game away really, you know, in an obvious way. You can't just show up in some Latin American military uniform and say it's a junta now. Obey. So you trot out this kind of drooling figure like Joe Biden to tell you, you know, it's just grandpa. You know, there's a lot of Jell-O eating and misremembering, but it's not dangerous. And that worked for a while and then he disappeared which raises the obvious like where is he? Is he still president? Well, he never was president. I mean we all know that and we never He never was. The The country's run by by people like Susan Rice. It's run by all these vile little commies behind the scenes who they they grew up worshipping Mao. We've We've heard all Lisa Monaco, all the people All All the Obama roster. Joe Biden was never there. He would never made a single decision. He was never allowed to make a single decision. His gift was the presidency. He gets a presidential library. Dr. Jill can make half a million speech on the lecture circuit once they cart poor Joe off to the nursing home and that's the only reason he was ever there at all. But And you're right about when they talk about guns and that's why they trot out poor Joe and his favorite line is well well my I was out hunting and you don't need a 30-round magazine to kill deer. Well, the Second Amendment wasn't to kill deer. It was to kill tyrants. It wasn't even to kill robbers. It was to kill tyrants. Well, then that I mean you're sort of getting it and I didn't even want to bring this up because I I find it so chilling, bone-chilling actually, but the most interesting fact from the debate was Kamala Harris admitting she has a gun. And I'm as for Second Amendment rights as anybody. I mean I'm, you know, more than anyone I know actually, maybe other than you. But I don't think Kamala Harris should have a gun. I mean that's Why does Kamala Harris have a gun? Where did she get the gun? What kind of gun is it? What's the point of having a gun? And why is no one in the media asked? Do you know the answers to any of those questions? Could you even imagine going to the range with that and putting a loaded gun in her hand? You know she'd be the one that turns around from the firing line. "It's jammed." You know, you can see her doing it already off the bat. That You know that she'd be that one. She'd be the one. But was it a straw purchase? I mean who gave Kamala HARRIS A GUN? WELL, look The These commies are always trying You You see it with every Democrat who talks today. They're always trying to straddle this line which is really Kamala Harris's specialty given her beginning. But you She's What? WHAT? WHAT? SO I'M SO PURE I DIDN'T get your joke. So they're they're When you're an American Democrat now, this doesn't apply to older Democrats at all. Like this is not the 1960s. If you're a Democrat today, if a Democrat politician, you're a communist. And you're trying to walk you constantly trying to straddle this line where you're trying not to freak out the older, you know, older union Democrat guy, maybe he's a firefighter, forever fought for this country, doesn't really like Republicans, but loves America, right, 4th of July, he's out there, hand over his heart, land of the free, he loves that. You still need him to vote for you. But at the same time, you understand you've got a bunch of trash. And that's your base. That's your voting base. That's the Black Lives Matter, Planned Parenthood, the LGBTQ rainbow demon mob, all you pick pick your one. You have to let those people know you are going to burn down America the way you the way they want to. Hey, vote for me, vote for Kamala, I'm going to burn down America. But but but I can't really say it like that. So, you have to try to give a little pat on the head to the 65-year-old Democrat who still loves the country. Yeah, I'm going to burn down America, but hey, I own a gun. But don't worry, not yours. And that's Every time they talk, now that I said it, you'll see it. Every time they talk, they're constantly walking this tightrope, trying to signal to their base, yeah, I hate this place like you do. Screw this country. At the same time, don't freak out mom and pop Democrat. That's all they're used to doing. If I take it too far, then then then they'll then they'll catch on to the game that the Democrat party's changed completely. So, I'm sitting listening to this and I'm literally my first thought was if Texas ever goes blue, you're going to jail, man. You're on the list. Um Yeah, well, he's definitely going to jail. Um if Texas goes blue. Um and it would be a shame. It would be one of the great shames in American history because this is above all, in addition to being prosperous and beautiful, it's a really nice state. It's just nice. And when you when you come here, you really notice it if you come from other places, just the kindness that Texans show each other is amazing to watch. And you'd hate that to be lost, and it would be lost, I think, as it has been in the state that I grew up in, which is a state of people who are really suspicious of each other and mad at each other. And I wouldn't want that for you at all, I mean it. So, do you think that this state is moving toward control of the Democratic Party? It will it will be up to the people of the state, and I know that sounds like the most cliché answer in the world. yeah, go ahead. I I know I know I know that was a walking cliché. Let me explain. What we have right now, we we already talked about the people who run things. But what we have on the other side is what I like to call the low-T GOP, the Republicans. They're useless. They don't stand up for you ever. They always pretend like they're going to, and then they go, well, we can't, we got to wait till the next election. And well, you're clapping, but you're not going to like this next part. You know whose fault that is? Our fault. It's our fault, and I point fingers at myself, too. You mentioned the state of Texas here. This state should already already right now they should already be reorienting the state police, Texas Rangers, to stand as a bulwark between Texans and the federal government that is evil. They already should be doing that. But instead, we have John freaking Cornyn as a senator. And and and this is what I mean. We need and this is and the sad part is this isn't going to be applicable to any one of the thousands of people who showed up to watch Tucker Carlson tonight, but we have a primary voter problem because the reddest states, they are sending the most putrid losers to Washington, D.C. John Thune, John Cornyn, Mitch McConnell, uh what is that? James Lankford, naked Ken doll Lankford out of Oklahoma. These people are from our reddest states. Wait, what did you call him? Uh naked Ken doll. Have you ever seen a naked Ken doll? There's no there's no nothing there. You know, so No, I'm not bragging. I've never taken off Ken's pants, but it's just Well, believe me, that's what you're going to find if you ever disrobe James Lankford. But but the point is that. The point is we do we have this red state, and because it is red, look, I moved here on purpose. My wife and I, we had two kids. I moved here without a job because I love Texas people so much. Because that's what that's what we do. But but that niceness can also burn us as well because you move to a safe place. I'm in a neighborhood without crime. I'm in a state that's Republican. I I have this, I have that, and you think to yourself, we're fine. We're not fine. The demons come for what is good. What is good? It's not an accident. If you've ever sat at home and you watched any of this child stuff or anything like that before, and if you've ever said something to yourself like, "Why the kids? Why can't they just leave the kids alone?" People love saying that on the right. I don't understand why they can't leave the kids alone. The kids are where they went first because the kids are the most good. Because the kids are the most innocent. They're not going to come after me, I'm a horrible human being. The kids are the most innocent, and so that's why they went after them. Whatever is good, whatever is right, that's what the devil goes after first. And if you think if you think your state of Texas is safe, it's the most unsafe because these people look at you and your family and your values and your guns, and it's a reminder of everything they're not, and it's a reminder of everything that can stop them. So, we're not safe, and we have to start getting more involved locally and in primaries. It is a disgrace that John Cornyn is a senator from this state. That should never happen again. Disgrace. Wow, that is a really deep analysis. It's it's the purity. It's the desire to defile purity that drives them. Anything that is beautiful, anything that is unsullied, anything that is sincere, they hate. And I have to say it's true, you really notice it. And you know, with with art and architecture, it's why they destroy nature. You know, it's why they put up wind farms on the top of mountains. You know, um but Texas does seem I'm just being totally honest. The single most left-wing, truly left-wing member of Congress I've ever met personally is a Republican from this area who has no interest in the United States whatsoever and does not even pretend. I'm not going to name names. Oh, I think that's right. Yeah, it's Dan Crenshaw, the most liberal most left-wing person I've ever met in the Congress. I'm just being serious. I don't I mean, structurally, how does that happen? Well, it happens because we don't go beyond as well this is not going to apply to the people in the room because you're the hyper-informed. You don't understand how much more informed you are than your neighbor that you didn't invite tonight. I I really mean that. Your brother, your mom. Yes, they're Republican, they're voting Republican. They probably have a MAGA hat on. Go Trump. What Ask them. Ask them when the last time they voted in a school board election was. Ask them if they even voted in a primary election. We don't do it because we're in a safe, comfortable place. And so and this happens everywhere, it happens in Wyoming. It's like the reddest state in the union. It's not unique to Texas. These If you were a scumbag communist and you want to get elected in a place like Wyoming, you can't run as a Democrat. You can't run as a hard lefty. You throw on some cowboy boots and you you buy a shotgun and go out there and take a picture shooting at some pheasants, and you learn how to speak the lingo a little bit, watch a little bit of Tucker Carlson. Now you know what you what to say, how to deceive exactly, and you find yourself in a position of power knee-capping people on the right time after time after time. Our controlled opposition problem is so bad, and that's why we always feel like we're playing tug-of-war with Whoopi Goldberg. It just doesn't feel like you can win. It's It's so true. Um Wyoming is the most Republican state in the United States. With the exception of Teton County, every county is Republican. And they elected Liz Cheney, who just endorsed Kamala Harris time and time again. I I noticed something today that I wanted to ask you about. So, there's this new list that Democrats are bragging about of Republican national security officials um that have endorsed Kamala Harris. And on the list are you know, it's all Bush-Cheney people. It's all the architects of the Iraq War. Um but on the list is the is the chairman of the 9/11 Commission, who was responsible for the 9/11 report. And who's now at University of Virginia as a professor, but really a guy who I think probably should answer some questions. And you wonder how much of the resistance to Trump, who's not like a he's pretty moderate guy, actually, but in Washington, he's hated more than anyone's ever been hated. And I always have wondered how much of that hatred stems from fear that he might declassify documents that implicate the crimes of the most corrupt city in the hemisphere, which is D.C. Do you think that's a driving motivating force? I actually think you nailed it completely. I I and I think it ties directly to foreign policy, actually Trump's foreign policy. Because for the longest time, Democrats and Republicans, for most of my life, have really had pretty much the same foreign policy. It's It's really a worship of the state. It's what it's always been. Ours has looked different than theirs, but you know, we always trusted the FBI. I I wanted to work for the FBI when I was a kid. Oh my gosh, the FBI. I didn't know it was the Stasi, or at least it was turning that way. I had no idea. We had no idea about these things and Trump comes in and like you mentioned he's not some hardcore righty. He's a fairly moderate guy when you look at his views, but he has a very different view on foreign policy. And so when you think about foreign policy, think about look we could just make it about Ukraine. Doesn't really matter what you think about that. The amount of money, taxpayer money, that goes from the taxpayer, it goes into the government. The government writes gigantic checks of your money to the defense contractors. The defense contractors get paid hugely to continue that war without end. The defense contractors also take that very same money and hand it right back to the politician who stole it from you and now all this stuff seems to be working in a great cycle and now when you tie in the finance giants who they've already promised big fat taxpayer funded checks to rebuild of course when the whole thing's done. What you finally wake up and figure out is the evil demons who run the country look at all of us like just one big tax farm so they can stay in power, so they can have their steak dinners, so all this stuff can work out. And that did that Bush Cheney wing, they were the freaking worst about all that stuff. They were awful about all that. And and Trump challenging that, I will I will always believe Trump challenging that is the reason they're trying to murder him so bad because that is the most money. You follow the money, there there's your answer. I think you've got to be Right. By the way, you served in the Marine Corps during that period. You did the the patriotic thing. Um now they hate you, but it's just it doesn't make any sense otherwise because here you have Dick Cheney and Philip Zelikow, the guy who ran the 9/11 Commission, endorsing the administration that armed the Taliban. So like that doesn't make any sense. If you were the leader of the war on terror as Cheney was or Philip Zelikow was or Bob Zelick was, you hate the Taliban. That's what you told us. How could you possibly endorse the Biden-Harris administration WHICH JUST ARMED the Taliban? It's now the best armed army in the region thanks to the Biden-Harris administration which you're now for. So it actually wasn't about fighting a global war on terror obviously. It's about keeping your crimes hidden and you're worried that if Trump gets elected he might just be crazy enough to declassify the documents that show what you've been doing for the last 25 years. I don't see any other explanation. I I agree with you standing up and cheering. That is right. NO, I LOOK WHAT WHAT WE'RE MISSING and this happens to so many countries. Sorry to Tucker, I'm going to filibuster for a second. Take your time with Dude, go crazy. Um so what we're what's happening in this country right now is what's happened to almost every single country in the history of the world where you get far enough away from your founding, the people who lead the country will lose a sense of duty to the country and it just becomes about them. Look, I could point to America's history. The Battle of Cannae, anyone any historians here? The Second Punic War, Hannibal, you've heard of him. He fights the Romans. He ends up wiping out a Roman army. A fascinating story about the Roman army Hannibal wipes out in Italy is he takes out a huge chunk of the Roman Senate. Wait a minute. Senators on the battlefield dying beside the peasants? Yes, that's how nations are supposed to operate because the elite don't live on private jets and in steak houses. If there was a war to be fought, you pick up your sword and you go die right next to the construction worker. That's how it's supposed to work. But if you look at that towards the end of Rome and where we are now, our leaders never go die and their kids never go die. You mentioned Republican second. You were in the Marine Corps enlisted during the war on terror. Was Liz Cheney with you? You know, I not only didn't see Liz Cheney with me, I didn't happen to see Mitt Romney or anyone of his 57 kids. And Mitt Romney to this day wants to it wants to invade every single place on the planet. And again, I'm fine with differences on foreign policy, but I know what it's like to sit there and watch some kid hug his dad on the tarmac and say Daddy don't go. Daddy don't go. And to know that these scumbags in DC constantly send our guys, our men and women to go do this without an ounce of duty to send themselves or their kids along makes me freaking sick. And it's it's it's because it's because they don't have a sense of duty. We have gotten so far from where we are. Our leaders now, they're just a bunch of bank robbers looting the treasury instead of people who see themselves as what they should see themselves are as the knights protecting Western civilization. That's why they've sent the FBI after so many American citizens. They've slowly turned their guns inward cuz now when these people wake up in the morning and when they go to sleep at night, they think the enemy is you. They don't stress about China. They don't stress about Russia. They don't stress about terror. They certainly don't stress about the newest rapist dirtball that they hauled into this country across the border. They don't care about your cat that got eaten in Ohio. They don't care about any of that stuff. They wake up and they think about you, you with your rights and you want your freedom of speech and you probably love guns too and you're probably going to hold them to account if they continue to take a steaming dump on the country. That's why they flooded this country with illegals and that's why they sent the FBI after school board moms. So So just to be clear, like for the record, cuz I don't think I was joking before. I don't think Wikipedia is the final word on history. I just don't think that. Your cat really did get eaten in Ohio, didn't he? Like that is real, isn't it? Well, Tucker, look, I'm an American and I don't own a cat. All right, I own a dog. Okay. What? What? No, no, I would I would never own a cat. You see, if you're wondering why I'm so such a messed up human being, I have a lot of unrecognized child trauma that involved my cat getting run over by a school bus in front of me. It just right there in front of me and after that my dad wasn't that nice about it and I decided I didn't want any more cats anymore. Fair. Fair. But getting run over by a school bus is qualitatively different than being eaten by an illegal alien. I do think that. Both traumatic, one more traumatic than the other. I guess it all depends on which party's eating. Yeah, good point. Um so we began the evening. I did it on purpose because I feel so overwhelmed with sadness by everything that's happening to the country that we love and we're born in and country our ancestors built over many years with great effort and determination and foresight planting trees they would never see grow. You know, doing things that they would never benefit from and they knew they would never benefit from them, but they knew that their grandchildren would and they did them. Um and that's the most virtuous kind of behavior in my opinion. So it's so sad to watch all this and so I wanted to start on a note of hope which I think is real actually. Do you feel any hope? And if so, why? Oh, we're going to win. We're going to win. I know that you're afraid. I I get afraid. I know you're sad. I'm sad. I I love this place. All right, I would die for it. Um it hurts watching these people tear it up. I know it hurts. But I'm here to tell you something. They're more afraid than you are. They're afraid we're going to wake up. They're afraid we're going to get involved. They're afraid we're going to go to their little fiefdoms of power at the local library or Congress or school board, wherever it is, and take their power away from them. They're afraid of you speaking the way you want to speak on social media. They're afraid of the fact that your guns. The demons are more afraid of you than you are of them. The darkness is afraid of the light. The light does not fear the darkness. And they should be afraid. I want to make sure I'm very crystal clear about that and you can clip it all day long, you commie scumbags. Come knock on my freaking door. They They should be afraid because as I mentioned in the beginning, they are wrong. They are evil. What they want is awful for this country. What you want is wonderful and good. We want a country surrounded by family and community, a country led by God and decent people. We want to be led by people who are better than what we have now. And if we stand up and I see it happening everywhere, we can have that. It is time to stop being afraid like you are and like I am and it is time to start making them afraid. Good guys don't get afraid. They need to be the ones who are afraid of us and we can do that. THERE'S A NEW SHERIFF in town, ladies and gentlemen. Jesse Kelly, thank you. The big tech companies censor our content. I hate to tell you that it's still going on in 2024, but you know what they can't censor? Live events. That's why we are hitting the road on a fall tour for the entire month of September, coast to coast. We'll be in cities across United States. We'll be in Grand Rapids with Kid Rock, Hershey, Pennsylvania with J.D. Vance, Reading, Pennsylvania with Alex Jones, Fort Worth, Texas with Roseanne Barr, Greenville, South Carolina with Marjorie Taylor Greene, Sunrise, Florida with John Rich, Jacksonville, Florida with Donald Trump Jr. You can get tickets at tuckercarlson.com. Hope to see you there.