The Jerogan experience. Here's what freaked me out and it didn't seem to bother a lot of people. The Biden administration, the Biden administration blocked the release of the JFK papers. Yeah. JFK was shot in 1963. How weird is that? They're like, nope, people are still alive. Some people that would be fucked are still alive. Would that tell me the government killed killing it? You're some shady shit going on. That's what that tells me. That doesn't tell me that the mafia killed Canada, the Russians killed Canada, the Cubans killed Canada. That tells me the government probably had that motherfucker wanting something. They're hiding something. They're hiding something. Unguitary percent. Yeah. It's 1963. That shit happened four years before I was born. It's 58 fucking years ago. Yeah, and still got to still hide it. Not yet? Not yet. Hold it? Yeah. Wait another 25 years. Unbelievable. It's crazy that they could even justify that. That someone could keep historical information that's relevant to our understanding of how the country really functioned in 1963. They keep that from us because it must be relevant to how the country still functions today. It must have some bearing. President being killed. Yeah. And we can't know all the risks and know about it. Right. What do you know you, fucks? Yeah. I want to know that more than I want to know about UFOs. I want to know what did you bitches do? Yeah. What the fuck did you do, Alan Spector? I don't know who that is. He was one of the people that were on the phone. Fuck both of them. He was one of the guys that was on the Warren Commission report. I think it was his idea for the, I believe, see if this is right. I think he's the guy who came up with the idea for the single bullet theory, which is the dumbest fucking theory in the like your guy who shot a lot of rifles. When bullets hit bones, they get fucked up. Oh yeah. That bullet was pristine. And they found it in the gurney. Oh, look, magic. I'm Connolly, Governor, Texas. Connolly's gurney. They found this magic bullet that they think did all the damage to Kennedy and to him. Went through two people, broke bones. And it was not mushroomed out or anything. No. Not even a little. You never seen it? I haven't. Oh, you're in for a treat. Generally credit to Tim is what it says. I'm trying to find out. Harlan Spector. Yeah. Harlan Spector is the guy he was a creep during the Bush administration. I remember like listening to him talk on TV and they don't want to found out that he was a part of the Warren Commission that actually came up with the single bullet there. I was like, oh, so look at that bullet. That's it. Exactly. Like as a hunter. Yeah. As a guy who shot bullets, you look at that. You're like, there is no fucking way. And I've had arguments to people say, actually, that's a, that's not a good one. That's not a good photo. If you look at it from another angle, you know, you could see that it has some distortion. I'm like, shut the fuck up. Every bullet I've ever seen that's been in an animal is mushrooms. That's how they perform. They mush him out. They and there's a, there's a fine line between basically coming apart where the, the damage would be dissipated. Yeah. Or and then mushroom perfect. None of them look like this though. Zero. There's other photos of it where it shows that it's slightly distorted. Yeah, that's not even right. But the read like there, there's a good, there's someone he actually tried to say that to be. No, no, she's looking at it from this angle. I'm like, bitch, you don't know anything about guns. You need to shut your fucking mouth because that's something that was shot into a swimming pool. Mm hmm. That's what happened there. Yeah. See, that's what that, that looks like. Well, look at that. They're even more, that was a more modern bullet. That must be one of the bullets, but that's possible. Yeah. That's possible. Yeah. Like modern, but, but the other thing we have to think of is maybe modern technology. Yeah, that's right. The bullets that we have is better than the bullets they had back then. Yeah. But either way. There's no fucking way. Here it goes. Every bullet shows signs of damage, exerting force, breaking bones, damage to the initial shooting, except the magic bullet. Mm hmm. Yeah. There's no fucking way. And they had to come up. Here's the thing about the, this is a thing about the theory. Yeah. So, by the way, I have lost months of my life studying the JFKS nation. Yeah. I really have. I've spent so much time reading books on the JFKS nation. But one of the reasons why they had to come up with this theory that this one bullet did so much damage is they had to account for three gunshots. And once they found out that a bullet had hit an underpass and it had chipped the curb stone and ricocheted up and hit this guy. So the guy had to be treated at the hospital for a ricochete from the gunshot. So they knew that that was one bullet that did not hit Kennedy. It hit the curb stone too. So there's two. And so one bullet blows a hole through Kennedy's head. And so they had to come up with another bullet that went through his, they went through his back and went into Connolly through his wrist. And I believe it wound up in his thigh. Mm hmm. Yeah. This is how they, they think the bullet went, which is just, and people say, no, no, you have to take into account the Kennedy was in an elevated position. Listen, bullets do wacky things when they go into animals. And I was talking to a guy once that told me in the war that they shot a guy in the head and the bullet came out of his eye going forward. Mm hmm. Like it ricocheted off the back of his skull and can't, yeah, he goes, bullets do wild things when they hit bones and ricocheted off stuff. That they don't take turns. No. They don't take turns like that. There's a reason why the bullet would ricocheting inside someone's head and then come out. Yeah. Like the initial impact is slightly slowed down. It bounces off the back of the skull and then comes out. Like it probably clipped the eyebrow or something coming in. But either way, they don't come out looking like that. No. Not after they did all that shit. And there was more damage. There's more rather fragments inside Connolly's body, more bullet fragments they found in Connolly's wrist that were missing from the bullet. They just should have immediately discounted that bullet and said, who gave you this bullet? Who the fuck are you? Yeah. Where does this bullet come from? Really, you're under arrest. Yeah. You're under arrest because I want to need where you got this fucking bullet. And like, you're going to start talking. Like, can't we see that information? Yeah. That's in there. Yeah. Watch the entire episode for free only on Spotify.