Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. What's with the gold? It's gone. Be a mom. Give me a smile. Oh, you got a top and bottom, man. What did you do is amazing? I've always wanted to have money so I could get one of these when I was a kid. Now, is that one of the ones you can take out? Or is it? OK, let's get it. Because that's such a commitment. One day you got to go to the White House. Right. You got diamonds and gold in your teeth. That's crazy. It might be a first time. How does it fit? It's like a retainer? Yeah, so they fit it. They mold it. I got it done in Dallas, actually. And they just fit it mold to your teeth and then pop them in. It's almost like wearing a retainer. Texas loves grills. Yeah, they love grills. Look at those cars. Well, we got to get one more. Yeah, Paul Wilson is going to hook us up. He's going, hang on. Yeah, I'm not sure. I just remember what was the one episode with Theo? And you asked about the headphones. And he says something like, it's like, there were the condom. And she's just looking at you. Or I forget exactly how the joke goes. But it was funny. It was like one of Theo Vaughn's greatest moments where he says all these things. He was like, well, I feel like saying it, I just write it down. I don't know if you saw this clip. But it's, I mean, I'm sure I was there when it happened. But he says so many ridiculous things. I can't remember. It just, I will hear it. I just see you put it on. On. I feel like, oh, Malone here. Oh, man. It is weird. It's like when you put a condom on it, and the other person is just still looking at their phone. And be like, oh, this is weird. And the person I mean is a woman. It's like, man, you gotta tell everybody. No. Well, I just say it. I just say it. There it is. That's why we said that the happened was that I just came to my head in like immediately. Yeah, sometimes I have them off. Sometimes I have them on. But it's better to have them on. It locks you in. Locks you in, you know. I feel that. Did you watch the UFC this past weekend, the Apex? I watched the main event called main. Bro, the main event. South kill is legit. I wasn't too sure about him, but now. Very sure. As a man who has one of the best back controls in the sport. You had to appreciate that back control. Oh, it was amazing. And he took him down, which I was kind of surprised. I was like, why is he going for the take down? Crazy. Proving a point. Proving a point because it stand up is so sick too. Yeah. I got so complete, man. And do that to Gambrot? That's what I was going to say. He's a sick grappler in his own right. I thought he was going to get out that one moment where he had the leg hiked up, he had the ankle. And all he had to do is swim inside, when he kept it too long, he hit the ground and he was able to readjust and locking that, figured for and it was over. Well, when he reached over and grabbed the far arm and used that to hang onto the back, that is slick. Yes. That was slick. He was fucking slick, man. And just very high level. Everything was like an elevated level. I had a very high opinion of him before the fight, but now I'm like, oh, this dude could do it. He knows what. He knows both. Yeah. That was really surprised with that. And the fact that it went so quick, oh, his fights have been in the first round. And these scrambles, these scrambles from this position. Now, generally in this position, it's so hard to keep back control. Like right here, grabbing the arm and this adjustment, bro, that's really skillful. As a seatbelt. Yeah. Just the way he's able to adjust it. Gambrot's trying everything, but once he gets to that position, it's over. You're back in his backpack he's got a lot going on, man. He's first of all, real tall for the weight class. I think he's over six feet tall. Long, excellent reach, excellent strike. The other thing that he did that was really slick, he pretended to get up off of his back. So Gambrot explodes and he exposes his neck right there. Watch that back that up just to touch. Look at this. This is so slick. Like look, he's hanging on his back. They're struggling. And he said, let me just sit up and he'll sit up, bam, right there. That's so nasty. It's like his fog, man. That's so slick. That's such a good sneaky move. Cause the guys like, oh, now's my time. You know, those moments where you feel like you can move. Like he got, he give you some space. Like I'm going to go and then plop. I'm anytime I'm in training, someone has my back. I always try to make sure I'm always aware of the joke. Matt's always says, always protect the joke first and that's the main thing I always try to focus on. Protect the joke first before you start doing anything. I was just crazy. Cause at the end of the day, it just takes that little split second to get under the neck and that could be to fight. Yeah. So sometimes people just get, they get a little too urgent. You know, they get a little too, they just want to make something happen without just being safe all the time. Always be safe. And that's in Gamrod situation right there. That was the moment. Cause who knows if he could have made it out of that position and survived all those choke attempts and got to the next round, who knows? You know, if he got on top, who knows? And South killed, I mean, you presume he has great endurance. You presume, but we really don't know yet. We haven't known. It's fun. The wild unknown about him. Yeah. I was like, I don't know how good he actually is, but I could tell you what. First round, he's a motherfucker. He's a motherfucker. That guy is good. It's interesting like these guys that have the unknowns. You know, like some guys get really far, like Tom Aspenall becomes heavyweight champion in the world and is kind of an unknown whether he can fight in the fourth and fifth rounds. Kind of crazy. Right? We just know he's a blitzer. We know he's big and fast. But we really rarely see him get out of the first round. Yeah. Kind of nuts. It's a gift and a curse. Right. That's a good way to put it because you get both your paychecks. You get done really, really early. But then if you get into the, you know, you run into the wrong one and the fight starts to get tough, you don't know if you can actually push that envelope. Cause it's very different. That is the most bullshit part of the UFC. You get both your paychecks. Fuck off. Fuck off without a hate it. That drives me nuts. I know the boss, we could talk to him. He's not gonna talk. He's not gonna talk. He said he's a hundred times already. It should be you get paid what you get paid. It shouldn't be, first of all, if judges were perfect every time, maybe you could make an argument for that. But I still don't think you should make an argument for that because I think guys fight as hard as they can to win. There's no one who's fighting harder because you think you're gonna get a win bonus. You know, you're fighting as hard as you possibly get. At the highest level. And so it's not incentivizing people to fight harder. You're just, you're giving too much of their career, too much of their future, too much of their actual, like how they gonna feed their family to the whims of people that sometimes get it wrong. I do remember one incident where I was situation, I should say where I was going to fight harder. And that was UFC 300 against Calvin Keater with Dana announced the bonuses were gonna be 300,000. And I got super pumped up. And everyone always pointed at the go, you got so excited that you went there and you fall like that. I go, listen, it takes two to tango. If he wants to sit there and hold me, it's not much I could do. I can't really just fight. I thought about it, I was like, I'm gonna just go out there and just start swinging for the fences and take them down and maybe get a crazy finish and it didn't go that way. But I thought about it. Guys can't sleep each other out, too. Yeah. That's the thing, you know, people want exciting fights. Everybody wants exciting fights. Of course, of course. But there is a reality to skillful guys going after each other. And that sometimes they'll cancel each other out and make a boring fight. Yeah. This shit happens. It really does, there's no rhyme or reason either. No. Who is it? Like Francis Lewis, Francis Lewis. Francis, they got him and they're delicious. Oh my God. One of the worst fights of all time. But we all thought that was gonna be just a quick fight so we didn't get any madness. Madness. And guaranteed madness. Two of the biggest knock out artists in the history of the heavyweight division. An exact opposite. Nothing. Nothing happened. But it was hell. These fights happen. And then the fans get on you about it. I'm like, listen, you're gonna take a punch from that guy. That guy is gonna send my conscience to a whole different universe. Well, you had Francis coming off the lost as steep A. And I think he was a little rattled mentally. And then you had Derek who realizes like, he's looking for his one big shot. And he's not willing to wait in and get clipped. And so he's waiting to play the role of the Counter-Strikeer. And then no one does nothing. Yeah. Call her a spaser and Rose Nama unit's worst fight in history. Arguably. I think it might be worse. Because I think that was five rounds. We went through five rounds of that shit. It was five rounds. That was worse than Derek. Derek Lewis and Francis and Ghana would have been the worst because of expectations. But it was only three rounds. Yeah. This was five rounds of what the fuck is going on. And it's not a knock on the fighters. Of course, there are two other greatest flyweights. Right. Yeah. I try to throw it. It's two of the greatest drawweights of all time. I mean, Rose Nama units when she knocked out John Wailie with that fucking headkick, holy shit. When she starts, Joanna hit her with that left hook and took her out like, dude, Rose's a beast, man. She's a beast. At one of the absolute most exciting fighters, champions of all time in those particular exchanges, like some of the fights that she's had, they've been amazing, amazing fights. But that just fights. That fights shocked for whatever reason. It happens. Just happen sometime. Can't explain it. Sometimes you just feel something when you're in there. You're just kind of like, well, I'm not going to go. And they're like, well, I'm not going to go. If you're not going to go, then it's just a steering car. I don't know what was going on in there. Fight. It was very strange. But I also think there's a time when you've been in so many wars. You've had so many wars that your willingness to exchange is different. Your drive to attack is different. It's not there anymore. And especially people who fight in wars, and Rose has been in some wars. And that's why I fight the way I fight now so differently, because those wars that I had leading up to where I'm at, I mean, I had that barn burner with all these other guys on the way to the title. And I had to change it up. Yeah, you got to stay alive. I'm just like smart. I'm joking. My fight's not born by this like that. No. They're different. Your fights are the best, you have the best back control, I think I've ever seen in this part. When you get on someone's back, I'm like, oh shit. This is getting crazy. Yeah. I didn't want to say I appreciate, because I do hear the episodes where you guys talk about it. I'm like, yeah. Two of the back controls each other. The sandhanging fight is nuts. When you know how good sandhanging is, and you just got that back. And that was 99. It was so slick. You've done that to so many dudes too. And you could see, obviously redemption for you was the second puree of your on-fight. That was redemption. That's so good. Cool. I remember you came in right afterwards. I was like, everybody's got to shut the fuck up now. They all got to shut the fuck up. It was just supposed to say they go, shut up. Yeah, please. Yeah, you really showed everybody in that second fight. The first fight was just nonsense. The first fight was just that kind of a move to hit someone when they're down on one knee like that. Like, what the fuck are you doing, man? That was a rough time. It was crazy. And then you having already had a bulging disc in your neck. Your neck was already fucked. It's also kind of crazy that you could compete at the level that you can be not with a fake disc in your neck. Yeah. Do you ever think about that thing? Oh, 100%. I still have like nerve damage in my tricep from it. Like if I do like a Pilate or just a plank, you'll see it just decide shaking. It's so bad. Even till this day. It's a lot better than what it was before, but this is what people don't understand. Some of these fighters, us, we go through a lot just to make it. And you're going to hear the other side of it. Well, no one told you to do it. It's not even about that. It's just like we're trying our best to chase something great, something that's crazy in the sense of the word. You're right. And you put your body through how to get there. And I just, I know there's great fans out there who appreciate that. And there's the other ones who are more casual and they don't really understand. But I wish they took the time out. Just a train, take a week of training and understand what we put our bodies through. Day in at a high level against other high level guys. Listen, you need the casuals. You need everybody to buy tickets. It's all great. But the reality of the casuals, all you haters, you are doing yourself a disservice too. You're saying ridiculous shit. You're acting like a fucking retard. What you really should do is do better in your own life. And you wouldn't be a hater. Because almost all haters are losers. 100% of them. And the people they're hating on are doing way better than them. And there's legitimate criticism. But legitimate criticism can be handled respectfully. And the people that don't handle legitimate, people that don't dish out legitimate criticism respectfully, it's because they haven't been smacked. Right? Or they haven't been smacked by the guy they're talking shit about. Yeah. Or did they see him and then they changed their tune. Real quick. Of course. It's so weird. They talk about literal professional fighters and compussies. I guess it is. I got a lot of DMs. It's so delusional. What guy said I'll fold you in half recently? Because I don't. But they're just trying to fuck with your head. They don't even believe that. They're trying to get a rise out of aljimane sterling. They can get a rise out of a UFC champion. And when they're 16 years old, jerking off, cheetos all over their fingers. You know, I'm exciting. That must be to have direct contact with you. Yeah. I try. I try not to engage as much as I used to. Because before I would, I think we talked about it before. I would engage and go back and forth. Don't do it. And I kind of got away from it. But the old version of me would like to just say, all kinds of crazy shape. But I'm a little bit more mature now. There's no benefit in it. And it wastes energy. That's the problem. And then it also wastes your, you get distracted. Like, what did he say back? I can't see what this mother fucker responded to. I'm going to get him again. I do check. You saved a bunch of pictures of his Instagram. Let me see your ass in person. In real life before he deletes it. Let me screenshot these. Yeah. There's people who are people. So again, yeah. People are people, man. And I would have done the fucking same thing. If I was 15 years old and somebody gave me an Instagram account, and I could talk shit to whoever, I would talk shit to everybody. Whoever was. I'm trying to think if I was like that. I don't know if I was ever like that. as it exists when you were a kid. It that the access didn't exist. If that access existed, I guarantee. If you and your friends like, bro, tricks talking shit with me, you and Drake are going back and forth. You're like, fuck you pussy. Of course you would do it. Everybody would do it. I would do it 100%. I guess it's just human nature. It's 100%. But I think that when you get to the level that you're at, a literal world champion and a professional fighter, of the highest caliber, that's you do yourself a disservice. You do like, I love Sean Strickland. He's crazy as fuck, but he gets in there with everybody all the time. He gets in there all day long. Talkin' shit with people. He gets in there, but it's somehow another doesn't distract him. I wouldn't give him the same advice. Something's fucked up about his brain that like for him to be in that kind of conflict all day, it does seem to bother him at all. I think it feels like, I want to keep going more like driving broken plays a recording of all the shit that all of his haters have said to him, why he runs. I want to do that, but you know what I'm saying? Yeah. There's people that are wired different, and they think Sean is very, very much wired different. And for whatever reason, you know? Yeah. Sometimes I always, but I like it. I like, he should have a segment like how Ray Longo has like the Ray Longo minne, he should have like a strictly minute. Well, I was telling him, you know, we were talking when he was out here. He went to waste a while as well to get his shoulder work not after the Homsaw victory. And I was saying, you 100% could do a podcast. It would be hilarious. It would be great. You could have guests on, you could do whatever the fuck you want. Like you have a real future outside the sport. Like once, and he's also very smart with his money. His crazies that dude is, he's saved a ton of money. He gives great investment advice on Twitter. Like he gives investment advice. Like who the fuck is this? This is the same guy. He's telling you how to invest your money. You know, S&P and all this shit. And like, oh, what? He's not as crazy as he comes off. He's a lot smarter than people would give him credit for. And he uses that as like, it tricks you. And it tricks you into thinking that he's like a silly person. Yeah. You know what I mean? But he'll say whatever comes to mind. Yeah, that's him. But much of a fucker can fight. Yeah. And I was into the day, that's the thing. That dude can fight. Like he can fight. And he fights in a weird way. Like his very weird style. Like nobody has that style. This episode is brought to you by Ketoan IQ. I've tried a lot of supplements. But for years, I've been one thing that I've been obsessed with to keep my brain locked in and that's ketones. And energy molecule, our brains naturally create when pushed to our limits. Ketoans used to cost thousands of dollars a shot. And we're only used by super elite people. But now thanks to a $6 million research contract with the military, ketone IQ had a breakthrough. And you can finally get ketones online on Amazon or at target for $5 a shot. They don't taste good. But damn do they work. Trust me, if you rely on your brain for your day to day success like I do, take ketone IQ. I take it and I love it. I feel sharper. I make better decisions. I have faster memory recall and a more productive. Your brain thrives on ketones. Go to ketone.com slash Rogan for 30% off your subscription order or find ketone IQ at target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. They're so confident in it that they even offer a 60 day money back guarantee. So go ahead and take your shot. By the way, do you have a lighter? Yes. And of course. Well, you want some cigars? I guess. Oh shit. How'd your main brings gifts? Let's go. We bring gifts. These are fighters cigars too. Fighter cigars? Yeah. I'm like porcelain. So it's different fighter lines. I know you got a foundation. Uh huh. I could have her openness. I think it's so cold now. They use my fighting muscles. It is well. I might. You might. You can put the beer clothes. It's weird. I broke it. I broke that too. What the fuck do you think? I'm supposed to just pull open. Should. I opened it this morning. That's weird. Did something happen to it? Got cold. I got a knife in here somewhere. There's some big ass knives that used to be here, Jamie. Why? Oh, when the device president was here? Left you, I always carry one. If we can't get these open algernate, bro, this is like chromatically sealed. No, I have to. There we go. So we got different ones. You got a Judo-burner. You got a funk master. Which one's this? I think that's the funk master. So I don't like light or dark. I like them all. This is you. We got smoke yours. Try them cigars. So who's making these? Where they making them out of? So he gets them from different places. They're on the back of that too. He gets them from different places. Yeah, like Cuba. Really? Cuba. Cuba. Really? I believe it's Cuban. Because Cuban cigars are banned a little bit. Hard? No, no, no. They're not really banned. Pop the top. Do you know how smoke's a Garoson? What are you doing? What are you doing? I don't know what it gives that to me. Oh, shit. That's a clipper. This is high. This is a high level shit. Cleary. A lot of fake Cuban cigars. I got one. And then flip the top. There you go. They got like Maduro's in different kinds. I'm like new into cigars. These are the funk master. That might be dead. Here, I'm sorry. This one's good. Jamie, you smoke cigars? Jamie's strictly blunt. Oh. But now he's got to stop because he just wanted to be a feller. I can't do it here. He's got a cross state line. He's got an Oklahoma and get high. Do you actually? I want one today. Yeah, he takes a flight southwest Oklahoma. Gets some bong ribs and hop back on the way. This is good. This is very good. So the feedback on them have been great. They're good quality cigars. They make them from like people that make them. And they get them to make our own different lines of them. So pretty cool. I like them. Well, we used to perform in Miami. There was a place that you could go. We could wash some hand roll cigars. And they'd sell you cigars. Like hand rolled. It was pretty dope. You watched these ladies roll everything out. They could have a long knife. And they slice it up. And they, you rolled yourself? No. No, no, no, no. They told us how to roll down in Miami. I don't want to ruin it. I don't want to do brain surgery. I'm going to say this fun. Get an expert. Somebody's got to be good at this. You got a rum line too, right? Is that it? Funk Harbor around your neck? Funk Harbor, baby. It's you. I got money now, Joe. You know, that's all bitch. I got money now. Hey, I was supposed to bring my sharpie. I don't know if you wanted it like signed or whatever, but sure. But we wanted to shuttles and things like that. Multiple metals. There's metals for like competitions for rums. Yeah, we got two double goals for this. We got two double goals for the silver. Jamie, can you get us some ice cubes and some glasses? Let's fucking party, Algimaine. Then we're going to go to the mothership. I love that name, by the way. Thank you. Yeah, we were trying to figure out what to call it. We had a bunch of different, you know, mitzi-shore that lady who ran the comedy store. Yeah, the painting up there, that's her. She was the owner and founder of the comedy store. She used to say about the comedians. The inmates are running the asylum. So we were going to call it the asylum, but I thought that sounds corny. A little corny. There's something about it. It's like a little like, little crazy, you know? And then I thought, well, what is this? One of the things that Ron White, he was the first. Ron White was the first guy to move here. And, you know, I knew Ron real well from LA. And Ron said, you know, I love it. It's in the middle of the country. You could fly out. What's the matter? You want one, Jamie? It's got work to do. It won't get hammered with us. He was in the middle of the country. He could fly out. It's only like three hours New York, three hours LA. It's perfect. And I was like, well, that would be like the mothership. And then you could fly out all your ships could fly to different parts of the country. But that would be your base. The mothership would be the base. Oh, that's pretty cool. Plus, obviously, I'm alien. That's what I thought it was. Of course. Yeah, I mean, I'm obsessed for whatever reason. Which one? Darker light. What's the difference? So this one's our limited edition. It's got the number one on it. We're going to be coming out with some different ones. We're actually going through a rebrand right now. This one's aged two to five years. But they're all Jamaican origin. This one's aged under the tropical sun. On age is a silver. We'll bust out that age under the tropical sun. And this one we use, Experbing Cass. So it drinks really nice if you like bourbon. Oh, okay. It's like, I don't see sweet, but it's not as harsh when you drink it. Are you a rum guy? Is that your thing? Is that why you started a rum company? Yes. You've always been a rum guy? My parents are from Jamaica. So I want my parents are from Italy, but I hate Groppa. That's just nasty. Groppa's not nasty. That stuff's nasty. I'm going to take the big one. All right. Cheers, sir. What do you guys say? Salut. Salut. Salut? I think I said something else in Italy. I don't know. Do they? I just got back. I was just there last week. Yeah. Two weeks ago? Yeah. Two weeks ago. It was awesome. I love it there. We still haven't gone. We want to go so bad. Bro, if you want to eat, that's the place. Pasta. I just hear everybody talking about it. I would love to do that. I gained three pounds. I ate nothing but carbs. I ate so much food. I ate two. I was hurting every night. I was like, I was like, I'm going to ignore my diet completely. I worked out every day. But I was like, I'm going to ignore my diet completely. And just eat for pleasure. But it's not as bad though. It's not as bad for you. The food is not as bad. But calories of calories though. It's just the volume. I'm a glutton. I ate two pizzas. I ate linguine with clams. I had barada and tomatoes. And I also had something. Oh, a bunch of pieces of bread. I ate so much. And one setting that I got home that night when we sat back. And I was like, I can't move. I've eaten myself to a place where I'm like, you ever see when those lions that eat too much? They just lie. Yeah. Oh. Oh. That's how I felt. Chesapeake, that those were. Those were my 135 days. And as soon as the place you were, I'm going in. I remember one time I ran into you at the apex. And I was like, what do you weigh? And you said 176. I was like, that's crazy. Yeah. You got to lose 40 pounds. That's crazy. The fascinating part is when I went up to 45, I got down and I was lighter. And my natural walking around weight, still eating the same way I always did. And I was walking around about 168. Sometimes 66 to about 172. And I'm like, this is doesn't even make any sense. How much lighter I am from 135. It's just less anxiety about making the weight. That too, your body didn't hold onto it as much. Yeah. So the body kind of just recognizes what's happening. Like, oh, this is a nicer weight cut. Yeah, you're healthy now. Yeah. Even though I was still awake cut. I was going to say, but I just checked my weight last week when I got, well, actually two days ago, when I got back, let me get your at least 170. I'm heavier than that. 175? North. 18? When he ate it, that's when I checked. And I didn't look fat. I was like, this is crazy is happening again. It's happening. It's people that don't understand it. Like I have to explain to my normy friends. They're like, Hosey, lose all that weight. He doesn't have anything to lose. I'm like, well, you're sucking your muscles dry. And that's what's crazy. And you're organs. That's what's really dark. Oh, it's dark, dude. It's dark. It's the worst part about fighting. I still think same day, Wayne's. Well, same day, Wayne's would change a lot, but also guys would get really hurt, because people are still going to lose the weight. They're still going to do it. But I think that's going to be like a phase. Like people are going to realize how stupid this is. And they go, oh, I actually feel better. Just competing at my weight. Perhaps. But I think you would have to have multiple weight classes added many weight classes added. There's too many gaps that are too ridiculous. The 15 pound gap would be the most challenging from 55 to 70. What about 85 to 205? That's nuts. 85 to 205 is crazy. 20 pounds is crazy. I always thought there should be a difference between that one. 100%. There should be every 10 pounds. Every 10 pounds is smart. Go 125, 35, 45, 55, 60. Blow up in the ones that are like when you get to 70, make 70, 75. 85 is already there. Make a 95. Make a 205. And then it gets weird with heavyweight. I think you might want to have a bridge or weight, like a 220, 225. And then giant fellas. And then after that, it should be as big as the fucking you want to be. Because that's the weird thing. It's like heavy legs limited. I remember Tim Sylvia when Tim Sylvia was saucy. There was a time when Tim Sylvia was big. He was a big fella. And he was cutting weight to make 265 hard core. He was barely making it. He was so big back then, man. That's a big man. He's gigantic. And that was when he was fucking sick. And I remember watching him struggle to make the 265. Like that's crazy. Why are you making the heavy weights cut weight? That doesn't make any sense. It takes away from what heavyweight actually, yeah. The biggest, baddest motherfucker alive. Yeah. You know, when Mike Tyson was fucking everybody, he helped people wait 220. I won't say small. Let me not say small. Right. Actually, yeah, the biggest, baddest motherfucker alive. Yeah. You know, when Mike Tyson was fucking everybody out, people ate 220. You're, I won't say small, I mean I say small. For anyway, for heavyweight he was, yeah. I mean, it doesn't matter. Kane, when Kane was fucking everybody out, he was 240. He was like two. Yeah, fador, same thing. He was never real big. Fador was fairly small compared to a lot of other heavyweight. Heavyweights. But then you got a guy like a rosebless, uh, dispend? Oh, that car's crazy. He's huge. Kevin Fador is gigantic. Huge. That range is nuts. He's like the modern day in the end of the whole. He's a Amazonian. He's giant. A literal giant. He's one of those guys where when I saw that fight that, uh, MVP did with him and Juni Dos Santos, I said, please don't do that fight. That fight's not right. That's, that's one of those fights really. That fight's not right. Yeah. This is just too much of a changing in the guard. He's one guy who is coming off of karate combat, first of all. The one thing of Juni was a wrestler. If Juni was a sick wrestler and, you know, oh, you know, maybe he's going to take him down, ground and pound. This is kind of even though he's older. He's been knocked out a bunch of times. He's still very dangerous. But you know, Juni had seen his best days back when he knocked out Kane, which was like, what year was that? Oh, 2016, 2015. Was it even? I got signed at 2014. I don't, I remember Kane, not Kane. So it was the big, it was the big Fox card. It was the first car to see. It was the Fox because I remember they made Kane fight with a blown out knee or they encouraged him. The fight with a blown out knee to get Kane's knee was fucked before that fight. And Juni or caught him with that perfect right hand. Well, 2013. Okay. That's his debut. Right. No, that's that fight. That's the fight where he knocked out Kane Velazquez. Oh, that's the second one. What's the one when he became is right before that? No, right before that. Oh, so he got signed at the Fox one 2011. Okay. So 15 years of wars. Yeah. 15 years of the steep emuetric fight, which was horrible to watch. Right. That was a brutal, brutal fight. And then you have the second Kane fight, which was horrible to watch. And I think there was a third Kane fight too. Correct. JDS? Yes. Yeah. Two sub fights back to back. Bro, you if you don't take Kane out in that first round, that storm never ends. Yeah. Never ends. You're like, we're going to ride this storm out. No, there was no ride. And prime Kane was a mother fucker, dude. I, and when I've always been conflicted with him in DC, because it kind of reminded me of a marab and I. And I always said like, if DC stayed at heavyweight, he could have arguably potentially have been the greatest heavyweight of all time. But I do know DC always says in the training room, Kane was the man. Yeah. He was the guy. He told me always Kane beat his ass. DC should have been a middleweight. How about that? I don't know. That guy's making middleweight. He disciplined DC. He's him and his chicken. DC went to Dagestad. DC went to Dagestad for three years. He's not going to forget. Yeah. Forget. Two years. If DC made men away and he could have made me a weight, a lot of guys who are way leaner than him have made that weight. So I saw him at my UC debut, UC 170, at Mandalay Bay in the back room, cutting weight, doing the workouts. And he looked like he was dying just to make 205. Mm hmm. True. So I don't know how he would have done it. Well, he would have had changes diet. No more papas. Yeah. No more nothing. No more garbage. And he would have had, I love DC too. He's my favorite person to do commentary with by far. He's the best. He's fun. We have such a good time. We have such a good time. He's such a fun dude. Like genuinely happy fun dude. Look at him. That's 205 DC. So 205 DC though, you're telling me that Alex Pereira, if he was a bit like that, couldn't lose 20 pounds? Of course he could. Yeah. I don't know. Because he's not. Look, if you see the guys that fight at 85, like Joe Pfeiffer, Joe Pfeiffer is a giant. Dr. Dreckus, Dreckus, Dreckus, Dreckus, Dreckus, Dreckus, Dreckus, he's a fucking giant. He's big. He's gigantic. He looks like a heavyweight. But look at he makes 85. What does that mean? He's sucking it in. He could have made middleweight. He could have made middleweight. If he had like the real, if he just had the drive and did it as a lifestyle change and like did it over the course of like a year and like really leaned himself out, got on like a ketogenic diet, leaned himself out. But then how often would he be able to fight? Depends on how much he actually gets his body weight down to. That's the thing. DC's only like 511, 510. How tall is he? I'm a given 511. Maybe, maybe I love him. Might be 511. 5, 5, 8. There's guys with his body that could, but it's not like a thing where you can make the weight by just dehydrating yourself. No, he's too big. But if he had with his frame, if he had slowly but surely leaned himself out and did it healthy, smart over like the course of a year, he'd have to take some time off and really just dedicate himself to just getting lean. His gas tank would be better. Who's gonna fuck with that guy at middleweight? Do you remember what he was doing at Dan Henderson? Do you remember that fight? He'd put them like a burger. Bro, he threw him around like a ragdoll and Dan Henderson's a monster. He's a monster. That guy's a beast. He's such a tank. And DC just ragdolled him, just ragdolled him. That was 205, right? Mm-hmm. The Henderson came up. Yeah, you know, because when I would cut down, and I wasn't always this big at 35, but when I would cut down to 35, I would have to do it in stages. So I couldn't do a three month turnaround, like I did for the one fight. How much time do you need? I need four months' ideal. That's crazy. It's ideal long. Because I could slowly get down, and then I could start tripping away. Because I'm at my natural state. I'm fat and happy. And it's not in fat. I'm just having my normal walking weight. And then I get down from 70, whatever, to 70. Then I get the next week or the week following down to 65. After that, I get down to 60. And that's like the optimal weight I want to be at. And then I get to 55. And this is like where I'm going to be when I'm stepping into the octagon. So to do that over the periods of time, like you could do it really quick, because I have the rustlers mentality. I can do it fast, but doesn't mean everything is going to be where it should be. And I also felt my cardio in rounds four or five, in comparison to doing rounds four or five in the training room, severely different. My gas tank, you would think I was more up, right? And just for comparison, say, right? And then I go into the fights in rounds four or five. And I'm like, I gotta serve some energy, because I'm so down. I can feel it, but I'm trying not to show it. Is there a difference between when you were allowed to use the IV and when they took the IVs away? I use IV once. Only once. And I was in like 2015. I thought it was stupid. It's forever to get it. And I'm like, I could have been eating right now. And I'm the same weight that I was when I was just eight. I'm like, I would much rather just stuff my face. I think the idea is that it hydrates you more efficiently, because instead of having to go through your stomach, it goes right into your veins, and then it hydrates your muscles more efficiently. I didn't really feel like a performance difference. I'm doing this. Interesting. But I'm different. Some people call me in anomaly and they say, you can't do what I do. I drink and train a camp and people think I'm crazy. Really? Yeah. I drink the night before the fight. What? Yeah. Come on. I have one glass. Sometimes too. Really? Three is like we're getting crazy. But the night before the fight after you've cut weight, why do you do that? I'm not John Jones. That guy's built. I'm built different, but he's built different than me. Well, I think John is just so fucking talented and so fucking smart that he was able to get by and dominate at a world championship level by putting himself at a deficit like that. Whereas if John, you say that, but John's a different person. He wouldn't be the same guy. He's wild. There's something about John. That's one of the reasons why he's so good is that he's wild. He's intelligent and wild at the same time. And that's why you can't compare this. Like whatever makes you happy when people, I remember Carl Dakes said something like he will eat ice cream not right before a match, but in his training, he said, because it makes him happy. I want to have a drink because throughout the training camp, I'm already going through this hard grind after sparring. And I feel like I hit a threshold where my conditioning is at a place where I want it to be. It's like a checkpoint. I'm like, okay, this is my checkpoint. I hit it. You ever want to aura ring or a whoop strap for any of those things? Yeah, that thing's stupid. Well, it's a lot of you. That thing's attacking me every day because what it's saying is that the alcohol is affecting your sleep. Stop attacking me. I'm like, that shit off it. Dude, it's a quarter. It's fucking with your back. That's serious facts and data. I remember I brought out Adrian Janis. I brought him out twice. The first time though is for the peo de yon rematch. And he stays at my house for about a week. We spar. I think it was a Thursday. I take him to Johnny McGurries. And I bring him to my guy Rishi. He's like Johnny McGurries. It's a pub. Okay. I'm on Long Island in Mass Pico. They got two now. But I bring him over there. And the guy I talked to over there who I do at Rishi, he's the man. He's good friends with wide men and Vellante from like the college days back at Hoshter. And he's a big MMA fan. So I love that. So instantly we kicked it off when I met him the first time. So I bring him over there. And it's at the spot. I'm like, yeah, we're going to get some food. We go there and then he sees me and I ordered a drink. And I was like, yeah, get one for him too. He was like, yeah, bro. What do you do? What do you do? I was like, no, no, this is normal. Trust me. He's like, he looks at me. He's just like, dumbfounded. He's like, you drink in training camp. It was the biggest taboo thing on earth. I'm like, yeah, dude. Like we just had some good rounds today. This is my reward. You deserve one too. You're in shape. I'm in shape. This I have one or two. And I always get my Thai chili wings over there. And so whenever I go in Long Island, I'm finishing up a camp on the East Coast. I'm fighting home on the East Coast. Rishi always hit me up. He goes, we're going to do the ritual. Get the Thai chili wings. You get my IPAs. And yeah. But like I said, everyone's different. Whatever makes you feel comfortable. If you're going to do it, you can't like for me, like having a drink the night before the fire and people go like, you're not worried. It's going to affect your performance. And I go, if I lose because of this one drink, I was supposed to win. Point blank period. OK, but let me, let me push back on that. Imagine you're fighting a guy who you and him are like that. Neck and neck. Neck and neck. Most are neck and neck. Yeah. Neck and neck. And the difference is whether or not you got that extra REM sleep the night before. Well, you could push when you lay off, when you lay back on the gas, when you really maybe could like, if you were a little bit more rested, you could just one extra move, one extra transition, one extra guard pass, one extra attempt at a submission, one extra thing that gets you the round. You know what I'm saying? I take my naps before the fight. I take my naps before the fight. We charge that battery. Well, listen, Iliya's a boy. He used to drink wine at the weigh ins. He was weighing in while he was cutting weight. He was drinking wine. Yeah. Yeah. There's no perfect formula. I mean, it also, there's something to be said for doing what makes you happy. Always. I think enthusiasm is a very important thing. Enthusiasm and joy is a very important thing. It's underrated. Yeah. So my friend Dennis Bizuki, he just fought in the Albania card. Bad stoppage by the rough. And I like Jason Hersock, but bad stoppage, she said he's typing in the top. But I remember his second contender for his cutting weight. And Maraba's having a party at his house in Vegas. That was a weird one. That top was weird. He went unlocking his hands to finding his leg and pushing off the leg. Yeah. He grew that as a top. I just don't understand that top. I go, I go Jason, I've trained with Jason. And I'm not attacking him because I don't want people to think, I don't like to attack people unless they really deserve it. But I go, if you're not sure, because he said he wasn't sure. He said it looked like a time. So I go, if you think it looked like it, you weren't sure. Why not just wait? Because if it was, he would do it again. Yes. But his immediate action after pushing off the leg was to grab between his leg where you kind of lock your hand from the head and arm fin. And I have the hardest time ever finishing dentists. And I'm a pretty good black belt in Jujitsu. And that's a good position for me. And I had, I struggle. I could cut on my hands how many times I probably finished him in that position. It's also it's the classic defense. Yes. You grab the leg and that's the best way to prevent the guy from putting all the pressure on the neck. The head and arm. Do you ever go to, do you know what the impaler is? And he Bravo calls the impaler. To get out of that position, you, you slide the knee to the sternum and you finish with the knee on the sternum for the bottom guy, for the top guy. So when the guy's defending, yes. Yeah, you go knee to sternum. It's fucking brutal, man. It's brutal. You're being attacked on two different fronts. Uh huh. You're being crushed. Your sternum's being crushed. And this defense does not work as good anymore. It still gives you a little bit, the grabbing the leg and looping over like that. It gives you a little bit. But there's something about that crushing on the sternum and along with the squeeze of the head and arm choke. Yeah. It's nasty. The difference with that, I would imagine you, at least when I've tried it, I try to get it before they get on their side. Because once they're perpendicular with the ground, it's a little bit hard to get the exact pressure point of what you want. And I go, I try this literally the very next day. And I go, there's no way you could submit somebody which you're ass in the air. You could be squeezing as hard as you want. But if you're ass is in the air and this guy's on the side, it's gonna be really difficult to make somebody tapping that position. Very hard. Depending upon your squeeze ability, right? That too. Did you see Amasov when Amasov finished that dude? He did that thing. He's a nasty ground player. Bro. In this crazy, because he lost to Jason Jackson. And I'm not saying that as a slight bro, Jason Jackson. But it's just like how good is Jason Jackson? Jason Jackson's real fucking good. And that's my dreamt making brother. He's not saying he'll good. He needs to be signed to the UFC 100 100%. That guy's crack. And when he took him out, man, he took him out. He didn't just beat him. Yeah. I wish they got myself out. Cross promote. Well, that's not happening. I know it's not happening. It's not happening, but I wish Santa Claus was real. But I go like, why don't we just find out who's making like boxing, you know, where we can find out who's actually look at this, how he finishes. DC and I were actually talking about this, because he looked, he goes, need to the belly. See how he does that? Across. Now, if you're grabbing the leg, so if he was grabbing his leg, you would go knee across the chest. And you put it right down on the sternum. But he did that to make sure he was flattened out. Yes. To make sure that he couldn't go to the side. But this dude is just so good. Wicked. Joe's just looking like, I can't do anything about that. Of course he can fucking, of course he could break dance. But break dancing is a great base for Jiu Jitsu. We had a bunch of guys, Richie Martinez and Geo Martinez. These guys that came into 10th planet, we go back in the early 2000s. And we were all like, oh shit, break dancing. Like we never even thought gymnastics, everybody knew. Like a guy who could do gymnastics, a guy who was like really good at tumbling, that kind of explosive ability and balancing control and body strength totally translated to Jiu Jitsu. Yeah. But we didn't think about it. Break dancing is kind of like a gymnastics. You know, these dudes are doing weird shit whether they're on one arm with their legs, lotus position above their head and they're hopping around on one arm. That's crazy. It is. Cause I try to do it. I'm like, yeah, I can't do that. Eddie started doing break dancing practice as a part of like strength and conditioning training for Jiu Jitsu. He started trying break dancing move. Eddie's so open minded. He's always willing to like try something out. Like, think about Eddie's classes too. If somebody finishes somebody with something, Eddie will like stop the class. What did you do? And it's like, oh, I do this and I grab my foot here and he's like, okay, everybody look at this. Come over, come over. And he'll bring everybody over. He'll show it to us. Show us how he set it up. And they'll show him how he set it up and they go, who thinks you can get out of this? Who thinks they gotta move to get out of this? And then they would all practice different ways to get out of this. And they go, well, what if a guy does this? What if a guy does that? And then break it down. Like he is very, very like open to new moves. You know, it makes his classes very interesting in that regard. You guys still trained? I don't. I haven't trained in a while. I was training with Gabe Tuttle out here for a little bit. But my got one name and that just keeps fucking up. And I do too many, I like to do too many things to want to go through another surgery or to deal with something. I just don't want to, it's like everybody I know that gets to my age is still trains, gets a disc replacement, gets another surgery, gets another surgery. And then when you start getting like back surgeries or like Matt Sarah just got a knee replacement recently, you start getting to that range and it's like, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey. This shit's forever. Yeah. You got to walk around. You got to play with your kids. You got to be able to go hiking. You got to be able to do things. And if you break your body down, especially through grappling, I still hit the bag. I still train like kickboxing. I still do a lot of workin' out. I work out constantly. But every time I start doing jujitsu again, my knee starts throbbing. Yeah, that's kind of similar to Al. I quinsed it. Yeah. Snugts. Uh, I always go like, I wonder how much more he had in a tank. He can even help fight on, no notice. Yeah. No notice. And the Kabib fans don't give him any credit for it. They go, he was playing with him. I go really? Tell me one fighter who goes out there and tells you that they're just going to play with their opponent. The prime time Al was a beast. Yeah. He was a beast. And he was tough as shit and game. You know? Is any selling real estate now? Mm-hmm. Shout out to Al. I had quin'ta. Yeah, he's doing really well, man. Good friend. Working together for a little bit. But then it got to the point where I was like, dude, I just don't have the time. I got to make a decision. And that's when I started doing the rum company and everything. And you see how fast time gets absorbed with things. Yeah. With everything. Yeah. So I could do multiple different things, multiple different lives. It might be in another dimension. Maybe. I would love to. But in this dimension, I have too many interests. I almost wish I didn't have as many things that I love to do. I could whittle him down to a few. Yeah. You know? I still want to learn how you do your spinning backache. I throw mine, but I know you do yours a little bit of a different way. I remember the video you did with the GSB showing him how you do yours. But I like to spin. I like to spin the wind. Listen, if it lands, the amount of torque that you get on spin is crazy. Come on. It's not good. What do you do different than the way I do it? I don't know. I know you're supposed to step, turn to heel, look over to shoulder. You can jump as well. You don't have to step. It's the whole thing is just getting it out in a straight line. Yeah. And the problem with most people that didn't train like in a classic talk one no school is that it's a circle. Circle can land. It can land and it can be really powerful if it lands. But it's not going to be as powerful as the way I do it. The way I do it is a turn. And then I always say spinning back kick when I do commentary because everybody understands that. Yeah. But it's a returning sidekick is the way we talked about it in Dark Window. It's a turning sidekick. You like to cycle the game back. Yeah. I'm getting maximum amount of energy, maximum efficiency. It's the difference between throwing a punch like this. You can knock somebody out if you throw a punch like this like a crazy arm punch and you could hurt them and knock them out 100% of the time. And you could do that once and say that's the way to throw a punch or you could learn how to throw a punch. Tommy Hearn style. Will you fucking turn your body into it and you got all that torque and bang. It catches you on the end in a straight line. Tommy would just starch people with that or deontay wild. Straight straight down the pipe. That's the difference between a turning sidekick and when people spin in a circle. So when you spin in a circle, of course it's going to have power. You have giant legs. Your legs carry your body around all day long. You've got the, you're pushing off the other leg. You're spinning with all your torso. Yeah, it's going to have power. But it's not going to have as much power as the way I do it. The way I throw it when it lands, it's everything's going in a straight line and I'm pushing off my back leg and I'm getting all my abs into it and my hips into it and it's just straight. Thug. And I know that if I hit you with that, you're going down. You're going down. You're going to the hospital. Like you're not going to make it, man. Yeah, I saw you hit the bag and I was like, holy shit, that's a fucking kickin' I have right there. There's only one video of me online fighting. It's from when I was 19. I was at the US Cop in Connecticut and I hit this dude with a spinning back kick and sent him through the air, sent him flying through the air. And I knew the moment I hit him, like this fight's over, I turned around and just walked off casually. Because I was like to do that, like fuck with these heads. But I knew that one move has too much power for your body to absorb. There's no way you can take it. It's just too much. It's like getting hit by a car. That's nasty, man. It's a nasty kick. Like when John landed on Steepay, yeah, it just caved his body in. Steepay is one of the toughest human beings is to ever walk the face of the earth. But he takes that to the body. Like that's, you're not going nowhere. You're not going nowhere. And John so smart, like John practiced that specific technique because he was going up to heavyweight. He was like, I need something. Because I can't knock guys out with one punch at heavyweight. I can maybe kick them with, but what's the most powerful kick? And he realized it's the spinning back kick. So he just drilled it. So three days a week, that's all he would do is just drill the spinning back kick. This episode is sponsored by BetterHelp. You've probably heard about BetterHelp before, but maybe you haven't heard from those who have actually used BetterHelp that feedback can tell you everything you need to know. Go to BetterHelp.com slash reviews and check out the feedback from hundreds of people saying how much they love this service. It's easy to see why to get started. All you have to do is answer a few questions. You'll get matched up with a therapist based on your needs. And if it's not the right fit, you can switch therapists at any time. See the reviews. See what stands out and see if BetterHelp is right for you. Visit BetterHelp.com slash JRE. That's better H-E-L-P dot com slash JRE. Yeah. And one thing about John, man, he's such a like his IQ has always been through the roof. He's fighting IQ is crazy. He understands fighting. And I think that's what sets him apart from everybody else. He understands himself. Like if you look at him, he could go, I'm not probably going to knock anybody out of heavyweight with the way I punch. So develop something else and it worked. And that's just reality. That's just the reality of his frame. I mean, you know as well as anybody. It's weird how some people can just punch. Like from the moment they get into the gym the first time they're hitting the pads, like, what the fuck? It's a natural gift. It's nothing powers a weird natural gift. And either you have it or you don't. And if you don't have it, you can only develop it so much. I'm still trying to figure out if I have it. It's just a lot of it is like the size of your hands. And my arms aren't. They long. Yeah. So someone who's like a toporia has like he's not as long as with his, uh, to poor each big ass fist. But I always like imitate the toporia and then the kind of McGregor with a little toporia is bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble bubble. It's like funny shit. Well Connor's another example like big fists man. Yeah. Look at that dude's fist or giant. That's a big thing. Yeah. I got a little, uh, these hands. You got to do what you got to do? These hands are meant for grabbing things. Yeah. Well, they're really good at that. But that's the beautiful thing about MMA as opposed to boxing. Like there's a whole bunch of different ways to finish a fight. Yeah. What did you think about the fight with use of before the fight happened? Like in terms of like, uh, I used to text you like, like asking, like your opinion, like what do you think, uh, you know, um, so I was, I'm curious to know what your thoughts were before fight. Obviously I'm like, um, cause I know what I thought going to what did you think going to the fight? I thought it was going to probably be one of the hardest fights for sure. We've trained together multiple times back in 2017. We've trained together a couple of times within the last two years. And uh, I always knew he moved well in the feed lateral footwork, great calf kicks. And I, I said to myself, if I get chopped down with a couple of these calf kicks early in the fight, it's going to be a rough night, especially if I can't move and do what I do, which is I'm also good at lateral footwork. And he has those nasty knees up the middle that are very quick to end the fight or put you on skates and could get you out of here, right? And, uh, he did submit me that one time. So I think that really gave him a lot of confidence coming into it. So those were my thoughts. I was like, for me to win this, I got to stay on the outside and put pressure on him when I could put pressure on him, take away his calf kicks when I can. Um, I put him on the back foot, making a little bit more difficult to land that calf kick with authority, right? So that was my two cents on that. I knew if I could take him down first, um, it should go my way. Well, it worked. Yeah. It was a little easier than I thought it would have been, but um, I think you're at a different beast. Yeah. They could do this tight. I mean, like, oh, I ain't playing with this. I didn't play with this one. Yeah, that was tight. Yeah, but you got out of it. And I think you're a different beast at 45. You know, I think you just have more resilience at 45, more durable at 45 more energy too. Yeah, that's where it comes from, right? It's again, I wish we could eliminate weight cutting completely from fighting. And I've had conversations with the UFC about doing it, but there's no real road map that makes sense. I think once guys get ingrained in their head that they're going to cut weight, they're just always going to cut weight. They're going to, even if there is weight classes, they're just going to fight dehydrated. They're going to figure out a way to be bigger. I mean, we did it for wrestling and we competed two hours later, sometimes an hour. But you're not getting punched and kicked in the head. That's the difference. That's why I feel if they did same day wins, kind of like what you do for an amateur, like against big, as you can get, which is going to be very little, maybe five pounds. So I go same day wins, you're giving four hours. So this way they can eat and have a nice meal, digest and then it can still warm up and have enough time to prepare for the fight. I think for the fighters on safety, you almost have to protect them from that. That's why they have the way in the day before for their own safety because there's guys that are just going to be stupid and the fights are going to suffer. They're not going to be as good because you're going to be more depleted. I just think there's going to be people that understand you can't cut 20 pounds the day of the fight and go and compete. I think that's going to be the end, like the end of the all, like you're going to come to the realization like, hey, they'll just lose and then it'll weed out the people that are doing that. And then they'll go, okay, so I have to work. I have to go up in the way class and this makes more sense for me. Wouldn't it be better if we look, we have random drug tests, right? They just show it. How many times you've been randomly drug tested? What you saw it up probably a lot. I know they have it on the website. You could check how many times people have been tested and whatnot. So it's just random. Now imagine if they did random, random weigh-ins. That'd be cool. Yeah, but then the problem would be what happens the day of the fight. That's like, what if the guy doesn't make weight? Yeah, because it's done. Yeah, what if you have a giant pay-per-view or a giant numbered card? Is that dead? Oh, what I say. you have a giant numbered card and the guy doesn't cut weight or doesn't make weight. What do you do? Do you still have the fight? I mean, we have the fight now. Yeah. It's been linked. But I mean, what changes? It would be different if it only had a few pounds though. So if you did it that way, random weigh-ins and then weigh-in day of the fight. Even if a guy was heavy, like you weighed in, you know, 137 or whatever, you got to lose two pounds, anybody could lose two pounds, the day of and it's not that big a deal. If you're not cutting weight already. Yeah. If you're not cutting weight already in your fully hydrated and you weigh in the scale of 137, 135 is easy. Or just penalize them. The same way we penalize them now. Yeah, guys, just going to take the penalty and fight bigger. But it's like you're ready to... You're like, for me, if we did same day weigh-ins, I would have to fight at 155 pounds. There's no way. Pause possibly even 170 because that's the weight class. 160. If we did same day weigh-ins, I would have to fight at 155 pounds. There's no way. Pops possibly even 170 because that's the weight class. 165 would be the sweet spot where it's like, this is nice. I don't have to cut. I'm probably gonna fight guys more than likely my size. And I'm gonna feel good. I'm gonna have the energy to compete. And I'm not dehydrating myself severely. Or 155 where I could die a little bit. I could still get down. I hold myself for a meal. Step on the scale. I can have my meal. Now I feel good. I go compete. But I'm not dieting all the way down to 135 pounds, 145 pounds. So that's a 10 pound gap. You see what I'm saying? So that's why I think the same day it makes sense because you're not as depleted where it wouldn't be as severe in comparison to what we're doing now. I think that would be smart. But I think the only way that's really gonna happen is if you have more weight classes, like at least every 10 pounds, I mean, look at boxing. Boxing is so many more weight classes than you have seen. Like how many weight classes are there in boxing? Too many. There's a lot. There's like every three pounds sometimes. Well, the leg the leger weights, right? When you get down to like Adam, weight and straw weight and fly weight, like their fly weights are fucking tiny. You know, like their phantom weight is what? It's not 135. It's lower. Yeah, it's like 126 or something. Let's ban them weight. 118. That's crazy. Minimum weight. That's crazy. Imagine telling the lady that in the bar. What do you do? My fight. What weight do you fight at? Minimum weight. I'm never even hearing of that. Minimum weight is crazy. Yeah. I mean, but this is also why Manny Pacquiao was able to go up and win world championships in eight different weight classes, which is fucking bananas. It's cool though. It's crazy. But so go back to that again, please. So look at the difference in the gaps when you get to the top. You got 122 to 126, only four pounds, 130 and other six pounds, 35 and other five pounds. It's kind of random. Five more pounds to 47 pounds to welter weight, 47. That's another stupid thing that we do where we have, you have welter weight in boxing, which has existed since the beginning of time. And it's always been 147. Sugar, Atlanta, Tommy Hearns, all those people, Roberto Duran, 147. Our welter weight, 170. Like it doesn't even make any sense. Come up with another name. Yeah. What's a welter weight? You just, it's something somebody made up. Doesn't even make sense. I just think we're like the Americans versus the Europeans. We just want to go against the grain. Like we have inches instead of centimeters. Like what we use in metrics and pounds versus kilos. Like we just, we just said, fuck everything you're doing. We're gonna do everything different. We're just gonna challenge everything that you're doing. There's a little of that too, but I think they just wanted recognizable names when they came up with weight classes. Because remember, there was only two at one point in time. Was it lightweight in, I don't remember. But when Frank Shamrock was fighting in his day, it was like 200. Yeah. He fought at 200. And then there was heavyweight. So yeah, I don't even know. I don't know what those weight classes. I used to watch, but I didn't know shit. I just watched. I think it should just be the number you weigh. It should be fighting the world champion in 170 pounds. That's what it should be. Like wrestling doesn't have names for the weight classes. No. We just have weights. We don't. We don't. We don't have weights. That's what it should be. Like this is a stupid. Fuck is a wealth of weight. Well, the fuck is a straw weight? What's an atom weight? You know, shut up. What's a fly weight? Fuck is very... You know, you don't weigh with a fly weight. Is this stupid? Fly weight's a dumb name. The 125 pound champion of the world. Minimum weight is a ridiculous. It's a ridiculous name. Ridiculous. Nobody wants to be minimum weight. I'd rather fight fat. Minimum weight. I've never even knew that was a thing until just now. Yeah, it's probably tiny little dudes. There's a few dudes that fight in Adam weight in one FC in their kickboxing division that are wild, man. It's incredible to watch. They're so fast. It's like they're defying space and time, you know, and they're super skillful. Yeah, there's the one guy. I saw the Japanese fighter. No, not Japanese fighter. The guy doing more tied the, well, there's a Japanese fighter. The guy in Reisen who fought Apache mix. Oh, yeah, dude. What the fuck was that? I do as a beast. I was like, this guy's been hiding over here the whole time and the world doesn't know who this man is. This guy is a savage. Yeah, he lit Apache on fire. That was incredible. Apparently he's not a striker, but he's competent enough. Yeah. He's like, he exposed like everything, every flow that he has as a stable guy, he took full of engine of it. I was like, dude, this guy's fighting like he's in the matrix right now. There's a bunch of those guys that exist out there in the world now. You know, it's a different world that we live in. The Daggie standing guy I think is. Thank you. There's a lot of them. There's the guy fights in the PFL, Mega Met off, who's fucking nasty, man. And he fights exactly like the guy who I think might be the best striker in the world who's just a Muay Thai guy. Azadula, Iman Gazaliev. I think that's the guy. Yeah, I can't say that. Bro. I can't say that. It's a tough one to say. That guy's nasty. But this guy, Mega Met off, did you see the PFL? I didn't get to watch it last weekend. He fought in the PFL and he fights just like Iman Gazaliev. And they're both from Dagestan. So, guaranteed these guys are training together. That was the one last weekend, right? Uh-huh. Yeah, we had one guy on that card. His name is Levi. He's nasty from Osetia, the caucus regions. Hmm. But he's a nasty striker. There's so many of those guys right now that are coming up that no one knows and their world class. They're elite world class fighters and no one knows who they are. It's kind of crazy. Yeah. It's like the amount of world championship caliber, potential world championship caliber fighters out there never been higher. Imagine talking shit to that guy. So, because he didn't know who he was, he just like. It's a problem out there in the world right now. There's so many guys who could fight as opposed to this. It's just be nice. Just be nice. Don't talk shit. Yeah. Don't talk shit and everything will be OK. Yeah. I mean, how hard is it? So tell me what you think about this weekend. Islam versus in-garing. So, what's fascinating about this matchup is how well in-garing can control the range. I think he's going to be much bigger than Islam in a sense of height, reach advantage. In terms of size, I never thought Ian was the biggest welterweight. I still don't think he is. Well, he can't be. He's so tall. He can't be thick. No. But in a sense, even when you're talking just from a weight standpoint, from what he was walking around that, and forgot what he told me he walked around it, but it wasn't cutting a whole lot of weight. No. I want to say on the top of my head, maybe 10 pounds, which is why he's so healthy. Yeah. He has such energy. So I go, you're cutting just this, and you're going out there and doing this to these guys, who are essentially bigger, heavier guys. But he's got the speed advantage. The thing about Islam, he's such a complete fighter. He could do everything. But this would be the first time he's got a test with a guy who's a long man, and can he get inside, take him down. I don't think he's going to stand up and strike with him. He can. But I just don't think that's the path to victory against the guy like Ian. I don't think he has any plans standing up and striking with him other than as a means to an end. Yeah. And his grappling is so high level. His Islam's grappling right now is at the top of the food chain. I always want to grapple with those guys. Just to see where I'm at, you should go over there. I remember when Al-Fut could be. And Al might have been like the only guy who was able to escape certain positions multiple times, where most guys, they kind of just concede the feed, and they just fold. And we were talking after, he goes, like, I think you would actually do really well grappling with him. And I'm like, probably I'm trying to get me killed right now. You're trying to get me killed by the bear. But whenever he said that, it kind of stuck with me. I'm like, man, just from my own experience, not like an ego thing or anything like that. Just to be cool to see. And I would like for them to put it on me. Just so I can see where I'm at, see if I'm, how my strength measures up with theirs positionally. IQ, knowing when the transition is certain spots, of course, the weight's going to play a bigger advantage. But it's still cool. Because I grapple with bigger guys. I've grappled with wine, and I always tell Chris, like, I wish we were the same size because you would have been my main training partner, bro. You know, because now it would have been cool. Like kind of coming up that way. But obviously, Maraba's my guy, I was my guy, Dennis. Well, having Maraba's a training partner must have been an awesome advantage. Oh, it was the greatest. There's no replicating that. And I see guys outside of, like, they'll watch and they'll think like, he's kind of like all over the place. He's not really going there with it. It'll go, yeah, feels a little different. I thought you've been in there with the guy. It's a whole different piece to watch from the outside. You're like, what is he actually good at? But it's just like the chaos that he brings always constantly challenging your nervous system, reactant his veins, his movement. He's just always giving you something to think about. And I remember GSP talked about that. Just saying, like, you want to use your veins to challenge the nervous system, get guys to react. Because eventually you start to slow. Like, in the beginning, we're quick, twitchy, right? We can react to everything. We're super sharp. As time starts to go on, those reaction times starts to go a little bit slower. You don't react as fast or as quickly. And things that we're landing, we're landing, are now landing. For us talks about that a lot. Yeah. I think that's where George got it. Yes. For us, very smart dude. So very smart dude when it comes to like strategy and understanding like what's going on with fighters or why they're reacting to certain things and what to do and how to counter. It's not a guesswork. It's like a really intelligent, structured system of what to do. Yeah. You have to be like that. I think some guys they train and then they go in fight. Without any goal in mind. And I tried to preach this because I used to coach at longos a lot before running a lot of my own practices, training camps and stuff like that. So I took over the role of, you know what, we're going to add these two MMA classes in. And when we come in, we're going to work on specific things from my fight. And anybody who has a fight, and if I'm not fighting, we're going to focus on you guys. And even if I have a fight, we'll also work in positions that you guys need to work on. And I always try to explain to guys like when you're coming in, you should have a mission. Don't just waste an hour, hour and a half of training just to say I trained. That's cool if you don't have a fight, but you should always be looking for something to get better at, something that you can improve at. When you're sparring, hey, you're not just going into the spar. There should be an intent. Your sparring partner should be looking to give you a look for the fight. And you shouldn't be looking to be a complete asshole and kill your sparring partner because nobody wants to spar with you. They're doing you a favor. And you need the favor from them to get where you want to be to make sure all the things that you're drilling on the pads, drilling what your partner's one on one. And then when you go into sparring, you're putting it together, pull it from 100% pull it down to like 70. This way you can work in real time. I call it guided discovery. I learned this at SUNY Cortland when I was studying to be a PE major. I did guided discovery. Yeah. So you're working on certain things and say we're doing wrestling and you're learning the position. I show you a high crotch. You grab the tricep or you post it. You shoot the high crotch, which means your head is on the outside. And I attack the leg two hands are now locked on the outside leg. My head is on the outside. And I'm in a strong position in my posture street. And now you're learning defense. OK. So from a defensive position, a guy shoots this shot super clean, super perfect. What are my choices that I can make? What are the options? I could turn the head to the inside stuff the head. I could push the head further to the outside and stuff the head to the outside where his head already is. And look to cut the corner. Or I could use my stuff the head and use my wizard or tight ways plugging the hip stuff in the head and rotating my hips. And if he puts me down to the mat, what is my responses from that? So then you're chaining everything together and you kind of got a system of my responses. So I'm not just doing stuff based on instinct. Instinct is good, but you should also have instinctual habits, if that makes sense. stuff that you know will work. And then you fine tune it to know this is my line of defense. If he goes here and I fill him going this way, I go this way. And if he's starting to turn the other way, then I know I need to do this and turn his head the other way, put my pressure or my weight in another position so that I can now create this space so I can escape and get my leg out. And a lot of guys, they're not trained like that. They're going, they're sparring, they're just throwing a bunch of punches. Maybe they're throwing set combos that they head on the pads. But how are you setting it up? Are you fainting moving him towards the cage, looking for the gap where the octagon kind of changes, whereas no longer like a flat surface and it's cutting out an angle where you take away a little real estate and then you're trapping them where there's not a lot of room for them to get back from. But now you can set up your strikes and know where you're trying to go. But if I'm cutting him off and he constantly does this and he maybe juke steps me and goes back the other direction and I'm starting my combination now he's gone. So it's like how do you set up all these things that you know exactly where you want to go? Because he's going to have an option in the fight in real time, but in training is where you should be working out the kinks and understanding this. And I truly feel this is one of the things I done so well early on in my career and why I was teaching class because I felt like the guys needed it. I was taking these guys down at will. There was no resistance. I'm like, I'm good. But how good am I actually because these guys just they just don't know they don't have the information. Okay, let's level them up. Now these guys are leveled up. It makes it harder for me. Now I have to improve what I'm doing and I have to bring a different approach. Okay, he knows how to do this now. So when I do this, I can't just get it easy take down where I'm just going to sit them to his butt. He's now challenging me with the wizard stuff in my head, breaking my posture. Now I'm elongated. I'm on the ground. Maybe I'm on both knees. How do I read just post my hand? Get high it again, attacking the legs, taking them back the other way or coming through the middle through the crotch and finishing a take down like what we call some people call it a Iranian or we call it a all American finish. But there's just so many little nuances and I feel and I'm amazed that people are still training just the train. And I think that's the difference between understanding your timing. You know the same moves. But if I know if I know how to react faster than you, I'm going to win that position or the situation every single time unless you throw caution to the wind and it's just some random wildcard that I just get caught by, which if I'm aware, it should be the chance that that should be very, very low. Well, that's the benefit of teaching the people that you're training with everything you know. That way you must come up with a new solution and you're forcing it. Not ever. What do you hold that? What do you hold that? Not everything. Get close. But that's also world champion mindset versus someone who's just a fighter, who fights and does well and is a good fighter. But there's so many times where I watch guys fight and I watch exchanges and they're waiting towards each other and throwing bombs at each other. And one guy wins and one guy loses. But I'm like, this is not the ultimate way to do this. This is you can do it. You can be a battering ram and a blunt force object and you can get it done. You know, like we've seen so many fights that have just been insane first round wars. And then we're seeing guys that just are slick and they're moving around and switching stances and doing wild shit that you don't expect and overwhelming the other guys nervous system and not getting hit and doing things where you're like, oh my God, that's so sweet. That's so smooth. And those are the guys that are going to excel and those are the guys that are going to really take it to the next level. Yeah. And I think when you're talking about all these guys like the caucus guys, these Daggust Annie guys, these so many guys that are coming up right now that are so fucking high level, like you can't have any flaws in your game anymore. You can't just be a guy who wades at someone and tries to throw bombs and hopes they land. Maybe that works on the regional scene. Maybe that works with training partners that are lower level than you. But you're going to get pieced up if you fight someone who's really good. But there's levels and levels and levels and the levels are changing all the time. The levels are moving up all the time. If you just go back to the ultimate fighter season one, that's 2005. That's not that long ago in regular sports. 2005 boxers look pretty similar to 2026 boxers. Yeah. You know, pretty fucking similar at the world championship level. And I'm a man. There's no comparison. It's nuts. Night and day, night and day. And these guys are getting better all the time. I see guys coming off the contender series. I'm like, okay, this guy looks like a world champion like right now. It's crazy that Ethan Ewing kid, that guy comes out of nowhere. Matrix and he's fighting so smooth and so slick and so intelligent. And the footwork and the fates and the movement and knowing what to do at any given time. And you know, like these guys are just so good now. They're so good. I was bummed out when he got hurt for that fight with a fair. That was a bummer. If I didn't have a tough fight though, but I was curious to see how that one was going to go because in to me is the dark horse and that division right now. Easily. Yeah. Yeah. He's the well maker fight was a big wake up called a people. And then he fought that Brazilian cat and just lit him on fire to one of the few guys back to back. And it's the way he did it too, man. It was so slick. And you realize like there are levels and these guys coming up right now, they're already at a level that's above and beyond world championship level 15 years ago. Yeah. It's crazy. It's really nice. And you have to see. And you know, 20 years ago, you would have said he was the goat. But it was fascinating. It's like from a striking standpoint, you could see that and look at a guy and go, this guy is the real deal. But then you kind of wonder like, well, what happens later in the rounds? If a guy does take him down and how can he adjust to those take downs in terms of a cardio standpoint, lack the gas to build up? Can he turn it around and still be as efficient as effective? Right. So there's so many like variables when it comes to things like that. And when people are game planning and approaching fights, those are the things I like to think about. First round, everyone is dangerous. Everyone is so skilled. But it's like, okay, if I can get out of the first round, what does the fight start to look like? How do I paint the picture? If it goes in this direction, he's able to get off a couple of these things. And I'm beating up a little bit. What are my, what are my fallback defenses to try to turn the tide a little bit and get it back to go where the ball is now back in my court? Well, that was why I was so interested in seeing what happens in the conemigrager max all the way fight, which was crazy. That the result was ridiculous. But take that away. Um, I was interested because I was like, if Connor can't take him out quickly, max hallway does not get tired. He does not get tired. And he's so accustomed to that five round pace. He understands when to hit the gas, when to back off. He knows when to move when to, and he's always moving inside. It's like, you want to talk about getting overwhelmed. Like max hallway overwhelms people with pressure, pace and feints and skill. Yeah. And he's not going anywhere. You guarantee he's going to be fighting in the fourth round, just like he was fighting in the first round. He's not going to fade. And it's, it's worse. It was one of the worst matchups for Connor, if he couldn't take him out of the first round. How else I was hoping we got to see more? I think the world was hoping we have to see anything. We didn't see anything. But it is, it's crazy because he threw that same kick in the backroom. But this time he runs out of me, throws it in lands and it's like, well, he threw that kick when you're hitting a pad is very different than when you're kicking the air. You never throw that kick in the air. You throw that kick jumping in the air. The amount of torque that is on your supporting leg is bananas. You're just hoping and praying that your knee stays together. Look, if you throw a jumping side kick, that's a different thing. You're landing on the ground. You're landing in a linear way. Right. When you're rotating and kicking and flying through the air at the same time and you're opponent adjust. So you're trying to like change the arc in midair. Try to catch him as you circling off. It's the worst kick to jump and throw. So I guess I'm doing that. Would jump around. Jumping roundhouse kicks are great if you're close enough to land them. Yeah. You know, if you're close enough to land them, who is that guy that landed it on Bond theme? No, not on Bond theme on James Vic in Karate Combat. Did you see that? He throws that jumping. Which case is he in guy? Yes. Yes. Uh, Gabriel the turn. What is his name? Alves Rafael Alves. That was gross. It was one of the worst chaos I've ever seen in my life. He's seen one. James Vic's still fighting. He likes fighting I guess. Oh, he's only 37. I'm 37. My bad brother. He's had a lot of chaos. My bad cause unfortunately. And this dude, he hit him with this, this jumping just right before that. Well, he looks like a tank compared him. Well, it's just the height. His speed is crazy. James Vic is tall and very skillful too. But it's just this kick would have knocked him out at any point in his career, any point in his career and any human being. Like this is too much. There's the amount of force that he lands when he lands this kick. When he throws that he throws the jumping roundhouse kick touches him with the right leg and then comes up top with the left and just clean across the chin. They're doing some good stuff at Karate Combat. Yeah, man. Well, Robellis was fighting that right before that, Jimmy. I think I had a little further head. Gold to like right below it before where the Brazilian flag is. Robellis combined fights in Karate Combat was like what? Less than two minutes. I know. He just there it is. There it is. So let's watch that again. Back it up again. So watch how he throws it. Boom. I mean, it is clean. Shin to the jaw. I mean, there's no. Why is he pointing at him? I don't know. He's a ****. Now he's bowing in print. Well, I mean, he realized after it was over how serious it was. So watch this touches him with the right and then the left comes. I mean, it's literally perfect. That probably would have caled him at any point in the time in his career. And when James has been in the Mount of Wars that he's been in and he had his the canvas is the worst. Oh, he could have died. That was one of those ones where he could have died. Because I think he was in the intensive care for quite a while after this fight. Really? Yeah, he was hospital has required a while after this fight. And I think it was pretty pretty serious. That sucks. It was a bad headkick. That was a bad one. It's a rough sport. It's a rough sport. And there's time. There's time. He's fighting. You don't play. There's times where guys get KOed and they're never the same again. You know, like Terry Edam when Edson Barboza hit him with that wheel kick. Yeah. Terry Edam was a real contender before that fight. And we never really saw him after that. They never really achieved those levels again. I don't even fight after that. Maybe once. Maybe. Maybe. I don't know. Not sure. But that fight essentially ended his career because it was so. I mean, and again, that's one of those kicks that the wheel kick us all much torque. Bro, I remember my fight with Marlin and I thought I was going to be one of those guys. I was so like, I don't say paranoid, but nervous concern. Any adjective that you could use to describe it, I was just like, man. After the fight after the fight of getting hit like that again. Yeah. I'm not even getting hit like that again. If I could even take a shot and my, you know, I have my fizzed degree. I couldn't win. Just been a gym teacher. I would have been somersolved pension that would have had health insurance. The whole nine. And I decided to chase a crazy dream thankfully worked out and I'm blessed for this life and all that good stuff. But after that fight, man, to tell you like the concern I had, if I would be able to make another two paychecks. I was like, I'm going to do one more. Whatever happens happens. And if I get knocked out, I'm just done. I gave it a good shot of roll the dice. Thanks for coming. See you later. Thanks for the memories. But thankfully it worked out and I was able to keep on pushing. Remember how I thought I had a spar for like three months? And the next fight I had with a lot of people think you should take even more time off than that. I needed the money and that's the shitty part about this gig. Right. You need the money. You need the money. I'm living in New York at the time. So long hours. Fucking expensive. And I'm subbing as a teacher. I'm coaching, wrestling. And when the training camp came up, I was fighting bread, John's undefeated. Three in on the UFC just came up for a 30 second cast, like slicer submission over Joe Soto. My junior Joe Soto submitted me. Probably I think five times in five minutes. So I'm looking at this guy like this guy is a wizard. You know what I mean? This is my perception of him going into the fight. And I told the guys, and I'm going to spar these last three, four weeks. I'm going to, I'm going to just circle. I'm going to Russell. Like you guys try to hit me. But just know, I don't want to get hit in the head. But try to hit me. I still want to have like my awareness. But the whole, that whole last three, four weeks, everything was just grappling before that, striking hitting pads, cardio. I was like, I'm going to just use my footwork and whatever I could do. And thankfully it worked out. That's time between the Marlon fight and that fight was April, December 9th, 2017, so it was four months. Just about. Yeah. Which was scary. It was scary. And they offered me to fight. I was like, I don't know if I'm supposed to be doing this right now, but I kind of need the money. So well, you needed the money. But if I could give an advice to like Vulcan off skiing, I would have said, first of all, would have said never take a fight with Islam, a catch at one 11 days notice. That's just crazy. Especially when you're not training at all. You just kind of chilling and you take a fight with one of the best pound for pound fighters, not the best on the planet. And you get a head kicked. And then to fight. Iliya just a few months after that is kind of crazy. Yeah. And he was looking good in that first round until Iliya does what he does, traps you against that black line against the cage. And he puts those combinations on you and puts the lights out. And yeah, I agree. He should have taken more time, 100%. He would have been okay with taking more time. You've got to take more time. You have to. You just have to realize that as tough as you are, your body is a machine. And if the machine's broken, it's got to be repaired. And it's going to take time to repair. It's not as simple as like go to the shop. You got a new carburetor. You're good to go. You got to give your body time to heal. And with the head, it's hard because you don't know. Yeah. You don't know what is the wild card. Yeah. It's like you're. And everyone is different. And I kind of wonder if that's something to do with like the way people grow up. If maybe they dropped on their head a couple of times when they were kids. Sure. Football play football in high school. Get KOed a few times doing that. You know, you get KOed a few times doing stupid shit with your friends. And then you get older and you're trying to compete and you realize I can take a shot. Yeah. As much as I thought I could have. And like you see a guy like Diego Lopez and you're like, dude, you got to his, his chin is granite. Bro, it's like, what can you hit him with that can actually put him down. It's crazy. Well, if he continues getting hit, there'll be a time. Well, I remember Chuck Lydell, Chuck Lydell in the early days was bullet proof. He was bullet proof. He was just weighed at guys, bite down his mouthpiece, eat shots of the head and take guys out. And he didn't give a fuck. He did full confidence in his chin and would force guys into these chaotic wars. And then it goes away. And then one day you get hit and it just goes. Well, left hand broken hand from Rich Franklin. That head shot. Well, yeah, he broke Rich's arm. Yeah. And then yeah, and when he had broken hand, he hit him. Is that what he knocked him out with a broken arm? From what I remember, that's what he hit him with that left hand and put him out. And I was like, that was, he was done at that point. Yeah. His chin was done. I mean, after Rampage K, no KOed him, that was kind of, that was the big one. That was an estimate. That was an nasty one. Yeah. I always wanted to be like the mini Rampage, but I was like, but I'm not knocking anybody out. So it's, uh, sorry to do that. Rampage could change. And the wolf. Yeah. Oh, I always wanted to do that. Rampage did it all natural, whereas everybody else was doing juice, especially in pride. You know, he's fighting all juice monsters. Everyone was a juice monster in pride. Yeah. You know, it's different time back then. He still has the craziest slam KO of all time. Of all time. A rono, right? Yep. A rono didn't let go of the triangle. Yeah. And he takes him. It's a different time back then. He still has the craziest slam KO of all time. A rono, right? Yep. A rono didn't let go of the triangle. Yeah. And he takes him over the top of his head like a pillow. And slams him down. Oh my God. That was another one. A rono was never the same again after that fight. What about cyborg? And then knee from MVP? That was the craziest. Fucking dent to his cranium crushed his skull, literally crushed his skull, broke his skull open. So this is gonna sound like a joke. But I feel like what do you do? Plunge it to pull the back. You got to get constructed. You ever see what they did to it? Not all these plates in his head. Yeah, he had all sorts of screws and plates and everything. The pieces head back together again. Because the skull structure has been compromised. What does it do to your brain? Your brain is now squished. Not good. I mean, he said after the fight, I'll be back. But everybody's like, no, you won't. No, that's what it looked like. I mean, that is literally crazy. Canberra. I saw a Muay Thai fight recently online where a guy did that to a dude with an elbow. And it caved his head in. And you see like this giant hole in his forehead where his head's dented in. And the referee's like, stop the fight. He's like, why are you stopping the fight? He's like, bro. You need to see what you look like. You're not seeing what I'm seeing. Yeah, your head's dented. Your head's broken. Like you have a broken head. Yeah. It's amazing how few times that's happened. If you think about it, yeah, this is it. This is it. Look at that. Oh, that might be worse than the other one. It's right up there. If you back it up, you can see the elbow to do lands right there. Boom. That was it. And then he looks at him. He's like, hey. And then the referee gets a look at it. And the referee gets a look at it. As soon as the referee sees it, it almost doesn't even want to hit him again. He's like, fuck. I mean, he's crazy. The referee stops. He's like, hold on a second. Let me get a look at you. It's like, you just stopped down. My friend. Doctor, what's going on here? Tomahawkdom. That was what was so impressive about Zanyukov, Chanko and his... Oh. John Pork? Yeah. What are they calling that? I have no idea. Chanko, they're calling Chanko because that's his town. That's the town we grew up in. Okay. But man, that dude's elbows were so slick. He's slick. Fun to watch. He's slick. His elbows in the clinch and in tight. He's a Muay Thai world champion. And that was his original discipline, which is interesting. When you see these guys who start off as strikers and then they get to Dagestan training room with Kabib and Islam and all those guys, they learn the wrestling, but they start off with just this elite level of striking. Yeah. And now the guy wasn't bad. He gave back some resilience, but... Oh, yeah, man. He dropped him. Remember? Yeah. No, that was his first fight. And the contender series, he got dropped. He's a dangerous guy, man. Super dangerous. Chanko's fucking... He's for real, man. And so high level with his striking. His striking is just so elite, especially those elbows and tight, man. Elbows are nasty. I'm like, Chelsea, I can't let you get close. I can't let you get close. Because now you don't want to do that to me, bro. That's... I ain't trying to look like that. Yeah. I want to continue my acting career. And, you know, I got a whole lot of things I want to do. But it's going to be a little tough if you get a couple of those. Yeah. Well, elbows are... It's kind of funny that your gloves protect your hands, but then you're not going to put your neck or your elbows or knees or your knees or your shins. It's kind of nuts that we have the padded thing. Is the thing that's the least likely to hurt you? If you really think about it, it's a crazy sport. It is the craziest. I love it and hate it sometimes. How much longer you think you're going to do it? You're 37 now. Yeah, you must be 37. You must be thinking how much more am I going to do this for? Yeah. You know, I'm just taking it one fight at a time. I would like to end my career with the UFC. You know, hopefully I get an option that you might not. I don't know. You never know what's going to happen. So when it comes up with a big number. No, not even that. Like you just never know. I know I sometimes piss off the brass from time to time. Do you? Because I've been told this how that I sometimes I don't say the right things. I'm a very honest person. So sometimes I just tell how I really feel about certain things and people, these media outlets, they know what they're doing. They're asking me these questions because they know I'm going to tell them the clickbait clips that they want. Who are you talking about specifically? Which one? The media outlets that fuck with you. All of them. They all try to give you a second. They all of them. They ask these questions. They'll go from fighter pay and I've been in the headlines for fighter pay. many times. It's a legitimate argument. It is. But for some reason when I when I talk about it, I am and maybe because I'm not the crazy guy like a Sean Strickland. Constrictly has talked about it. He's always been he's known as the crazy guy. But when he talks about it, he makes it a very logical understanding bit where I go, how come he's not getting maybe he is. Maybe I just don't know because I don't ask. I'm like for some reason when I say it, I feel like I'm a little bit more screw nice. So what does the UFC get upset at you? Do they say that they're upset at you? You don't have to talk about this if you don't want to. You know, like this is a real issue is going to get in trouble with the. No, I was you're we haven't really seen you are. Look, when Eve Luev and Alexander Hernett when when they fight, yeah, it's just very soon. Fokenowski is defending his title against finally Eve Luev like who that fucking guy has been waiting forever. Yeah, every life ever. So I don't really know who is a clear cut guy for me to face unless his LaRoe Murphy. I was told he was hurt. I think he's booked. I heard LaRoeans got a fight. I heard he was hurt. Oh, really? Yeah. Maybe he had a fight scheduled and it doesn't anymore. Yeah. But I thought he has a fight coming up. Yeah, I was told he was hurt. So he's going to be out for a couple months. I don't know how long. I don't know how serious of an injury. But everybody else's booked and who did he just lose to? LaRoe. Most are. That's right. I thought that fight should have been scored a draw. Did you? With the point deduction should have been scored a draw. What was the point deduction for? I think it was a low blow. But they gave him four rounds. They gave him most of our four rounds. I'd have to watch it again. I didn't think it was a bad decision when I saw it. I was a competitive fight. Most are didn't decide to wrestle him until round the end of round three. And he just goes to show he could have taken him down any time he wanted. I'm sick. I think most of our wanted to show him striking. Because he does have striking. But because of that, he made it more controversial to the overall fan base because he decided to use his wrestling a lot later on in the fight. Yeah. But I think he needed a show that he's not boring in order to get a shot at the title. And now he's got a shot at the title. But to stay in the fight between rounds one and two was still like there's nothing happening. I thought it was pretty good. I thought it was pretty just match. It wasn't just what it was. I think it was. I think it was opening up the loan to shots that I don't think he expected were coming at him because I think he probably anticipated shot take downs, take down temps. Instead, most of our was getting off on him. It's strike. He can. But it's like you. It's like why do it when you're better at grappling? If you can get a hold of him, why do it? Why roll the dice? And people say like a lot of people were upset when Marab beat Sugar Sean. They were saying like that was boring. That was just like, listen, this is the sport we're watching. If a guy like Marab can take you down and give you nuggies for five rounds and you can't do shit and you lose your title, that's how it goes. You can't say that's boring and he should fight differently because Sean's got to come up with the solution. He's got to figure out how to deal with that. Sal's makes fights is about the story. Yep. How'd you do against this guy? It's the democracy versus the end. Same thing. How does he do with this guy? Conor McGregor versus could be Nirmaga medal. Same thing about the storyline. Conor was protected his whole UFC run. Now he's fighting a good high level grappler, probably arguably the best grappler from the top position, clinch position. Ever. Ever. And it's the storyline. Can Conor McGregor overcome this? Can he land a perfect shot? It's what gets you to buy into it. But if you're going to be pissed that the machine is going to come in and your guy can't land the perfect punch, who's fault is that? It's like, but this is why you're watching. You're not tuning in to watch a slaughtering of the lambs. You want to watch a competitive fight. If you just want to watch one side of fights, I don't know. Like what do you want? Yeah. I mean, it was one sided in that he was able to take him down at will. But also the problem was Sean fought that fight with a fucked up hip and really probably should have been fighting. Like he had a tear in his hip. Yeah. But we all have stuff. Of course, I went to the fight with Sean injured coming into the fight. He gets injured during the training camp and then he uses that. I had a busted rib. I go, bro, we all have stuff. But you were in a better position to win this fight than I was coming into the fight. The same thing. When he hurt his hip, I don't know. But then they fought again and it was worse. It was worse. So, well, Morob was like super confident coming in the second fight that he was going to take him down. And then also he had that championship level confidence. Of course, you got level up. Get that level up. Yeah. So it's like it's not not because Sean is not knocking the fans. But it's like, yo, this is the game that we're playing. No one's coming into this. I was talking to the guys that wasted well. They're like, it's fascinating how many of you guys are so beaten up. I'm going down the list of my injuries and everything I got going on. Like I got a MRI for this. Like I got a MRI for this. This hurt and that's been bothered me for two years. This has been still ongoing. And I still go fight and you would never think it. But that's just what it is. Like we got to do it. We got to do it. We're never going to be 100% going into it. 100% going sports guys have fought in world championships with blown out knees and won. You know, I mean, when Alex Pereira beat Erie, Projosca, he had a fucked up knee in the first fight. Yeah. And that's why when you see him get on top of him when he's finishing him, he rolls over like rolls instead of stepping up and standing over. He rolled off of him because his knee was blown out. He was so bored. Yeah. That was crazy. But that was on Yuri. That was such a blunder. Such a blunder. Well, that's Yuri's craziness where it's not good. You know, some of Yuri's craziness is great. Like when he fought Jamal, I felt for him so bad. I did too. Cause I was just like, I was not like saying I wanted him to win, but I felt for him like, damn, bro. You made the biggest mistake that you could have possibly made in a situation like that. It's literally the only thing you can hit you with. He can't, he doesn't have a right leg. His right leg is completely gone, but he can still throw that left hook. You know, that's his best punch. Lightning. I always tell people the way he leads that that he just leaves out that lead hand and he's measuring stiff jab and he's stepping back and he takes that side step pivot, that L step and boom. It's just he's clean with that. That division is on fire right now. How about Navajo stir? I must say what happens with those two guys. Oh, I know, but the same camp. No, I know. He just be below the hole. It's what happens and he stopped him. That was first. I know watching that was extraordinary. I was like, this kid is something. He's something man. That right hand was the distance he covered to land that right hand to and Yann's got a chin made out of iron to take Yann out like that and drop him like that. Very, very, very impressive. He's 43 now. Yeah. So it was also I'm not taking anything away from him, but it's like, I think that's how his global was when he beat him. I think the lower was like 42 when he won the title. He was in his 40s. It's doable. It's doable. It's doable. Yeah, it's not normal. I mean, global was the boogeyman for six years before he could ever get to the UFC. Everybody had talked about global like he was scary, but he was trapped in Brazil. He couldn't visa issues. He couldn't get a visa to come to America and fight. During those six years, he might have been the best light heavyweight on the planet. Yeah, I remember you talk because when he got signed, he got signed pretty, what is like late 20s, maybe 30s? Mm hmm. I think he was in his 30s. Yeah. And I didn't know about until he came over and made that debut and was going to Fabio Maldonado, I think maybe. Mm hmm. But yeah, so sometimes it just goes like that. Even like prairie came over so late, started so late, I should say. And for him to do what he has done in such a short amount of time, he's like unreal. Unreal. Pretty extraordinary. How impressed were you as zero gone though? Very. Very heavy ways can move like that, dude. Zero. And that's the whole thing with the Aspenoff I did, I was saying. I was like, this guy played basketball. It's a different type of athleticism. Quick twitch muscles. Notice how to pivot, fake his jokes. Yeah, it's like plyometrics. Like a giant man plyometrics. Yeah. Yeah. And he's great at just holding the range outside of the eye, folks. Great at holding the range. Also the dude never gets hit. Yeah. Most last time we saw, I mean, think about gone as fighting in the heavyweight division. He's fighting guys like tied to Yvesa. He's fighting, you know, these elite guys, these big heavyweights. And you never see him get cracked. Even against in Gama. I'd say even against in Gama. He didn't get cracked. I mean, that's kind of crazy that he's so good at avoiding getting hit. He's probably like the least hit clean heavyweight in the division. I think that fight with John Jones. May people think less of him than what he actually is. It's just that's how good John Jones is. I'm like, that's how good John Jones is. He can't do that. It's not the same. Especially if John gets a hold of your neck, he's going to finish it. The way he did it, you know, taking him down like that in the first round and guillotine him in phenomenal. But it's just you have to deal with that speed and that movement standing up before you get ever get that to happen. And John figured it out. But I think serial is tightened up his takedown defense considerably since that fight. Yeah. Because I think you realize like this is the big hole in his game. I know he brought in a lot of real big wrestlers. But when it comes to kickboxing, when it comes to Muay Thai, he's so hard to fuck with. And he, that style is different than everybody else's style. He's nasty. Light on his feet. He does a weird thing too from his side. Yeah. Front kick. I've been watching that twisting front kick from the front leg. This is the way he stands. He stands almost like this bladed, but it's like not really bladed, but it is. And it allows him to have that dexterity and the flexibility way he could just look like he's thrown a front kick. He throws it. It's a twisting kick. Yeah. There's a kick in Tagwondo called a twisting kick. And that's what it's like. It's from this position. You throw it out like that with the ball of the foot. You're standing completely sideways and your front leg comes up and it twists and goes like that. And that's what he's doing to the body. He's throwing a twisting front kick to the body. It's nasty. See if he can find it in here. Well, that's his round kick. But it's off of his front leg. He throws it off the front leg and he throws it completely sideways. And when you get to moving, he's gone. And also you might try to like over emphasize those movements and he counters catching you coming in because he's faster than you. And that's what he did to Alex. He caught him with that. He caught him with a jab. I mean, that's what he really rocked him with. It was a right jab. Alex was big. That's huge. It's freaking ass. I was like, yo, this is like distracting bro. You got to fucking, but don't get dunking this fucking block. Blocking my vision of the screen right now. Alex, they moved. Turn it the other way. the worst match up for Alex to step into heavyweight, a guy who is bigger than him naturally moves faster than him and lighter on his feet and is also an elite striker, a world championship caliber striker at a heavyweight level because like, you know, Alex has been 185. He's a thinner guy. And he definitely put on mass to get up to 250, but that's not necessarily where he was naturally. Yeah. Whereas serial God has a natural frame to be a 248. And he's more stationary. The stationary guys never do so well against the guys who can move very well. It's just right. Hard for you to chase him down, track him down to learn the perfect punch. Had a hard time landing his calf cakes, which slows fights down for him and allows him to land that big chama left hook. I don't know, even if they were to have a rematch, I don't know what he would have to work on to make that adjustment. It's just a hard fight for him. It's always going to be a hard fight for him because serial gone. So agile. He's so hard. Yeah. He's never in front of you. Unless you caught him, like maybe through those high kicks right in the beginning, you could have caught him or something like that rocked him. And that would have been a different story. But he didn't. You know, and Cyril's like, he's great at blocking shit too. And if you get to him, his reflexes are excellent. Yeah. And it's just that movement and speed is extraordinary. It would have been very interesting to see what happens if the Aspen all fight didn't end the way it ended. That was a hard breaker. It was a hard breaker. I got a lot of flak for that because people were saying I should have taken inside because I got a foul too. And I'm like, I'm not not taking inside. What I'm saying is the only person that knows how bad he truly like was hurt is going to be Aspen all. Yes. You know, so if he's saying it, I take it at face value. It is what it is. I can't go and say, I'm in your eyeballs. I've seen guys get poked all the time in the continue. Yes, we've seen it all the time. But not all eye pokes are created equal. No. All them three studious fingers up in there. It was not. Yeah, it was bad. Terrible. Terrible. Like I can only take what he says. But again, it's really up to him. Can he have said if he was winning the fight, my pushback was devil's advocate. If he was winning the fight and having his way, would he have said, you know what? I'm going to suck it up. I try to fight through this even though I still can't see. You never know. If he was having, I don't think he should. And I agree for a foul. I think he was, he made 100% the right call because look, he didn't lose that fight. It was a foul. Although controversial, he doesn't get knocked out. He doesn't get head kicked. He doesn't get fought flying in the face. If you can't see out of one of your eyes, hard, there's all sorts of shit that's coming from this direction that you're just not going to see coming. And in wild exchanges where your peripheral would catch it and you would duck under, you're not going to be able to see it. Yeah. And you're going to get rocked. And it's also, you're thinking now, oh my god, I can't see out of one. of my eyes. Fuck that. Yeah. He did the right thing. He did the right thing. And I think, you know, he should have got more support. He should have got more support from everybody for that. From everybody. From everybody. Yeah. I mean, I tried to give him as much support as I could. I think he got fouled and they did the right thing. And I think you got to take one point away every fucking time someone touches an eye. One point every time and they won't do it anymore. It looks like he's doing better now. I'm hoping he gets to compete again this year. He's got two fucking eye surgeries. Remember when you got knocked out by maul and morize, how in the back of your head you're like, oh shit, I can't get hit. How about him? Two eyeball surgeries. And now every time a thing comes towards his eye, he's thinking about his eyes losing his eye. Look at Michael Bisping. He doesn't have an eye. He has one eye that's missing, right? So you got to think that. Am I going to not be, I'm going to look at my kids through one blurry eye for the rest of my life? That's fucked. That's fucked. You know? So for the, being the position that he's in right now is kind of terrible. I want to talk about the Islam fights for this weekend for 330. Can we take a piss break? Yeah, take a piss break. We'll be right back. And we're back. Jamie, pull up that card. The one this weekend. So we take a look at it. Yeah. What do you think about the Ian Gary Islam fight? If you had to predict. They're like on the UFC desk and they put you on the spot. OK. Islam market chef did a really good job neutralizing. JDM boxing. Didn't really give him an opportunity to do anything. He chopped his legs away with the calf cakes. Control them in the clinch. The takedowns were relatively easy. He didn't even really have to set it up with like hands. He kind of just shot and just took him down. I will. Ian Gary now on the other hand, he's done a good job of showing takedown resilience. We saw that with Belamah Ahmed. Is Belamah Ahmed market chef? No, no, he's not. But it definitely showed something. He did a good job with Shah Khat as well. Who's a bigger guy? Was able to defend a bunch of times. I forgot if it was Shah Khat who had his back, but he was able to defend. Shah Khat's the guy who beat him. So Shah Khat is the one loss that he has. And it was the grappling that Shah Khat got him with. But he also blew out Shah Khat's knee. Yeah. Like that's why Shah Khat has had all these surgeries. They had a bleek kick. That kick is so nasty. That's the one thing that I wonder. Like should we not have that? You don't like any of them. You don't really like that one. It's you can't. I mean, you can defend it by not getting hit by it. But the problem is if you get hit by it, like Khalil Roundtree and Modesto's Bukakis, when he went to turn his knee sideways, he stomped that thing, stomped it. And that's a career of change. It could be a career. Ender, Bukasquez came back. But this is two years now, right? Yeah. For Shah Khat, he's been out. Yep. He said multiple surgeries. He had it done and then it blew out again how to get it done again. Yeah. I just don't know the range, the reach of an inch. I think Ian does a great job of using his lateral footwork. My question is not the fastest guy. No. But he is, he's imposing. He knows how to cut you off that South Pole stance. I think causes some problems for a lot of people. He's only lost one. One time to the Adriano Martins with the Hekik knockout, a punch. Was it a punch? Yeah, you got punched. Oh, it was Hekik. Either way, I think Ian's going to have to look to something like that. See if there's maybe some of those old tendencies that that punch was able to land. That was also such a younger version of Islam. I just don't see him making those mistakes again. Yeah, that was a long time ago. How does Ian win? He's going to have to point fight and sit on the outside and hope not to get tired going backwards the whole time. Right. And he got tired doing that against Khalil's practice. So this is a tough one for Gary. Can he get the upset? Of course, it's fighting. We just saw this with Gaychi and Taporia. But I would say Islam has the one shortcut way to win, push him against the cage, take him down. And even if he presses him against the cage, I'm curious to know if, to curious to see if Gary can do damage in the clinch. Whenever I'm in the clinch with somebody, I always tell the guys, look for your knuckles and hit the eyeball. Hit the nose. Hit the soft spots. That's going to make this guy uncomfortable in the clinch. Not looking for his foot sweeps where he's comfortable just resting on you, looking to the set up his take down, his next transition. And I learned this from Brian Caraway, my first pro-laws in the UFC. After being five, you know, we clinch. I take him down. But in the clinch, while I'm going for the single leg, I have his leg up in the ear, he's leaning over my back and he's taking his knuckles and he's just hitting me in the eye. Swole up my whole eye. I was like, what the fuck is he hitting me with? And I go back and I watch the tape and I get to see. and I learn that. So I always like showed like shared these little tricks and stuff with guys when I'm teaching them. So if Gary can land some good damage in those positions, kind of deter it's not a little bit or making them a little bit more sloppy on his finishes, it could cause some chaotic squarembles where he could potentially get to a good position. And maybe we see Islam on his back again, kind of like what happened with Vogue. And when he was there with Vogue, it did not look good. And now of course is round five. So it got to be, it was also a fight where the time was all fucked up and he didn't have as much time to rehydrate. Oh yeah, they did say something. Yeah, it was not, he was compromised in that fight because he didn't have as much time to rehydrate because they're fighting in Australia. And they were trying to fight on US time. This one, that I'm really excited about too. Cause Gillie is so fucking good on the ground. Top position, even off of her back. But Kenzie Dern is great off of her back. The top position too, she's more decorated in terms of like the Jijitsu space. On the feet, she's more reckless. Like she's still in caution to the win cause she doesn't care. She's not afraid to get her pretty face messed up. She's gonna go in there and go after you. She's just attacking. Gillie on the other hand, not as physical on the feet. Not a big puncher, not a big kicker. She sets everything up looking for the takedown or the claims to take you down and get to the back. But when she gets there and she gets you down, she, her ground and pound, it's nasty. The question is, is she gonna be able to do it to a world champion like Mackenzie Dern? To a good position. Like some of those other girls, she gets the back mount or full mount and she's able to land these solid elbows, beat them up in that position. Mackenzie's Jijitsu world champion. Exactly. It's a different world. That's the hard part. It's gonna be interesting. Go to the other, rest their card. Go back to it. Cause I'm interested to see how Abdul Malik recovers from his last fight against him. It was so big. Bulgaria is a monster, dude. That's a guy in the 185 found division. It's a real fucking problem. Yeah. He's a world class striker. He has a victory over Pereira and glory. Yeah, that is, that's the guy. Yeah, one victory. And he got starched in the rematch. But the thing with Malik is he was trying to go for the takedowns but the setups were like, in my opinion, from a rest standpoint. So I may be a little bit unfair with this criticism. But I just didn't think they were that good. And he was also dealing with striking that was like way above and beyond him. Yeah. And that was part of the problem is that in the transitions, like trying to get close to him, you're dealing with the guy was gigantic. He's one of the tall skies in the division. He's so fucking big for 185, so long and so tall. And on top of it, world class striker. And he's coming into his own as an MMA guy. And part of the reason is cause he's down there in Connecticut with Glover and with Alex. And he's doing camps with those guys. So like his grappling is now on point. Much more confident on the feet, much more stable. But before that, I thought Mansur was a real potential world champion. Yes. But it's just so crazy. You can see somebody in one fight and they see him in the next one. And he's just like, all right, it was a bad loss too. It was a bad one. It wasn't good. It was a lot of like, you can find that. Like, like kicks, the jabs. He got beat up. So it was the thing was the amount of damage that he took. Cause he's so tough. The amount of damage he took before they stopped the fight was pretty extraordinary. There was a lot of damage. I was hoping he could get the fight down at least once. Right. But yeah, he couldn't. It was, it was a tough one. This is a lot of guys at 185 that are a fucking problem, man. A lot of guys at 85 that are a real problem. But we need that in those divisions. Cause those divisions have been so thin for so long. Like there's a couple of guys, right? But now you're starting to see more, like even like the low-weight classes, a guy who's unranked like an Ethan Uen, right? And you're like, I'm excited about this division cause I want to see how far he could go. You got a guy like me and so are and I can't say the other guy's name Abdul. No, that's me. So Gary. Oh, Gary. You got these two guys coming out of automobile, go to EA. How about that motherfucker? Yeah. He puts guys into orbit. He fought our guy, Azzidia is the last one. Yeah. That was a tough one. It's a tough one. Yeah. But I mean, Mansur is so tough that he was able to keep this fight going where a lot of guys would have got taken out early. But he's, yeah, the elbows and the clinch, everything. He's just getting destroyed. You see how he's even trapping the wrist and then stepping in with the punches or stepping in with the elbows, clean right hand, elbow? It's just Mansur is so tough. He's so tough. He's just absorbing so much punishment. And finally they stop it. But before he stopped for him. They're gonna say, get out of here. Before the stoppage. I think that was the end of a round. I don't even know if that was the end of the round. Yeah. That wasn't the actual stoppage. So if you keep going in the fight, it gets even worse. I mean, the thing about stand up is when you're dealing with a guy who's a world championship kick boxer and you can't take him down. And he's got really good take down defense and he's got a reach advantage. It's like everything possible that's terrible about what could happen is going on. Oh, that split right hand. Oh my goodness. Oh my God. I'm surprised he didn't just place playing after that. Well, he's so tough, man. But the problem is the durability. And but the toughness is your problem is you get so many holes punched in your card in one fight. And one fight. Whereas if you got hit with one shot, one big shot is bad. You get taken out, but it's not as bad as a prolonged beating over three rounds. I always say, I call him Dings. There are so many Dings you can have in your career. Yeah, this is the final body. His body just couldn't. Is tough. I always say I call him Dings. There are so many Dings you can have in your career. Yeah, this is the final body. His body just couldn't. His top is he is and he's so tough. But the problem is that's a kind of fight where in boxing you wouldn't have if you were a manager and he was your guy, you would not have had him fight him at this stage of his career. No, I don't think this is not a fight for you right now. We've got to really get our striking better. We've got to, there's growth to be had before you fight that guy. But you've got to know that. And I think sometimes fighters, we could be so egotistical that where I could beat anybody. But sometimes it's nice to be like, you know what, I could beat him but just not right now. Let me beat somebody else. We'll get there when we get there. But it takes you. You have seen does not give you that opportunity. The UFC is like, here's the wolves. You can't say no though. You can't. But you might get shell for a long fucking time. You say no. And a lot of guys know that. And they also know some guys have taken advantage of those opportunities. Those short notice, John Jones. Yeah, John Jones got, I mean, what was the fight with Shogun? It was very short notice after he just beat in, oh man, who did he beat everybody? But who did he beat? Rashad Evans had just gotten hurt and then he stepped in and took that one right for the title. Exactly. And that's when him and Rashad were training partners. Yeah. And that's that shows the wildness of John. He's fighting Shogun, who's a legend, who's the light heavyweight champion opens with a flying knee. Yeah. At 22 and beat some down, beats him down and wins the title. He has to be studied. Listen, man, he should be coaching for sure. Definitely should be because of any is now with Gable. Yeah. Gable Steveson is, he's a real fucking problem. But the other thing is this, you can show all the technique in the world. And I always say it comes back down to what do you do when you're in there under those bright lights. And that's the most important thing. And if you can't dial it in, it's a scary place to be because I can't make you confident. You can be as confident as you want when you're talking to me. But only you truly know was like what's really going on between those years. You know, so right. That's where it gets like tricky. It does. It gets very tricky. It gets very tricky and it's complicated. And I mean, there's only so much a mental coach can teach you on how to handle those situations. They can give you some tools. But either, I mean, I think it's something that's born out of your life. You like mental coaches? Excuse me? You like mental coaches? I think there's nothing wrong with tightening up every single aspect of your game. However, I don't think they could fix a leaky boat. Yeah. What do you think? I think it's like you don't like mental coaches. I think it's a chicken armor. I think it's a chicken armor. If I know you have a mental coach, come for that ass. Okay. But what if you found out that Al-Shanjrea Pantoja had a mental coach as savage as that dude is? Good for him. I might be like, okay, he's not fighting me. Right. But you know what I'm saying? That's what I'm saying. But you know what I'm saying? Like imagine if you found out puree yawn had a mental coach. It's cool. But you know what I'm saying? Like if a guy is a leak already and already a dog and you give him just some different things to concentrate on, I don't think there's anything wrong with it. What I think is if you need it, it shows me that there's an issue. And sometimes that issue can never be fixed. There's some guys that when the going gets tough, they find a way out. That's where I'm getting a guy. I agree with you. If you need it, it's not the wrong with it. But I also know that there's a place in there that if I could get the right key to unlock that door, it's gonna be bad. Yeah. It's gonna be bad. You're a ghost. Yeah. I think you're right. I think you're right. And I don't know. I mean, Sean Brady had a mental coach. And you know, there's moments where Sean Brady is a motherfucker. Right? Like the walking Buckley fight. Like holy shit dude. That Leon Edwards. Oh my god. Extraordinary. But then Morales. But the problem is Morales is a fucking light heavyweight. He's huge. Jai Gantic. You want to talk about the one guy that is like the poster boy for cutting weight. It's Morales. He's so big for 170. It's it doesn't even make sense. Yeah. You see him in the octagon. You're like, that's a light heavyweight. Or at the very least, a very big metal weight. No, for sure. He's a big dude. And he's walked away. And it's seen him in Brady in there. I was like, this is not the same weight class. It seemed like it wasn't. He got them. He got a big back. But, but look at him. Look what Brady did to a former world champion in Leon Edwards, who's a good grappler. I mean, Leon took down Camaro, who's one Leon can grapple. He's a good grappler. But there's levels. And Sean Brady's on another level when it comes to that. And what he did to Buckley was just bananas. It looked like he was in a training room. You know, right when he was on top of him, it was like working a heavy bag drill. It was crazy. Yeah. I got no fear whatsoever of getting shook off. It's like, there is not a chance in hell you're getting me off of you. So I'm just going to work my cardio and beat your ass, which is fascinating because he's so strong and explosive. You would think you'd be able to get up 223 pro. He's weighing in for the back up for this fight. So he's cutting weight. This is to 23 is heavyweight. He's a heavyweight. He's down to 193 now. Yeah, but that's probably after training. Yeah. That's not a week. He's really over 200. I guarantee you. No, I see him in prison. He's a big motherfucker. I was making 170. And his power is fucking extraordinary. He has to cut 20 or more pounds this week. Yeah. But listen, he can do it. He's young. He's done it before. He started out. He's a wrestler. That's his original discipline. Really? Yeah. He knows how to cut weight. I didn't know that wrestling in judo, I believe, see, find his Wikipedia. He can grapple, man. That's the thing. You don't see it from him, which is crazy. I see his videos. Yeah. Not the one when he's dressed up as a girl. I think that's a tradition down there. I know. I know. I know. It's a little case. It's a little sus. I think they do. It's a traditional thing they do down there. I don't understand it, but I don't have to do it. I've never seen Cheetos doing judo since he was five years old. Yeah. See, there you go. I want to see him in Islam. His mother was what? Third Dan judo black belt. Yeah. He switched to wrestling when he was 10. Yeah. We're gonna watch out for a little mama. So he's got a background in grappling. That's where he started out. But the thing is, the dude's got lightning in his hands. I want to see him in Islam. I want to see him and call a little protest. That's what I want to see. Fuck. Yes. I want to see his protest is the truth. I just don't want to scare the fuck out of me. I don't want to buy you knocking each other off yet. I understand what you're saying. That's what it gets hard. That's 100% a great world championship fight. And we'll see what happens. Listen, if Islam may retire, I can feel him. I can feel him. He may retire. He's done a lot. He's competed in two different weight classes in one world championships and two different weight classes. If he beats Ian, he's going to be in and says, I've had enough. I'm going to do what could be did and I'm on a coach now. I could see that. And then I could see Morales and protest for the fucking undisputed title. That's the way to go. protest is a fuck out of me, dude. Because to me, he's the scariest. Because he does weird shit in there where he sets you up with stuff. He does that setup where he fakes a punch and dives in with that left knee to the body. Yeah. And his punching power is fucking crazy, man. All his hands are down here. Hands only and having fun. Having fun. Relaxing. Like when JDM took him down. He's like, why are we wrestling my friend? People don't want to see wrestling? Come on, let me up. But JDM's the box. I thought it was going to be more competitive. JDM's pretty complete. JDM supposedly in the Islam fight had a really bad back. It was pretty fucked up. And really struggled with wrestling getting ready for that fight. That's the word. And even if he didn't, there's levels. And Islam's level is the highest level. He's the highest level. When it comes to grappling, there's no one higher in that division than Islam. His fucking, his squeeze is extraordinary. So I want to train with those guys. Yeah. Give me a week. One, two weeks and forget. Send the the daggers that two years for a good. Now, be good with that. Would you want to go down there and train with those guys? I would go down for a bit. Why don't you go down? I got this. I got the cigars. I got my training partners. I understand. But the time is of the essence is not much time left. If you want to find out, you have to be now. I know. You can't go down there when you're 40. Or maybe I'm like Mighty Mouse when I'm retired. I go train everywhere. Or George. George St. Pierre does that. He's down here all the time. I'm training with Gordon Ryan. Yeah, that'd be fun. You know, but George is like a real martial artist. You know what I mean? Like never got out of shape. He's a man. He's the man. And he's so cool. He was, he, you know, he plays chess at a really high level. I play chess. You play chess, do you play chess? I play chess. Are you good? I'm out of 1,400. I'm out of 1,350 to 14,20,20, is that good? It's supposed to be good. Decent for like, I'm not like a grandmaster, which is like 2,500 or some shit. Or 3,500. How often do you play every day? Really? Every day. I play five minigames because it's similar to like a fight. Like you got to know and make your strategies, make your attacks. Sometimes they play 10 minigames. I'm like, I'm too busy to play 10 minigames. I got to where did you learn? I started playing after COVID during COVID when Queens Gambit came out. I used to think chess was like, oh, that's a gay thing. This is like, so stupid. Play check is like a man. And like, oh, you played checkers like a man is dumbest thing ever. And then I realized really quick. I was like, oh, this is, this is some high level shit. This is not for stupid people. This is for intellect. Like you have to understand what you're actually doing. It's strategizing. Setting people up. Kind of like a fight. It's a fascinating game. George was playing James McCann, James McCann's hilarious comedian from Australia. And Georgia and James is very smart and really good chess player. And George and him were going to war in the green room of the mothership. And we were all like, oh shit. Yeah. Yeah. They had a board. Yeah. Guys playing at the mothership all the time, Brian Simpson and Tony Hinchla have played all the time. Okay. Yeah. They get serious about chess. Chances accepted. Yeah, man. I don't play, but I'm scared. I'm scared to play. Yeah. Yeah. It's a big thing. That's the problem. It's because then you want to, you want to know the openings. You want to know the strategies. You want to know, okay, if I do this sacrifice and there's so many. Now, did you learn by reading books? Did you learn by watching videos? How'd you learn? I download the app during COVID and that was it. I was hooked. And so how did you learn how to move? The game, so the game you could start like begin a level of tells you what pieces like does what like the pawn code, only go for it. Could only capture sideways the night can only do like this L shape thing forward backwards. So you just learn from the app. Yeah. Oh, wow. And then I started watching videos. Then I was watching hour long videos tutorials. I was like, all right, that hooks are in. But we had Magnus Carlson on the podcast and Tony sat in with it because you know, Tony plays. And it was like watching a guy and talking, watching his mind move and just talking to him about how he does it and how he strategizes and you know, he's the greatest of all time. Yeah. So having him like explain the game to you. You just go, whoa. There's just so many, there's so many moves. There's so complex. There's so much going on. There's so many theories. Steps in advance. You're playing. It's cool. Yeah. It's cool. But it's something you could play forever too. Yeah. Regardless of your physical ability, you know, you don't have to ever worry about getting out of shape to play chess. Yeah. I want to, I have some of my friends at this time. And that's where they learned that they learned how to play. And we played from time to time. But then I come to find out like, they were really good at the time, because I wasn't really good. I thought it was good, but I really wasn't. And it really quickly, I realized, oh, these guys really, they're like that good. They're like, they're like, they're level. You know, so it's very intellectual game. That's why I really, really enjoy it. When I was playing pool in New York, there was this kid who was a young player who like when he was really young, he was playing tournaments all over the place. He was like, really good. And there was a dude who got out of prison and learned how to play in his head in prison, because they didn't have a board. And so this kid and this old dude were sitting there playing chess in their head. And they would call out the moves. And they had the, the whole board mapped. I was fascinated. I was like, this is crazy. That's really hard to do. Yeah. And you also have to agree where the pieces are. Yeah. You know what I mean? I'm not that good. You got to rely and, you know, this one guy had played so many times in prison in his head that he could keep track of the entire board. And this kid was a wizard at it and watched these two guys call out moves and just sit sitting there staring at each other. I tried to figure out who's winning. I'm like, you guys are playing an invisible board. This is crazy. Yeah. That's next level. That was my first introduction to chess. I was like, this is nuts, man. You want to try this over? Sure. I'll try it. I still have some of this left though. It's water now. Yeah. I know it is. I'll go. I still chill too. So I like this one. Chilled. You do have to do like a green tee shot. What's a green tee shot? It's like with bourbon or whiskey. It's like a little sump tee. Yeah. They call it green tee. You see a lot of the girls they drink at the barns and stuff. So we did this with like a, we call it silver tee. It's a silver room. What is rum made with? Sugar cane, sugar cane, or molasses. I think the other ones, agriculture. But no matter where people are in the world, they find a way to get fucked up. Yeah. From the Pirates of the Caribbean. Is that what's wrong? No, no. But that's what the Pirates of the Drake. Why did, why are pirates? Why were they so into rum? I said I couldn't tell you. I, I, I, I don't know. That's like rum is like a associate. They probably learn from the Caribbean. Right. That's where it originated. Right. Yeah. You get it from a sugar cane plants in the whole distillation process. This is like pasta, pasta on calm still for both of these. It's just a Jamaican blend. Like some of them are mostly pirates did drink rum, but it's stereotyping. It's exaggerated. It's for plexus. During much of the 1600s, cur, Caribbean pirates often drank wine and brandy more commonly. Rum became far more available and popular in the early 1700s as Caribbean sugar production expanded. That makes sense. Yoho and a bottle of rum. You know what? I never understood. It's like, we, we know the big players in the rum market like Bacardi, Captain Morgan's Malibu. But when we go on vacation, we go to the Caribbean, we drink all the different rounds from, from the islands. And I always tell people like you have such a great time drinking rum. Like why don't we bring that here to that, to our culture and, and make it more of a inclusive thing versus just only when I go on vacation. That's the only time it's really associated. And I go, I want to change that, that narrative and let people, rum is for year round. You could have sipping rum. You could have for Vegas pool parties. You could have it with a cigar. Like there's so many different ways you can enjoy it. It's, it's not just for vacation time. It's, for me, I want this to be something that makes you feel like you're back on the island. And we want to make sure this was 100% Jamaican rum. Didn't want to piss off my people when you make it because that's the one thing when we're doing this. So I went through the whole process like the branding, the labeling, my money invested in it. So it was like actually my company. But with that said, one of the things I spoke to so, some of the guys at the, at the distilleries, the one we went to mainly was worthy park. And they were saying the main thing you don't want to do is call something Jamaican rum if it's not 100% Jamaican. I was like, I had a feeling, but I want to make sure. So we didn't toe that line and piss anybody off. So it's been, it's been a fun project and we've been having a good time just getting some bigger distribute, uh, distributed and stuff. We should have kept one in California soon. My guy Kevin Folkler from King seafood. He has a bunch of restaurants down in Cali and vey his, he brought us in. But he's a long island guy. He heard me talking about it on the aerial show and reached out and I thought it was like a prank email. I was like, let me just see where it goes and it turns into something. I was like, Oh, this is actually a legit guy actually had a legit business and everything. And it's been cool. So this has been fun. It's my passion project. Well, it's a smart thing to do to prepare for your retirement too. They have a real legitimate business going like as you're still fighting. Yeah, it's not just my name on a label, like trying to do a quick money grab or anything like that. So that's awesome. So where are you right now in terms of like your next fight? Are you in a holding pattern? Yeah, everyone's got a fight. La Rosa, the only guy who would make the most sense in my opinion. Um, but like I said, I heard he was hurt. I think Diego Lopez is supposed to have somebody he's fighting lightweight now. That's what I heard. I heard Diego was moving up, which makes sense because he's big. He's big. He's big. He's big. And after he beats Steve Garcia, which was a crazy fight, I got my thoughts on that. What are you thoughts on that? Think about it. Why you lighting that's a car. Paul. So cover that ass. I'm coming on that ass. No, I'm coming for that. I still remember that. I still get the messages till this day. Well, it's the funniest thing I was like, yeah, you're just got done with a fight. What are you going to do? My adrenaline was through the roof. I'm on cloud nine. I just submitted the boogeyman of the division. Um, even back then, my managers, I heard talk that they thought he was going to be the first champ for their management company. And I took that as I as Michael Jordan would say, I took that shit personal, you know, so, right. And I'm so glad I proved the point. And, um, yeah, I was just holding another level. But yeah, LaRona's out, um, Garcia just lost. Our knowledge had a great fight with cost, uh, uh, he lost to G. So before that, uh, most are invoke. We know that I fought most already. And Gene Silver's got a fight too now, right? He's supposed to be fighting a year. That's at least those, those are rumors. I saw circle. That's right. That's an interesting fight. That'd be fun. Yeah, here is always a wild card. Yeah, that dude can kick. I was going to say his kicks. This is a guy I don't want to fight is that motherfucker because I know what the kicks do. And I'm like, I don't want to be on the receiving end of that. His kicks are crazy. Baseball basket swing at your head. And he's so decks. He's got so much dexterity. Like he can whip those kicks around from anywhere. He's so light on his feet, man. Those kicks are extraordinary. Yeah, I hear someone he's one of the best kickers in the sport. 100% 100%. People think I have like a kicking background. Like no, I just watch a lot of VHS tapes when I was a kid and played white tiger, white lion and all that stuff with my brothers growing up. Because I learned how to kick. Basically we just really see what we did on the on the TV and just start imitating in and we have these battles. Right. I'm a family of 20. So I got a huge family. Wow. That's crazy. That's huge. Yeah. All the boys. We went to war with each other. And you just learned from watching movies. We learned from watching movies. We didn't we didn't do anything traditional like no martial arts traditional background. So when did you first like get like someone teach you technically how to kick? I forget the guy's name. But when I was at Team Bomb Squad in New York when I was in college and I was just starting off as an amateur in an early pro. We had this Muay Thai guy come up. Stone something I want to say. But that's a first he was working with John Jones. He was the first guy like showing John the elbows, the knees and stuff. And that's where I first first started learning how to do like traditional Muay Thai kicks. I worked with this other guy named Primo Bellarose. He was really good for me to work with. Irish guy had a ton of Muay Thai fights. And then when I came along island, I didn't really have like a I still don't even have like a set Muay Thai instructor or anything like that. I just kind of know what I know from back then. And I kind of just blend it in where it makes sense. I know you're training Vegas sometimes too. I've seen you at school. I live there. You live there now 100%. Yeah. Wow. What made you decide to do that? And my home's always going to be in New York. But I live in Vegas now. It's the fight capital of the world. Business for me over there. It's doing really, really well. And is it because you get more training partners, more coaching or more coaching? Are you still a syndicate? No, I was more. I was a syndicate. Right. I would go to syndicate. That's why I saw you training. Yeah. I would go down there to help them out for his fights. I started at XC. That's why I trained with first with Nick Sick. The training times were a little bit odd for me. It was like 330 pro classes and stuff like that. But I think this sport's still kind of backwards. People doing all these classes. I think in the beginning is good. But I think eventually you have to get to that one on one. Elia Taporia. I don't Mallee. I hadn't received you at a mighty the way these guys are doing it. Even tailored structure training camps. Like a boxing camp. Right. Right. And even when I was back home in New York, that's basically how we essentially ran it. I was running all the stuff that we were doing. And then, you know, rain, those guys will come down and for sparring. And I go to Sarah's for BJJ working in a lot with Jason. Jason Rao who's got his own school now too. I don't know if you know him, but he's he's like the boogeyman. Everyone talks about it in the training room. But for some reason in competition, he's just never really showed what he could truly do. But he's so talented. Walk you through everything and explain everything at a high level. But yeah, that's kind of how I ran everything. But it's centered focus. And I felt like that's the best our gym was on a run where everyone was killing the game. So is it also because marobs and Vegas that you wanted to go to Vegas? I went, I moved from before him really. And then he moved in and he found a house right next to me. Oh, that's a man. That's a man. Literally like across the street from each other. Oh, that's amazing. That's pretty cool. That's that's actually great. And where are you training? What Jimmy train out there? The cue? I don't know that place. It's a brand new before. It's kind of like no meds land. We're training most of the classes at the PI, but you can't charge anybody, right? You're using someone else's facility. So you can't be running a class in on top of that charging people and brand. So that whole thing. So my coach Mateus is eventually able to find a place and now just about all the the undergraduate graduates, most of them are just about all assigned to the UFC now. So we have a we have D. Oni Barboza. We have John Paul, Lambo Sune. I can never say his name. John Paul. I just come JP. John Powell, I think he's supposed to be getting signed. Shane Collins just got signed. He had that debut against Atari, the Georgian, which was also a friend of mine who was kind of stuck watching that fight because I was like, I don't want to see nobody. I don't see nobody lose. Ozzie Diaz. And I think Morob is now going to be shifting over to doing most of his care. He's still going to be working with syndicate, but he's going to be doing most of his camp with us. And there's a few of the guys, I'm sorry if I'm missing some other people don't don't be mad at me. I'm sorry. I'm just a man. No worries. And so you have Mateus, not Mateus from London. No. What's Mateus' last name? Nakashay Nakashie. He's from Novu and Yael. He grew up with Aldon, those guys, Hennon Barrow, Johnny DeWardo. He's like, bro, you fight home my Brazilian friends. You beat all my coaches. Because I beat Johnny DeWardo. I fought Hennon Barrow, I beat him. And he's like, bro, I remember I was there and you beat my coach. I was like, fuck it. I'm sorry. But it's a good gym. You know what it is? It's a lot of the drills that we do even in the classes. It's practical. We're not doing eight, 10 punch combinations. We're doing real life practical stuff scenarios that happens in the fight. So I don't mind doing the classes with this, but I also like to do my one on ones afterwards, especially when it's fight specific that we need to work on. I think they do a good job. Now you were saying you had thoughts on the Steve Garcia. Oh, low pass fight. Again, another pause. You like went up for my boys. Yeah. One, 45. Yeah, Steve Ford. I always says Steve is a dark horse of the division. He looks so good and early going. If you watch some of his other fights, the one fight, the few fights he lost where he was knocked out was him just being more reckless than he probably should have been. Big frame for the weight class has reaches fucking stupid crazy long, crazy kicks. When he gets you on the ground, his ground of pound is ferocious, like almost reckless to a point, right? And then he's fighting a super smart fight with Diego Lopez. Diego Lopez now comes out for around two. He flips the switch. It says, fuck this technical shit and just pulls him into a barn fight. And man, he clipped them. And he's been knocked out before, right? So if there's any away a guy who has a Greenwich in who could rely on it is a guy like Diego Lopez. And I even said I saw Diego Lopez at the PI and I told him, it was like congrats on the fight. So we had a little, little beef, but it was, it was more so about who should have gotten the title shot. I thought he was gifted a title shot. Okay, cool. The second one you mean? The first one. The first one. I thought it should have been most sorry. The second one was ridiculous. The second one was ridiculous. The second one was ridiculous. It didn't make any sense. But congrats to him. Do you think they gave him the second one as a gift because he's, he fought short notice? Possibly. Yeah. It kind of seems like it. This one don't like but my, my whole thing is that's why we kind of bumped heads. We did train together one time. We were friendly corduro in the whole nine and that kind of set a little riff in the relationship a little bit. We both fought at UC 300. We took a bat, a picture in the back. But that's, that's what I said. I was like, I always speak my mind on on things. Sometimes it gets me in trouble and it turns to a whole thing with his manager and myself and Twitter beef and all this whole thing. And I thought the fight should have went to Mozart just being fair based on merits should have gotten it tied up the division, the division, the fights that probably should have been different directions, right? But I thought I told him congratulations. Before the smart fight, you pulled him into your solid fight. And that's how he got the job done. If he fought him on a technical standpoint like that, I think Diego would have probably ran away with it. Not Diego Garcia. Garcia. Well, he just unfortunately went in when, when Lopez start chasing after him, he engaged in that kind of way. Yeah. And that's what he does. I'm like, if I'm fighting Diego, I'm not doing that shit. Yeah. I'm sure I could take a punch. But that guy's got mitts. There's one and he knows he could rely on his chin. And he's probably looking at me like, I don't think this guy can knock me out. So I'm going to risk it, right? So square jaw, dude, you have to understand what you're getting into. And that's what I was saying before about like somebody's got you have to understand myself. When you look at Diego, yeah, that's good. Diego looks like he's designed to take a shot. Yeah. Like one of the Mark Hunt type tins, you know, designed to take a shot. So that's why I go like if I were to fight him, like I know how I would approach the fight. Obviously the path of the least resistance for me is always going to be the ground, but he's, he's good on the ground. Very good. He almost got evil who have remember the knee bar, the triangle arm bar. Yeah, you could make an argument that he could have won that fight because he was closer to finishing multiple times. And those should count. Those submission attempts, close submission attempts should count in a big way. And just because a guy got out of it, doesn't mean he was almost dead. Like that's, that means a lot. I mean, just as much as rocking a guy, it should, it should. But just that's a bad aspect of judges because it's very difficult to get to a position like that where you're almost submitting a guy multiple times. Yeah, like those, those are like very close. And if you were looking at that in terms of a jiu-jitsu perspective, like, yeah, he's got the advantage. 100%. 100%. So that's why that would be a tough fight for me. But it's the, I want to fight the biggest names. I want to, Diego's moved up. So Diego's 55 now, yeah, from what I understand, which makes sense because he's fucking big. He was probably a real struggle for that dude to get down to 45. Yeah, a real problem. Yeah. But 55 is such a fucking lion's. What did you think of the Toporia Gaiji fight? I thought it was amazing, man. Like, for Gaiji to come out, it kind of remind me of the Tony Ferguson. 55 is such a fucking line to do what did you think of the toporia gagie fight i thought was amazing man like for gait you to come out it kind of remind me of the tony fergus and fight right the boogeyman. Did what he need to do had a perfect game plan and what gait she said was the most spot on thing. I was told to one of my friends they said um. They like gait you in the podcast but they were like I thought he came up a little like a little cocky or arrogant i was like as he fucking should. He's a world what's trying to shit out him again no chance to win the fight if anyone relates to that is me i understand exactly where he's coming from. Fuck that fucking talk of shit because of if the other guy won. Best believe he would have been his white rose like he said he was going to do he's had beef with his dad. Like there's a lot of built up animosity whether it was fake whatever it was there. So let him have his time in the sun or so but with the fight i thought he he the thing he said that made the most sense to me that resonated. It was he changed people's perception of the fighter where before people were kind of going in their hesitance scared and they kind of knew what they were walking into and it was going to be a bad night. And going in there doing that to fergus and chains fergus and his career going in there doing this to to pour you can to pour you bounce back and be the same guy and have that same aura same persona that people are going to step in the octagon with them and be. Hello hesitant to want to go in there with him because of what he's done in the past but then also knowing that. Oh just like us may he put his fucking pants on the same way we do one leg at a time unless he could jump and both all the same time. I think there's a physics element to it too the reality of gachi and taporia is that taporia is much smaller. Yeah he's a much smaller person look he's got death in his hands death and a lot of people would have folded in that. Second round but gachi is so fucking durable he's so and you can't make him quit it's not he's not going to quit you might beat him he's been beat before but it's not because he doesn't believe in himself and it's not because he can't endure it's because he gets caught. You know and you think about the way elia put it on him in that second round he emptied the gas tank empty the gas tank and gachi was still there. And that's the problem as you cannot empty the gas tank on that guy. I think he tried he got ahead of himself too. I felt like he was trying to put an excavation point bow tie ribbon on the finish where he could have submitted him or maybe just go for the tkl but instead he went for the could be like. Mounted triangle that he could be hit on gachi and he was in the same position was going for the same sequence and I go brother. This is either going to be really dope or is going to be the reason you lose and he lost the position in case you get back up and man just everything he did in the approach if they had a rematch maybe the fight goes different. Maybe to pour it if he does he takes him down and does what he's also really good at and some in some. Or maybe he's more patient with his attack. I'm going to head more. Justin empty the gas tank in the second round when he has him hurt. It was Justin's attitude so crazy too. Like when he got back to the corner is like good body shot. He's like that. Help like congratulating him. I'm hitting him with a good liver shot. Yeah. Yeah. And he man he the way he hit him I was like the fact that he didn't just go down and curl up in a ball and say, all right. I'm just going to take my paycheck and go home. Nope. But it was his last chance at 37 to be a world champion and he did it and he did it in the White House, which is crazy. So you're saying this chance? Does it say in his chance 37? He's saying this is closer to the chance. You already pulled it off before you 100% could be a world champion at 45. You know it. That would be the sneeze. The rela ending for my career. Yeah. I can't even put it into words like what that would feel like. Like I get like goosebumps even like thinking and talking about it because it's, well, you better smarter than you've ever been before. Yeah. All your experience. This is a lot of fights. Great example that you're at a, you know, world championship level at 45 for sure. Yeah. 100%. It's, it's a matter of whether or not you got that shot. And I think they should hopefully, let's say I don't get booked because there's not a lot of options. But let's say they have their fight. Hopefully, Sonabodabi sooner rather than later. I think that's when it's supposed to be, right? Yeah. That's what I've heard. And hopefully I'm the next guy because then it's okay to wait. I thought I didn't, you know, I rather stay active, stay busy, um, make money and the whole nine because that's, that's, that's ultimately what it comes down to. So they haven't talked to you about any potential fights or offered you anything. They floated names. Um, picos now book was allowed. Oh, yes. Interesting. There's the valetos, but with valetos, that's going so far back again for me. It's like, it's not a fight that makes a ton of sense, but whatever these guys want to do, but I've never said no, maybe that's a problem. Um, but ideally you'd like to fight for the title. I, I, ideally I would like to fight for the title next. And I think that makes sense, especially you as a former world champion in Phantom weight. It makes sense. Especially a vocal wins. Yeah. It's like, that's the fight. This is a big fight you can make two OGs of their weight classes. Everything I've done at the Ben weight division set the records. Why not? You know, so well, I mean, he after LaRone knocked out Pico, he was saying, I'll see you next. And we thought that was going to be the case. And it changed. Yeah. So hopefully, hopefully it changes, but it's not LaRone loses to Eve, Luv. And you know, then the whole thing is just upside down now. Cause LaRone after he knocked out Pico looked like the man. Yeah. I mean, it wasn't looking like the man before that, but well, Pico's bad mother fuck. Yeah. He didn't get like no fucks. I was like, dude, you got to slow down. He's so reckless. I mean, it makes him so exciting, but listen, he adjusted in the pitbull fight. Yeah. In perfect way. I mean, he looked like world class in the pit, in the pitbull fight. That left hook he has is beautiful. It's nasty. Oh, it's beautiful. It's perfect. Like they should study it. They should teach that left hook. The Aaron Pico left hook, him and Ilia, Ilia's left hook is fucking phenomenal. That left hook to the body. Ilia just does such a good job. Once he gets going and he hits the slip and he's just like, big, big, big, big. It's almost like Connor asked the way he just lines up his shots of vintage Connor, vintage Connor, like Eddie Alvarez Connor. Oh my God. That was the matrix. Who's it? They did a side by side, Euro's Medditch with D. Rock. Yeah. And it was a problem. I was like, there's no way this is like the same exact combination. Clothes, except for the knee. Yeah. Yeah. Euro's Medditch look good. Bad. He's another motherfucker. He's another motherfucker. And another guy who was cutting too much weight at 55. Yeah. Yeah. At 70. That's perfect for him because he's big, man. He's so tall. I think old first rounds too. Uh huh. Just starting guys. Serby is a wild place too, man. They're wild people. Brother. Brother. It was hostile. They were nice to me, but my Albanian friends. Oh, I'm sure. Because there's still a lot of history that wasn't too long ago. And I always tell my friends that like, you know, we are blessed to be in this country because the shit we bitch about and complain about. These are luxuries, liberties and freedoms that a lot of these countries do not have. Right. And only takes us a short trip overseas and you'll see, hey, I can't wait to go back home and I'll kiss the ground. Hey, perfect, but we got a lot. You know, you ever seen those Serbian basketball games? I heard about it. I didn't get to see them though. I heard they were talking about, I think we were supposed to go to one or something. like war, like the chance in the audience. It's crazy. The flares and everything. Well, it's the chance. It's when they're chanting. You're like, Jesus, it's like daunting. It's it's very different than anything you ever seen America. Yeah. It's like the first of all, they're national privately. Give me some volume on this. Yeah, the flares, bro. So we're being basketball. Yeah, they're lighting that place. How far? I mean, it might as well be a ride. Now this actually basketball. Like, yeah, we know it. Bro, basketball. Not Daggis, Dang, he's staying. No, no, no. Exactly. The Daggis daddy's, that's crazy. Like listen to the crowd. They get into it. Look at that. Look, they need. I know. Oh, it's like war. I mean, the energy. Three. Wow. It's the energy is like the energy in American NBA game times 10. Shall the next. It's crazy. It's crazy how much. Like look at all the movement and the crowd. I mean, these people are active. I mean, it's kind of nuts. Yeah, we don't. That's the one unfortunate thing. I feel like our sports isn't as like our fan base is besides New Yorkers who will beat you up for being the rival team in the play of finals. We're in the wrong jersey, but I take that shit off. We don't really get like, we don't. Not go right. Yeah, that's like, well, those people have been the war pretty different. Yeah. So different. Yeah. Yeah. But it makes you appreciate. That's what I thought. Like I go back to like it makes me appreciate like what we have here. And the fact that we can achieve basically whatever it is that we want to, it's going to be not easy, but we can. Yes. We can try. We have the option to try anything. Yeah. I mean, this is literally the land of opportunity. But when you see people that come from Serbia, we see people that come from Dagestan, we see people that come from these like war, taunt, Chechnya, they're different because their, their childhood was different. Like different mentality. Yeah. It's a different mentality. It's a warrior mentality. It's very different. Yeah. Like I've seen it, I've learned a little bit from a Rob and going to Georgia, learn the history about them and Russia and the whole the whole. The war and everything and the political side of things and then going to Albania, going to Kosov and then going to Serbia and and and seeing how it like. The Serbians are coming up to my Albanian friends introducing themselves, basically, we're asking the my friends where they're from. And then just straight up to saying Kosov is Serbia as an introduction. I would go, are we just trying to start a fight right now? Like I don't understand. Can we just be like, can we just be cool? You're wearing your country? We just accept one another for what it is. We're here for the fights. We're not here to fight. Just just have. Oh, before I forget this. So we were at a we're after one of the the nice. I think we went to one of the the clubs on the water and we go out to this food spot to go get food. It's called good food or whatever. And we're there. We're with some of the staff, the UFC staff. We're hanging out. These guys always great. They were having a good time. Couple fighters. And I guess one of the guys came over and was talking to one of our friends and he goes to him. Our friend looks straight up. Dardinian like he looks like a straight up, Illyrian bloodline like he looks straight up. I'll be in it. And he asked him where he's from. He tells me, oh, I'm I'm I'm opening. I'm from. I think he says from Khasov and they start talking. But then sure enough, the guy I guess starts reaching into his pocket. And he says whatever he says, they don't speak Serbian. Different language. And we have a Serbian friend with us. And he translates. He translates for them. And he tells them he says, if you guys don't clear out in 10 minutes, I'm going to blow this place up. Brother, what? I'm taking a piss break around the corner outside somewhere. Cause I'm like, be drinking on that. I got to find somewhere to go. I come back and they're explaining this to me. So we start telling the girls, he says when the guy starts going down the steps, he's like trying to talk to the guy. He was taking a step back. He says he starts sweating profusely. He's got his hand in his back pocket and he moves it to the front. And he's just like waving, whatever, saying whatever he's saying in Serbian, telling everybody they, they better leave. And he said he thought it was a gun. And then he asked our Serbian friend, he said, no, it was a grenade. I was like, what? He's just casually walking around with a fucking grenade. Are you kidding me? And just because they were Albanian. Brother, this is, this is life for these guys. It's, and I know people are going to be, they're going to criticize. We're not all like, of course, not everyone is like that. But there's still some crazy people out there that still have this pent up resentment and anger for everything because of the separation of the lands and all this. But this, it's almost like the Israel Palestine thing. It's, all the lands get divided from years ago. And then you did this to me, but then you did this to me first. But then you did this to me back then. And I'm like, what are we going to go back to, to BC? Like what the fuck are we talking about? Can we draw a line in the sand and go, okay, this is where we all agree that this is where it should be and just make everybody happy. So, or somewhat happy so that we can go on with our lives in peace. You know what I mean? It's just the problem is the war is so recent for them. Yeah. I was so, I was so like broken up about it comes just like, Joe, I did not know it was like this man. This is like, because you're from this country and this guy had a pleasant conversation with you. He's gonna, he's gonna fucking do me. He pulled out of fucking grenades and he's going, I'm like, no, it's crazy. But yeah, don't take any fights over there. That's Albanian. God bless America. Well Dennis is Albanian. That's crazy. And the chance he was getting, basically what they told me to translate to was kill Albanians. And I'm laughing because I don't understand everything. Anything. I'm just laughing because I'm like, yo, this is sick. You're in a main event. This was like me, Fai no Melley in a main event. The crowd was packed. They could not wait for Dennis to make that. Booing, you had chance, because so of a Serbia, because so of a Serbia, and unfortunately, but I told Dennis it was like, you handled it well. Like, you know, even in hostile territory, you came in like a champ. You didn't piss anybody off. You were just doing what you normally do. You do, you go every fight. You're not looking to provoke anybody. And it was nice to see you. Even after the fight, whatever, the fucked up stoppage. He was, he got a better reception on the way out. There was still some, like angry fans like, well luckily he didn't win. I was like, bro, you had one this fight here. I don't know. Man, we haven't run. They might have blew up the hotel. Oh my God. I mean, imagine you fight Euro's met it over there and you beat him. Bro, I don't know if I'm supposed to say this, but his dad was told when he got to, I guess the hotel that he wasn't welcome here. He had to go all the way back to Albania. Really? He drove all the way down and had to drive all the way back. Wow, that's his last name. Holy shit. Yeah, he told me you're not welcome here. Like this is Douglas, America. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's here's the thing like in America, like when Russians fight in the UFC, everybody cheers. Oh, no, no, we got the biggest reception. But I mean, even now, even now in the middle of the Ukraine war and all that shit, like when Russians fight over here, nobody cares. If you could fight, they'll cheer you. Yeah, because a few people that yell out USA USA and that's all good, because it's just, it's not that bad. You know, it's just they're cheering for the American, but they're not saying death to the Russian. You know what I mean? Yeah, we don't have a phrase. A statement. Right, but would you fight in Russia right now? Imagine if you were fighting a Russian in Russia right now, how scared? I got off with a raft match in Russia. What's a raft match? RAF? Oh, I thought he meant like raft like you fight on a raft. No, no, that'd be crazy. You see, Marab was a smart guy. He's like, right, right, right, right, right, right. Basically, right. He did the sport. He kicked off the raft and then he picked him up and slammed the bit to the water. So you offered one of those matches in the rush? My second one. The first one was with Benson Henderson. That was a fun match more so for me, but yeah, but I was just like, it was a really good prospect 12 and old guy. I think he fights a PFL. Tough guy, but I'm like, dude, I'm leaving Albania. I just left Baku. I have no desire to go all the way back overseas again. I want to prepare for a fight. I want to sell some rum. I want to fucking sell some cigars help my training partners. And I got a wife. I got to make sure that I'm your home. I have home. Like give her some attention and some love. You know, some TLC. Well, it's also there's a reality of wrestling matches that you have the potential blown in knee out. That too. That's real. So, you know, who was the Russian guy, Blue is knee out? I was a Georgian guy. Is that what it was? Yeah, the big, the big, heavy way guy. Yeah, yeah, the Georgian guy. It was like a silver medalist in the big. Yeah. And you can, you can blow a knee out in these matches. And then you're fucked. And all the injuries in MMA are basically what were you doing? Wrestling. Wrestling. Yeah. The culprit. Well, listen, how's your man? It's always good to have you on here, brother. And good luck with the rom company. It's called Harbor. What is it called? Phone Carver. The rom. And we actually got a community app now to, it's called joinfundcarver.com. And what is the website? People want to go and see the rom. Well, if they want to join the community, it's joinfundcarver.com. If you want to purchase phone carver, run.com or phonecarverspirits.com. Pretty easy. And we're looking for distributors, more distributors to keep growing this thing as best as we can. And the best thing about it is we're actually giving people an opportunity to help grow this thing from the ground up. We're two years in as of August 1st. And we doubled ourselves from last year. So we're in a really, really good spot. So I'm excited about that. And anyone that's been following me from the beginning of my career, they get an opportunity to now take the ride with us. And we got perks and stuff like that. All listed on the Republic campaign for the crowd. Beautiful. For the crowd. I'm so happy that you have something like this. It's really cool. It's good. It's smart too. Yeah. It's really good to invest in something like that. Yeah. So far so good. And good luck in whatever happens in the future. Because I really do hope you get another title shot. That'd be it would be them. That's the right way. The right ways. Yeah. Because again, you're 37. This is this is the time. Thanks. Take it. Yeah. Thank you, brother. Don't be sure you always get to see my friend. Always. All right. Bye. Bye. Bye.