If you wanted conspiracy theories to flourish  after the 9/11 attacks, here's what you'd do. You'd suppress video evidence of the attacks  themselves. You'd ship the rubble from the attacks overseas immediately without looking at  it. You'd call everyone who disputed the official narrative crazy or a criminal. You'd engage in a  campaign of very obvious lies about the attacks. You'd do everything you could to prevent an actual  investigation into what happened. You'd avoid any public trials. And when you captured and killed  the perpetrator, you'd show no photos or video evidence of the raid that killed him. And then  you dump his body into the Middle Ocean. Then you'd use the attack to justify the invasion  of a completely unrelated country on behalf of a foreign power. In other words, you do exactly  what the US government did in the wake of 9/11. It's possible that there are people who wanted  conspiracy theories to thrive. The more far out, the better. The more time people spend  wondering about directed energy weapons, the less time they focus on the obvious, the facts  hiding in plain sight. And the main fact that they are ignoring is our government's central role in  facilitating those attacks. We established this in episode one of this series. and the extreme  levels of incompetence that made it possible for Bin Laden from Kandahar, Afghanistan to pull  off the most sophisticated terror attacks in history. On the other hand, not all the wildest  theories about 9/11 are crazy. Some of them raise legitimate questions about what happened.  And in this episode, we'll go through those theories one by one and explain using primary  source documents, interviews with CIA officials, contemporary news reports, exactly what we know  about those theories. The North Tower of the World Trade Center collapsed at 10:28 a.m. on  the morning of 9/11. And when it did, burning debris fell and damaged several of the buildings  around it, including a building called World Trade Center, building number 7. It was a 47story steel  frame high-rise located about a football field's length away on the other side of Vessie Street.  Interestingly, there was a building between the North Tower and building 7. That building did  not collapse. The collapse of building 7 is completely unressed in the 9/11 Commission report.  577 pages, but no explanation as to why building 7 fell. And that provoked very obvious questions.  People have been talking about it for the last 24 years. And if you watch some of these pieces,  you can actually see them turning to dust before they hit the ground. A steel building doesn't fall  into its own footprint because a plane hit another building a couple hundred yards away. I do not  see a plane. I didn't They said the plane hit the first building. The second building just exploded.  The circumstances around building 7's collapse and the near total absence of an explanation for  why it collapsed provoked in the end a Senate investigation. Start with building 7. Uh, again, I  don't know that you can find structural engineers that would say that that thing didn't come down  in any other way than a controlled demolition. Building 7 had a pretty amazing list of tenants.  They included, ironically, the New York City Office of Emergency Management. That would be  the agency responsible for responding to the 9/11 attacks. On the 9inth and 10th floors of building  7 were the New York Field Office of the United States Secret Service. The equipment and records  they kept there were destroyed that day when the building collapsed. The building's 25th floor was  home to a secret CIA office. Its records were also destroyed. Across the 25th floor was a Department  of Defense office. It's unclear exactly what it was doing there. Building 7 was one of just three  buildings that collapsed that day. The collapse of the other two, the Twin Towers, got extensive  coverage in the 9/11 report, of course, but building 7 was almost entirely ignored. It's worth  remembering that even on the morning of the 9/11 attacks, there were very prominent people already  doubting whether a plane could take down a steel frame building. I said, "How could a plane, even  a plane, even a 767 or 747 or whatever it might have been, how could it possibly go through this  steel?" I happen to think that they had not only a plane, but they had bombs that exploded almost  simultaneously cuz I just can't imagine anything being able to go through that wall. It just seemed  to me that to do that kind of destruction is even more than a big plane because you're talking about  taking out steel, the heaviest caliber steel that was used on a building. I mean, these buildings  were rock solid. One reason the 9/11 commission may have effectively ignored the collapse of  Tower 7, is because even now we don't really know much about it. On the morning of September  11th, lower Manhattan was cut off from the public with military-style checkpoints. World Trade  Center building 7 collapsed that afternoon at 5:20 p.m. Video that has been widely circulated  appears to show it falling symmetrically into its own footprint. Several buildings closer to the  Twin Towers, meanwhile, remain standing. That's odd. And then the debris was removed immediately  and shipped to Asia. That's even stranger. Where is all the rubble gone? And have you have you  been able to an is there any way you can answer that question? I'm sorry, Peter. I didn't get  the question. Okay, I apologize. Jackie Jud and several other people keep asking us, when you  look at where the towers used to stand, there is surprisingly so little rubble. Where did all the  rubble go? It's a very good question, Peter, and I have asked some people who've been doing some  of the rescue and recovery work this morning. If you look behind me, you can see the very remains,  the skeletal remains of the World Trade Center. And one volunteer, Robert Gerlinsky, explained  to me the reason there's so little rubble is that all of it simply fell down into the ground and was  pulverized, evaporated. Now, I should say though, for the last several hours, there's been a  steady stream of dump trucks and other very large vehicles carrying out debris. According to  a New York Times article published 5 months after the attacks, quote, "An unknown number of steel  columns has been sent off to mills as far away as Asia without ever having been examined or saved."  This made it nearly impossible for engineers to answer the monumental questions of exactly  why and how the buildings designed to sustain a jet impact completely collapsed. To the extent  that any analysis of the debris was done at all, it was done by volunteers at a scrapyard in Jersey  City, New Jersey. According to the New York Times, the deepest mystery uncovered in the investigation  involves extremely thin bits of steel collected from the trade towers and from seven World Trade  Center, a 47story high-rise that also collapsed for unknown reasons. The steel apparently melted  away, but no fire in any of the buildings was believed to be hot enough to melt steel outright.  Two agencies investigated the collapse. One was FEMA, which relied on volunteers, and the other  was NIST, the National Institute for Standards and Technology funded by Congress. FEMA's  explanation is that falling debris from the north tower damaged the outer facade of building  7 and started a series of fires in the lower floors. According to NIST, the collapse of the  towers in the morning had damaged water manes, so the building's sprinkler systems failed. Since  the building had been evacuated earlier in the morning, and the fire department's resources  were stretched to a breaking point by ongoing search and rescue missions, fire chiefs made the  decision early on not to fight the fires that were burning in building 7. According to the NIST  report, thermal expansion of steel beams, not the complete melting of steel, caused the connections  tying a crucial girder, girder 2001A to column 79. And that joint failed. The girder walked 6 and  1/4 in off its seat, and that precipitated what is known as a progressive collapse. That means that  the collapse started in one area and then spread downward due to gravity through the rest of the  building. That's the explanation. There are two questions that come to mind and both are obvious.  First, if there was just one failure point, then why does video evidence show the building  coming down symmetrically all at once at freefall acceleration in what more closely resembles what's  called a global collapse where all the supporting columns are severed simultaneously? The second  question is how have other steel frame buildings around the world similar in design to that in  tower 7 fared during fire? In 1991, for example, the 38story 1 Meridian Plaza in Philadelphia had  an 8floor fire that burned for 18 hours. And yet, the building didn't collapse. In 1988, the 62story  First Interstate Bank building in Los Angeles had a massive fire that started on the 12th floor.  There was no structural failure. In 2017, the 24story Grenfell Tower in London burned  for over 24 hours. And yet, the internal steel withtood the fire. So why then did building 7  collapse after just 7 hours of burning in a way that no steel frame building anywhere in the world  has ever collapsed? With the support of a group called Architects and Engineers for 911 Truth,  Professor Leroy Hulsey of the University of Alaska at Fairbanks conducted an independent study whose  findings were released in 2020. Professor Hulsey found that office fires of the kind in building 7  on 911 could not have produced sufficient thermal expansion to cause the crucial girder to fail.  It's impossible, he found. And more significantly, he and his team found that NIST's explanation  does not account for what anyone can see on video, which is that the entire building came down  all at once, not in a progressive collapse, but in a total collapse. Something else,  therefore, must have triggered the downfall. There's only one thing that could have triggered  a collapse like the one we saw in television, and that is a controlled demolition. That  was his conclusion. Our ability to analyze the collapse is limited by the video that we  have. We don't have footage of the south side of the building where the fires were because the  cameras there were likely destroyed or obstructed by the collapse of the twin towers. One issue  with the control demolition hypothesis is that the widely circulated video of the building  coming down is selectively edited. In fact, the building did not exactly collapse all at once.  It came down in two stages. What you're seeing now is the full video of the collapse. It shows the  penthouse collapsing first and then very quickly the rest of the building going. The unedited video  leaves more questions than it answers. It calls into question the official NIST narrative, but it  doesn't conclusively show a controlled demolition either. Because of how quickly authorities shipped  the rubble overseas, we did not get a thorough investigation into the destruction. But one group  of scientists did collect and test four samples of dust and debris collected by a Manhattan resident  about 10 minutes after the collapse of the Second World Trade Center tower, two the next day and a  fourth about a week later. In 2009, they published the results of their study in the Open Chemical  Physic Journal. In those samples, the scientists found distinctive red gray chips full of highly  energetic and thermmitic material. In other words, they found traces of explosive compounds.  To its credit, NIS report did investigate multiple hypothetical blast scenarios, but found  it would be impossible to carry out on any floor in the building without detection that would have  required removing or cutting columns with welding torches and placing wires for demolition. NIST  found that window breakage patterns on visible floors was not at all like expected from a blast.  NIS did not test residue from the attacks for thermite, but did note that thermite burns slowly  relative to explosive materials and would require several minutes in contact with a massive steel  section to heat it to a temperature that would result in substantial weakening. Additionally,  they estimated that at least.13 lb of thermite would be required to heat each pound of steel  section to approximately 700° C, the temperature which steel weakens substantially. Which means  that if building 7 were demolished using thermite, many thousands of pounds of thermite would need  to have been placed inconspicuously ahead of time, remotely ignited, and somehow held in direct  contact with the surface of hundreds of massive structural components to weaken the building,  making it an unlikely substance for achieving a controlled demolition. NIST also says that an  explosion big enough to take down the building would have been considerably louder than any  noises recorded around the time the building collapsed. Yet eyewitness accounts say they did  hear explosions inside the building. All this time I'm hearing all type of explosions. All this time  I'm hearing explosions. We attempted to interview that witness. His name was Barry Jennings. But he  died at the untimely age of 53, just 2 days before NIST released its report on Tower 7. The film  director Spike Lee attempted to cover this story in an HBO docue series entitled NYC Epicenters  911 to 2021 and a half. In an interview with the New York Times, Lee said the amount of heat that  it takes to make steel melt, that temperature is not reached. And then the juxtaposition of the  way the building 7 fell to the ground when you put it next to other building collapses that were  demolitions, it's like you're looking at the same thing. For saying this, Lee was excoriated by the  press, which usually lionizes him. He suggested the official 9/11 narrative might be wrong,  and for doing so, he was called an anti-semitic conspiracy theorist by the Times of Israel. In  the end, Lee re-edited his docu series and removed portions that were skeptical of the official story  of the collapse of Building 7. Where do you keep your most valuable possessions? Not your neck tie  or a pair of socks, but things you wouldn't want to replace or maybe couldn't. Heirlooms from your  parents, your birth certificate, your firearms, your grandfather's shotgun. Where do you store  those? Under the bed, the back of a closet? No, that's unwise and maybe unsafe. Liberty Safe is  the place to store them. I would know. I have a colonial safe from Liberty Safe. It's in my  garage. It's the best. I keep everything in there. It's a Prolex system. allows you to design  the inside of your safe in a way that works for you. It's not a fixed setup. Someone else puts the  shelves in, you have to deal with it. You make it the way you want it. Have a stock of rifles, you  can make room. Need more shelves for handguns, for documents, for valuables, for gold. You can do  whatever you want. You can refigure your safe in minutes. Maximum flexibility, maximum convenience.  Liberty Safe is America's number one safe company. Made in the United States. Great people. I  know them. Visit libertiesafe.com. Use the code tucker10 at checkout for 10% off Franklin  and Colonial safe featuring the Prolex interior that you customize. You're going to dig it. We  definitely Plus, they're good-looking. I will say another unusual aspect of building 7's collapse  is that some media outlets reported it happened before it actually happened. Here's footage  of the BBC reporting that Tower 7 was down. Keep in mind this was filmed live 20 minutes  before building 7 actually collapsed. Jane, what more can you tell us about the Solomon  Brothers building and its collapse? Solomon Brothers was building 7's major tenant and you  can see the tower in the background of the shot. Was that just rushed reporting on the day of the  attacks or did the BBC have advanced word that the building was coming down? If the media did have  foreign knowledge of the events that day, they weren't alone. Buried deep in the 9/11 Commission  report on page 499, one easily missed footnote says there was a surge in put options, investments  that profit when stock prices fall. These put options were put against United Airlines parent  company and they were placed on September 6th and then against American Airlines on September  10th. Incredibly, the report goes on to note that 95% of the trade against United Airlines was made  by a single US-based institutional investor. So, who was that investor? Well, we don't know. The US  government is still hiding his name. They refused to tell us. Why? No one will say. The Commission  report says an investigation by the FBI found out the trades were quote innocuous. Whatever that  means. Researchers have since discovered that these trades are far from innocuous with trading  volumes showing statistical significance, massive statistical significance. There were other trades,  too. On September 7th, the number of put options placed against British Airways was four times the  normal volume. The number of put options against American Airlines on the day before the attack was  285 times the normal volume. In the days before the attacks, put options surged against Morgan  Stanley and Meil Lynch. Both banks had sizable offices in the World Trade Center. There were also  notable surges in gold and oil call options in advance of the attacks. But who could have known  the attacks were coming apart from al-Qaeda? One highly significant yet often overlooked aspect of  the 9/11 attacks is that foreign intel agencies, including those of ostensible allies, likely  had detailed prior knowledge of the event. These 9/11 hijackers had come from Germany. Were  the Germans asleep at the switch or did they just not tell us anything about these people? John  Kiraku was chief of counter intelligence on the bin Laden unit. What about the Israelis? What  about the Saudis? There is solid evidence that members of the Saudi royal family were working  with al-Qaeda terrorists. The 9/11 Commission, not surprisingly, ignored this subject altogether.  Here's what we know. As early as January of 2001, France's Foreign Intelligence Service learned that  al-Qaeda was planning a hijacking plot involving a US airline. What did the French tell the United  States and when? We don't know. But the French are not alone. Others knew. Well, there's no doubt  that the Israelis and probably the British had better better information than the people um  working against Osama bin Laden in the agency. Much better information. Michael Shyer ran the  CIA's Bin Laden unit in the late 1990s. One reason foreign governments may have had superior  information is that the NSA frequently shared signals intelligence details with them. details it  withheld from our own CIA. Signals intelligence is a type of espionage that deals with intercepting  phone calls and radio communications. We needed uh the collection of um signals intelligence out  of Afghanistan and since there was no central telephone company or communications companies, it  was very uh limited. uh you you had to be lucky to find the signal. Well, we found a couple of  signals and we shared the information with NSA uh and uh they collected information  and wouldn't share it with us in the uh in the raw form. Um NSA reports are generally  summaries of what people say over the phone. you don't really know always who's talking to who. The  first thing we did when we got the first copies of uh translated material, we sent them to NSA and  said, "Can you please provide the other half of this to us?" And they said, "Thank you very  much, but under the 1947 act that created NSA, we don't have to share that with anyone, and we're  not going to." But somehow the Israelis and the Saudis always were able to find out something was  there that they wanted. And so when we refused, they'd call the White House. The White House  had called the DCI and the DCI would say, "Give it to them." We know very little about NSA's  fornowledge of 9/11 because the 9/11 Commission barely investigated it. Keep in mind, the NSA is  the largest American intel agency by far. And yet, the commission never assigned a staff member  to research NSA files, in part because some of the 9/11 commissioners and staff simply did not  understand what the NSA was and what it did. Even now, the NSA's terrorism archives still have never  been thoroughly reviewed by outside investigators. If someone ever did go through those files,  they'd likely find a treasure trove of previously undisclosed warnings about the 9/11 attacks.  The NSA was the primary agency responsible for monitoring the switchboard through which  al-Qaeda operatives communicated with each other. It's certainly an absurdity for the for what the  American people pay for signals intelligence to be collected uh translated and supplied to the  intelligence community to have the British, the Saudis, the Israelis getting information from our  national security agency that we are we and the agency were not privileged enough to get. A number  of foreign governments may have had fornowledge of 911, but the Israeli government stands out in  particular. And here's why. On the morning of 911, a group of five Israeli nationals purported  to have witnessed the initial explosion of the World Trade Center and were seen to be celebrating  the event. At the time, the celebrations received quite a bit of mainstream media coverage. Fox  News has learned some US investigators believe that there are Israelis again very much engaged  in spying in and on the US who may have known things they didn't tell us before September  11th. It's striking to see operatives from a supposedly allied country celebrating the mass  murder of Americans. But it is true that some in Israel saw the attack as a good thing for them.  A September 12th, 2001 article in the New York Times quotes now Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin  Netanyahu responding to the 9/11 attacks. quote, "It is very good." before adding, "Well, not very  good, but it will generate immediate sympathy." Netanyahu predicted that the attack would  strengthen the bond between our two peoples because we've experienced terror over so many  decades. But the United States has now experienced a massive hemorrhaging of terror. According to  FBI documents, the Israelis caught celebrating the 9/11 attacks had videotaped the terrorist attack  on the World Trade Center and may have possessed for knowledge of the same. When the Israelis were  arrested in New Jersey, they were carrying box cutters, multiple passports, thousands of dollars  in cash, and photos of themselves smiling with the World Trade Center burning in the background.  The Israelis are always for the Israelis first, last always. They don't like the United States  except for the most part our money. And yet uh our national security agency is producing information  for them but not sharable with its own people. Go figure. According to FBI records, polygraph tests  administered by the FBI suggested that they did not have foreign knowledge of the attacks but did  engage in deception and were likely involved in illegal foreign counter intelligence. They were  spying in the United States. The leader of the group, a man called Dominic Sudter, fled to Israel  on or around September 14th, 2001 immediately, and he was later included on an FBI anti-terror  watch list distributed to European allies in May of 2002. Most of the Israelis were held in  FBI detention for 2 and 1/2 months before they were deported for visa violations, a common way to  expel foreign intel assets from allied countries. The Israelis pride themselves on having  infiltrated every Arab intelligence service, every terrorist group. Did the Israelis know about  9/11 and not tell us? One memorandum submitted to the 9/11 Commission presented substantial evidence  suggesting that numerous art students from Israel, who were in fact Israeli intel assets, have been  strategically located across the United States. It's hard not to notice that they lived near  the future 9/11 hijackers. There were groups of uh Israelis traveling around the country as  artists sketching things happened to be one time around Cape Canaveral. I remember and other  places where there were certainly things to to uh paint and sketch and sketch but also um  noticeably near military installations or some other kind of installation in the government. So,  I think that's an open question yet. The so-called Israeli art students centered their operations  in Hollywood, Florida, and northern New Jersey. Those are the exact locations of the hijackers  before the attack. According to the memorandum, quote, "It is very difficult to believe based  on the existing evidence and the location of their common central operating bases that this  group was not tracking the future hijackers and their collaborators as well." According to  the Forward, a Jewish publication, quote, "The Israeli government acknowledged the operation  and apologized for not coordinating it with Washington." Within a week of the attack, Israeli  intelligence officials claimed they warned the United States about large-scale terror attacks on  highly visible targets in the United States. But the specifics of those warnings have never been  made public. There's no evidence they happened. In fact, in the whole time I worked in  counterterrorism from '92 till 2004, I never saw one uh piece of information from  the Israelis that was really worth anything. As Americans, we need Washington to create a new  truly independent commission, one that does not lie and that instead investigates what happened on  9/11 and answers the questions we've posed in this episode. Who made the decision to ship the debris  from the attacks out of this country immediately and why? What was the role of the CIA office in  building 7? What signals intelligence did the NSA have in relation to the plot? And how much of it  did they share with foreign governments? What did those foreign governments know and fail to tell  the United States? The American public deserves answers immediately to those questions. These  are all questions the 9/11 Commission itself ignored. Why did the FBI's most wanted poster  for Osama bin Laden updated in November of 2001 emit any mention of the 9/11 attacks? Why did it  take the government 5 years to release footage of the Pentagon? And why were there only two  publicly available videos of the Pentagon crash? The Pentagon was one of the most heavily secured  and surveiled buildings on planet Earth. And yet, even now, more than 20 years later, there are  only two videos. Why did US forces abruptly bury Osama bin Laden at sea and never release any  photograph of his body? How hard, by the way, would it be for amateur pilots with only basic  aviation training and no experience flying jumbo jets to navigate to lower Manhattan and crash  into a building? The majority of hijackers were flagged for additional screening at the airport.  How did they get on those watch lists? And why didn't security slow them down? Why wasn't there  substantial wreckage of Flight 93 at its supposed crash site in Shankville, Pennsylvania? We were  told the crash of that aircraft was so powerful that it vaporized the aircraft's hull. And yet,  the hijackers's passports were found intact at the site. How does that work? And who was being  protected by the commission's unwillingness to answer these questions? Someone was. None of these  questions were even asked by the 9/11 Commission. It's time that someone asks them and that the  government answers them. On September 11th, 2001, nearly 3,000 people were murdered. In  the years that followed, hundreds of thousands more perished as a result of our response to  those attacks. The government enacted measures that suspended constitutional protections. The  freedoms this country was created to protect, they're gone now. The government employed  illegal warfare tactics, including torture and the murder of innocent individuals. Those attacks  fundamentally altered the way America operates, the way all of us live here. And yet, not  everyone suffered in the aftermath of 9/11. Some emerged the winners. Reveal who profited  from 9/11 in the next installment of our series. Thank you for watching the 911 Files.  The next episode drops next week or you can unlock the entire five-part series right  now ad free by becoming a TCN member. Members also get access to the watch companion,  a guide to the timeline, the key figures, the primary sources that we went to to bring you  this documentary. You can read along as you watch. Join us today at tuckerclson.com for the whole  series all at once as support our investigative work. We couldn't do any of this without our  members. We're grateful for you. So thanks.