The Joe Rogan experience. He doesn't look happy. Wow. And that, 11 in 1901. Fuck. Yeah, average life expected. He's 40 years old. Average life, say, say like 44, 45. Really? At that time. I mean, but if you make it past childbirth, of course, you have a better, much better chance of surviving. But anyway, he does name his company after his wife. What's interesting is you wonder whether that was, like, whether she'd be happy about that. Right? And he comes to this hated name in 70 ways years later. But he's scrapping by. And he actually had tried to start a chemical industry in the late 19th century. It had burned down. And he didn't have any money. He's got these kids. He's got this family. So like to your point, I'm kind of when I'm reading this. I'm trying to understand how is this company starting? What's the human story here? How do we get into this mess? You know, money. And then, you know, when you get, as you said, to the 50s and 60s, these agricultural chemicals become a huge part of their business. But kind of backed around up 70. OK, 245T now, now the lids off. You know, the government starting to find out about it. People are raising alarms. Scientists are talking about how toxic this stuff is. And, you know, they're looking for an alternative, something that's not as toxic as this stuff. And that's when John Frans finds glyphosate. Interestingly, you know, all like the detergent all? Yes. That was a Monsanto product. Of course it was. But it had a phosphate-based ingredient in it that helped it clean clothes. But in the 60s, phosphate-based detergents were ending up in waterways and contributing to like, algae blooms and fish death. And so they had to get rid of that phosphate detergent. And they had all this phosphate. And they're like, what do we do with all this phosphate? Boom. All detergent, you know, and all that phosphate ends up becoming the building blocks of Roundup. is ultimately coming from elemental phosphorus. Wow. It's crazy. But it was all designed to be healthy. I know a guy who lived in a community that was connected to a golf course. He grew up drinking water from a well. And him and a large number of people in the community got cancer. And they firmly believe that it was because of whatever pesticides that they were using or herbicides that they were using on the golf course. So that leaked into the wells. Can I show you what Roundup looks like nowadays? Jamie, there's a map in there that's like a map of the country. And it's kind of brown. And it shows you kind of roundup. It's probably mostly. Life is glyphosate because that's the active ingredient. But I just want to show you the chains that's happened over the last several years of glyphosate. So like, that's glyphosate. This comes from the USGS pesticide National Synthesis Program. This is what happened with Roundup Ready technology. This is 92. So remember I said Roundup is created in the 70s. But it's not really used that much. Throughout the growing season. Interesting how it's used so much in California. Yeah. So for Valley application of it, let's get that. The weird farmland on the way up to San Francisco if you're driving from LA and you see like, fuck Joe Biden signs, that's where they are. Exactly. Yep. Also, the land of like 90% of our almonds. Like, all of the salad, everything comes right there. Yeah. And so much pesticide use in that Valley. But look at the Midwest. I mean, it goes from like, you know, almost none. Almost very little to swarms. To swarms. And that's because you've made crops that are now resistant to glyphosate. So you can spray it. You know, as much as you need to kill your weeds. But and Jamie, there's a, you had that weed resistance graph going up. But a fifth grader can tell you, well, when you spray that much Roundup on something or glyphosate on something, you're going to start seeing resistance. Adaptation. Exactly. Like, it's nature of finding back. Like what's happening with antibiotics. Where you're seeing these like MRSA, like these medication resistant staff infections that are insanely difficult to treat. Just like it. Yeah. Just like it. In fact, some of the weed scientists I talked to, I'll be honest, when I first was going to a talk at Ohio State that they said, the weed scientists are talking about that. Oh. I thought it was for weed marijuana. But I showed up. I was like, oh, this is cool too. Yeah. Yeah. I want to find out how to make the shit stronger. But these weed scientists at Ohio State are great and helped out with the book, fantastic folks. Some of those scientists, they're like, glyphosate was like penicillin, man. It was so powerful, so effective at killing weeds. And we burned through it because these weeds became resistant to it. And so, and that's where we're at now, kind of going back to your point about chemicals and exposures. Like, Roundup was introduced because it was seen as an environmentally more friendly herbicide at the time. And the seven. Then, Agent Orange. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You're comparing it against some pretty bad that's like, would you like to get punched or shoot you? And you know, it had to do with the way it worked and the mechanism's there. But what's happening now because of that resistance, Jamie hate to bring it up again because it's actually kind of cool. You get to see this. This is the first time we've put it together. But when that weed resistance takes off, I think it's the next graph after that. What happens is, you take this out. OK, this is what's happening. I put this together with a friend of mine is data scientist. I try to remember that a lot of people are just listening. They're just a huge percentage. It's fair enough. So I'll try and describe it. So what we're looking at is pounds of herbicide per acre of soybeans. So they're just looking at soybeans as a case study. And we're looking at the amount of herbicides that's being used on farms per acre in the US. And specific states just because they had data for this, for us to compare. And what we're seeing is this like explosion and Roundup, glyphosate, that big, dark line going up like that. And notice, look, we started seeing the decline in all these other herbicides that are really toxic stuff, like chlorinated compounds and things like that. They're going down and down and down. But check out weed resistance, 2004, 2005, 2006. Boom. All those herbicides that were really toxic, including, by the way, the other half of Agent Orange, 2,4D, is now being used to try and beat back Roundup resistant weeds. And so, last fucking mess. It's crazy. Watch the entire episode for free only on Spotify.