All right, so we're rolling what's up Jack what up guys? You having me how you doing bro good. How about a nice introduction for Jack give him an intro forest This is Jack Jenny from the juke squad World renowned brother of T-fu I guess maybe maybe more He's no longer a lot of my conscience. Yeah, my conscience is dad too. We have my conscience son and Arch nemesis of Ben Malo Let's get that me guys over here. So that's pretty cool that we get to have you on the podcast because you know Not many people get to have your time other than your own channel pretty cool You pretty big legend on the podcast. Yeah, yes. He had a drive all the way from clear water to summon all the Very appreciated five minute drive. I don't even have a ride home What do you even do with all your time? Oh? Just lately trying to come up with as much content as I can But it's kind of depressing to make content when your backyard is like a toxic wasteland Yeah, I've been seeing all those videos that you've been making and the beach smells like a sewer right now It's bad. I wouldn't as the worst smell I've ever smelled my entire life the only day actually in this video a couple minutes in But yeah, it's disgusting, but I drove down Reading today. It was terrible. Really. Yeah, but then when I got to see Pb to wasn't so bad You feel in your nose your eyes row your lungs horrible and you've lived on the beach your entire life For everyone in your ox beach. It's been your backyard since you were born. Yeah, but Have you ever seen it this bed not even close not even close? You're gonna be banned for a minute. Yeah, be banned go ahead This is a natural occurring cycle has nothing to do with Rick's god of the government So why is it so bad this you think? Oh, it was just cuz I mean as time goes on the runoff from the cattle ranchers and all the pesticides and fertilizers that you use on the crops that Seats its way into Lake Okeechobee that then gets drained into the rivers that leads to the ocean Red tide is technically just a type of algae and when it gets mixed with another toxic type of algae that comes out of Lake Okeechobee It just gets disgusting and another thing that people don't realize is Red tide is not naturally occurred on its own since 1920 and It used to only happen when there was giant fish spawns when they know there'd be tons and tons of fish spawning and Since we're over fishing now we actually haven't had enough fish That was a truck There hasn't been fish spawn But like it's been over a hundred years since there was Enough fish to naturally cause a red tide now. It's just toxic algae coming from all these farms and So how come it's so much worse this year than than other years? It's just a combination. It's just like the perfect storm pretty much Are they polluting more nowadays or yeah? I mean there's just building a bit everybody's saying big sugar. It's a combination of a lot of different corporations but You know there there's record crops every single year There's a whole lot of rain this year too and that led to all the crops getting too flooded You know like all these crops that they're growing are farmed on swamp lands that are constantly drained they need to be drained or else it'll just flood all their crops So where they drain the water straight into Lake of Gechobee Creeksies toxic algae blooms makes its way to the ocean and then we have like a supercharged Red tide toxic algae bloom lately that water. This is not the color that the ocean supposed to be where is that? Also not that's John's pass. Okay. That is the inside of John's pass nice drone shot though. Yeah Shout out to all those dead fish shadow to the other Danny Danny's scandal Wow, so are they allowed to dump all this waste in there or? Yeah, yeah, yeah, they are so so it's it's funny because I mean obviously We've both spent a lot of time in the ocean surfing and whatnot and we're both aware where red tides been around for hundreds of hundreds of years right? Yeah, and I've never really known what the cause was I mean I've heard stuff here and there But I've never heard anything I've never seen as much Conversation about it and tell this year like I've never heard people talking about it I never really knew why it actually happens because it's worse this year. You know red tide technically is just and now a type of algae So right saying this red tide Technically it it is correct to say that it's red tide, but everybody thinks of red tide as this naturally occurring phenomenon and This is this is not natural. This is not something that Just happens by nature, you know, this is a direct result of all the talks that run off being like leading to the ocean Yeah, and another thing is it's hitting Panama City Beach in North Florida That is a that is a wide Spread yeah, I was actually just there last week and it was really really bad there There was dead fish on the beach. Do you think that they're gonna have to restock the Gulf? What do you mean like with fish? How do they do that? I don't know like buy fish eggs, I guess from somewhere else Like look all these fish are dying like guys are gonna like what do you have to do to get you know more of them? Stop sending all this toxic water into the Gulf So how long do you think is last like this? I have no idea because this is a record setting red tide that's been going on This is this red tide has been going on for nine months Which is a record and we've also broken every single yearly record of dead manatees Sea turtles and dolphins in one month so more dead wildlife in one month than any previous year Wow, so this is worth here than I ever before by far So what what have you been doing personally to? Make a difference or like on your channel You've been making a lot of videos about it like what what's your goal? What have you been trying to do? Unfortunately? I don't know what to do Like I have no idea how to solve this problem I know that there are a few solutions one of them is like a one point five billion dollar project To buy something like 150,000 acres and use that land specifically to clean and filter the water But really I'm just trying to make as many people aware of this issue as possible So that maybe something can be done because you know when? When people get outraged that's obviously you know the the Senate and the state and the government takes notice You're just trying to shine like exactly Jack Jack's got the platform That's what he's been saying in his other video, too He's got the platform to make these issues heard by big numbers of people You know just like the petition if the if a petition gets a hundred thousand signatures the White House has to release a statement on it and Pretty much every time. Oh, yeah, we got there less than 30,000 more to go I mean, that's good for it. Yeah. What's fucked up is I did a poll on my Instagram I've gotten so many people telling me that they're having trouble signing the petition that they're getting an error that their signatures not counting or that It just straight up will not let them submit That was the worst thing I've ever smelled in my entire life before I Actually can't like I did not think anything like it smelled so bad that I literally could not breathe it was like Yeah, it's been it was so strong that I couldn't take a breath because it just instantly made me gag out my air to the point that I was like Gasping and had to run away from the dumpsters far enough away to where I could like take a breath of having look at that Is this is this also treasure island? The entire bay just as far as you can see I want I saw it treasure island picture and inlet just Straight fish stacked here. This is when the tide was going out So they're like separating but like look at that pot of dead fish. I mean there has to be so there they have to be Trying to do something to fix that there's no way that no government officials or like some big wigs Aren't actively trying to do something. I mean this is crazy. I mean when you're funded by corporations that solely only care about money. I mean this has been going on for 80 years a hundred years or something like that. Yeah, and There's no sign of it slowing down. You know, they're still allowing these farmlands to Pump the phosphate fertilizer all over the plants and then when it rains the water drains into the canals that canals drain into like a Chobe like a chobe drains to the river that leads to the ocean Do you think has anything to do with like you know fertilizer? Like oh yeah huge part of its fertilizer like an individual like on let's say treasure island You have a yard you fertilize it rains will run off goes in the ocean I think that that would be a very very small percentage of the overall But it's the same thing they just on a smaller scale. Yeah, I mean But I think that's what I think that's what a lot of the people But I don't know the ones that people believe that it's not big business It's the individuals, you know fertilizer. Yeah, those people who think that are dumb and are missing for I'm saying that. That's fake news. Yeah, you heard it here. Yeah, that's another thing is the news Will not report on well They'll say you know is man making this red tide worse with fertilizing this and that but they will never name a specific company Of course specific reason why let's name them What company? Managers north of Lake Okeechobee. Yeah, it's the let's put them on big sugar south of Lake Okeechobee Which they've been training their runoff into like for years and years and years and like all the manure That's in all the cattle ranches that gets drained into the lake too, you know that contributes to it as well And another thing I hear is uh There's weeds that are going in Lake Okeechobee and I guess they're spraying all sorts of like crazy pesticides and poison on the weeds to kill the weeds Which contributes to the algae bloom too I've absolutely no idea like apparently if you look back at pictures or videos of Lake Okeechobee 20 years ago versus today It's like a completely different place There's all these weeds and all this grass all over Lake Okeechobee and they're slowly like trying to kill the weeds because we don't want weeds and it It doesn't make any sense you can probably pull up a video of them spraying all the pesticides and all the poison Under weeds what kind of they do that right out there in Lake Seminole to even they say yeah You know what? Yeah, you know what you might have to do Jeff Like you had that other video where like you know Remember when you made the beach you made your private beach and you got such an outcry from the public and the news that it made major Network Like you you might have to come up with some crazy idea to do with the red tide to get them to cover it Have you gone down there to like a with Toby to like where those farms are and where they spray all that shit and I try to talk to anybody or I've not I would like to you should go in a dead fan outfit I wanted to send squad send boxes of dead fish and bottles of Lake Okeechobee water at all the Senate offices in the like Rick Scott's office in the governor's office probably about idea I would get a lot of trouble. That's why I haven't done it But I mean like if they can kill the entire state. Why can't I do that? Like let's go dump it a hundred gallons of Lake Okeechobee water into Rick Scott swimming pool You know it would be interesting though if you took a water sample this week and then take one like You know when it when it clears up and just to show how bad it was and send it to some type of laboratory To have them show you what that what the deal is. I mean our water we swim in it. They have a scale for red tide. I You know, I'm not the most educated person on the topic. I'm just trying to make people aware of this because there's Like my backyard is like a toxic waste Man is he's dying all over the place um but they they measure red tide by like how many Particles of the algae are in a per liter of water And I think the scale max is out at one million because it's never supposed to go higher than a million That's just like completely unheard of but this year they were measuring like ten million Particles of the algae bloom per liter of water which is ten times higher than the scale caps out at Goddamn He's just wow. You think that this could possibly be the work of my concha Is he to blame I wish cuz if he was to blend then I could fix it So what Exactly is Rick Scott have to do it. What does Rick Scott have to do with this he? I forgot what year was I think I have a picture of it. I guess the year is kind of irrelevant, but he cut $700 million budget from the water preservation act Just took $700 million away from Trying to keep the water clean, you know, if you look that up Yeah, I might have a picture on my phone. I saw some videos of the waterways with the different colored Water, you know feeding into it and I saw some comments on the video and they said that that's naturally occurring like where Where lakes and rivers go into like you know the ocean and stuff like that They said always looks like that is holy fuck you're right Here we go in 2012 Richard Scott cut 700 million from Florida water management district now the Gulf Coast is suffering What maybe the worst red tide bloom in history empty beaches and restaurant and Trump loves this guy Do you and I have another tweet from Trump Rick Scott of Florida is doing a fantastic job as governor? Jobs are pouring into the state and its economic health is better than ever before He is strong on crime borders and loves our military and vets vote for Rick Scott on Tuesday This is our president where our state is literally Uninhabitable like you know, I lived at the beach my entire life I can you know gauge a popular beach day like during the week, you know There's there's still gonna be dozens of people on the beach last Sunday. There was two people on the beach as far as I could see Yeah, clear water be a good ghost land right now. They're yeah, he's on Indian rock speech Yeah, but clear water beach. I saw pictures from clear water beach all the businesses like the empty trunks are empty and The thing is like I have a lot of friends who own local businesses And I have a lot of friends who run fishing charters and like I don't want to hurt their businesses at all But pretending like this isn't happening just so that tourists keep coming this year like if this continues for 10 years Like I will not be able to live where I live, but I might be able to but I won't want to you know I think this was a wake-up call though. It's like almost like they they push see how far can we get how much you know Toxic ways can we pump into the and that mean is anybody doing anything? I have no idea I know I've no I've not heard but when you have a problem about his widespread and this much Well, he got 30,000 30,000 how many how many positions have you got signed? Right? But he's 70,000 over 70,000 signatures is anybody in position talking about it. No Nobody you think with this much outrage if they had any type of solution or making any sort of progress to stop this from happening They would release a statement, but I've seen nothing Not also I think part of the problem is like this problem is so large and so widespread that there isn't a easily Dulable solution that's like oh we can do it tomorrow. This is a major just cut off What the fuck are you gonna do cut off? I don't really said it you not let them use fertilizer and that's a huge step in the right direction just completely Ban fertilizer. Can I play devil's advocate for second. Of course. Don't reflect my actual use of playing devil's advocate There you go. I mean you can't when you affect business like that and I'm taking downside of this You know business is business so we're out here to make money We're not necessarily out here to save the environment. I'm taking that's a problem to the big business You can't just say you can't have fertilizer anymore. That's gonna affect millions of dollars of Florida tax Right, but there's got to be a better ways do it. Yes I totally get that But what happens when Florida's uninhabitable like right then what well that's that's the whole point of government regulation That's why when people Typically Republicans want less government regulation and Democrats want more well when you deregulate things stuff like this happens Right, so you know There's got to be a center area somewhere where that where everybody can agree and we're kind of at a good spot right now because We're gonna have a change of leadership here very shortly But and you're right, you know that that would take millions and millions of dollars away from Florida's taxes blah blah blah But Florida is completely reliant on tourism way more so than the sugar crops way more so than the cattle ranches So it's like you know, they're pretty much shooting themselves in the foot at this point But also laws move usually legal system moves fairly slowly So if they want to you know bring about legislation to ban or limit fertilizers It's gonna take a long time. They can't do it overnight. It's forever right everything takes forever. Well the biggest fuck up. I mean Florida start somewhere though. Yeah, yeah Naturally close out right like it naturally flows south because that's just like the incline of the state of Florida the farther north you go the higher you are above sea level and For thousands of years the river of grass as you want to pull the picture that you can look up a floors historic water flow and You can see that like have you ever seen a map of Florida from what they thought it looked like before they were actually able to fly over it or Measure it properly like to the tea like yeah, it looked like super fat right? It looks super fat and it's like chunked up into islands like looks like they painted it As it was not a solid land mass whatsoever like there's rivers going through the whole thing. Yeah, I can pull up a picture for you By the way, we probably should have we're gonna have the Republican view at 730 right Yeah, we'll have we'll have Republicans are on their way. I don't know Here's the thing Ben doesn't know he don't really like that type of shoot either though He'll probably roast those companies as well. Yeah. Well, I'm not necessarily Ben's friends are you know Typically Republicans because they're business people, but he don't want to see those dead fish float There's a big door to that Florida looked like that's crazy So obviously a lot of win was this it probably has a date on there. He was like seven hours at Ben 1800s I was at Ben Each house in days ago and I call them on the phone because it smelled horrible and I called Ben Like there you go natural flow water. That's how it's been forever, but we completely cut that off This is the past. It says they have it. Yeah, that's the past. That's the past. That's how you know That's how the water flow is original if that was present in a future on here if that was the original flow How come? The South part of Florida like Miami area didn't get terrible red tide. Oh, because they didn't have the they had the Gulf Stream No, I was thinking if right also the the river of grass if there was any toxins in the water now I could show you it filtered it out Yeah, all the weeds and all the grass in South Florida would filter the water and clean it before it ever got to the ocean Now we completely cut that out of the equation and we just send it straight east and west straight to the ocean You know it'd be cool too Like if you guys want to leave in the comments put if you have a creative solution to this problem that Maybe somebody you know businesses or government might want to look into put in the comments below Maybe we'll find something that they didn't think about already But like how the fuck are you gonna start? I mean the only way to get to get like you can't just fucking say big sugar shut Fuck down exactly never know definitely no you have to just start raising hell now You got to bring you awareness trying to do right? Thank you a million views in the world out there in two months So where's the can they sign the petition itself? It's in the description of pretty much every one of my youtube videos It's in the prescription of my Instagram. We can put it on second That's the description of this video top top line The thing is the petition cuts off the 20 seconds. We only have two days. All right Sign now. Yeah, it's a 30 day thing Jacks. How does President Trump get on you gotta edit put this video out tonight. I have tweeted him. I've tried to message him Who? It should be hard it should not be hard he's so active on Twitter. Yeah tweet me dude. Hey, you Message me Dm. He probably subscribes to T-Fu. I would imagine. Oh absolutely You're not subscribed to T-Fu. What are you doing? Wow That's insane. Yeah, yeah, unfortunately And I say unfortunately because this would be very unfortunate But it would also in a way be a solution if we had a hurricane big enough to flood Lake Okocho be so much that it broke the Hoover dive which is the dam that they built to stop water from flooding South Florida That would almost solve our problem because The water wouldn't be able to go straight east or west the problem is there are towns That would be completely underwater Let's destroy the town The thing is there's you should they should have never built towns there in the first place like it is a swamp That's the thing about everything needs to be drained and you know the Lake of Chobie hurricane It was the second most deadly national disaster in US history over 2,000 people died almost 2,000 was it it was they call it the Lake of Chobie hurricane it was like in 1920 I believe okay and They built the dams look at that dead whale shark That's crazy. It's crazy to see some of the bigger animals dying to like any about just a wash up bush or a washed up a mile north of my house Yeah, and two new sharks a mile south of my house It's pretty crazy. So if a person goes in that water will they die too or people have died that's several people I saw people swimming in the ocean I Guy down south this is a story I heard so confirmed to be true by a friend of mine that would never lie about something like this There was a guy cleaning for a week straight cleaning all the dead fish trying to you know bring his home back to What we wanted to be which is a beautiful paradise with like flourishing ecosystems and He got sick went to the hospital died within 24 hours of respiratory failure. Did you hear about recently? I'm just about a month ago. Damn. I heard yesterday some guy was clean up the beach Yeah, it was a catfish bar. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, he's in bad shape So you shouldn't go out and try to clean this shit up then Well, I would say if you're gonna clean it up just wear a respirator. Yeah, and shoes My friends were cleaning it up right now too and like they're brave of them. I know I've had pneumonia in the past So my respiratory system is already weaker than the average person so unfortunately I can't go and do that because I would almost Guaranteed end up in the hospital, but I mean I think we have to be cleaned up and well, too I think we need to go straight to the fucking source Jack I think me need to fly down to the Lake O'Kurcho being and fuck up some farmlands fuck them up Just go and start burning crops, but what I was thinking about with the clear water beach like they probably all I mean they don't have anything to do with Lake O'Kurcho I mean they could complain or write letters or you know influence legislation But they don't have anything directly so all they can do is damage control at this point Which I guess they are doing you know by spending money to clean about clear water though nowhere else Well, fuck though like this is the beginning of the end like this is how the planet dies like slowly Wani goes to the side is to you know, then the whole state of Florida Literally statewide morque coastline than not has dead fish washing up right now It's like in 10 years like we're fucked. Yeah, if this keeps going on for 10 more years like you're not gonna be able to live here anymore No, why Elon wants to go to Mars. Yeah, well after something this catastrophic like I have a solution To solve all global problems just Elon Musk can be world leader Something goes wrong. We ask him what to do. He will probably give us away better solution than 99% of people fuck it I'd vote for him. I would I think a lot of people would vote. I think he would win if he ran for president I don't think I'll run the good. Yeah, the guy the CEO of Starbucks just thinking about running for president I thought the loser is ever just got just got like fired or something no He stepped down because they're thinking he's gonna run for president. Oh star book Yeah, Starbucks. I'm not about for that guy. Well. How are what was it empowered Schultz? Yeah, I think that's his name Starbucks to expensive It was Dunkin donuts Starbucks Donuts ice coffee Look there you go. There's the they just shot the measurement a million Showed at the bottom shut out my boy Schultz Anyway, also if you want musk wants to come on the podcast Yeah We got him lined up for next week. We got a EV charger here on you can bring your Tesla. What charge you we got blunts for Elon to Anything else you want to say jack about the topic or about first on all. I don't do something soon I mean this is like like I said, it's gonna be the beginning of the end of planet Earth You know one ecosystem dies the if the ocean dies we die You know ocean covers most of the planet and if we keep this up, it's not gonna be good So sign the petition. What else can we do? Yeah? I don't know Better sign the petition. I'm just trying to make people aware because I don't know share the video That's part of the problem that think about you to power of somebody like like you say Do news like think about how much money they have and influence when you have money evidence Boycott make sugar do not buy any sugar from Florida, but how are you supposed to do that? You don't know when you buy like I know if I rock you gotta just do your research Yeah, but if you buy a raw sugar, but like let's say I buy a Coke. I don't know where the sugar comes from it. Oh my Coke Coach horrible for you Sugar eventually everything I've seen you don't have to if it can clean the rust off of a bumper you probably shouldn't drink it Yeah, but you know people are all too. You can't I mean people are gonna drink Coke. You know stupid Lot of people are just really dumb, but the general consumer that's how stuff like this happens a general consumer doesn't care They go, okay. Well, it's not my problem. I can't remember those people are gonna do anything or care anyway Right, they're gonna drink Coke. Cool and die. You know I stopped eating fast food and stopped drinking soda completely Years ago and it's the best decision I ever made the problem is momentum too like there's so much fucking like He said people drinking Coke people buying shit at the grocery store full of sugar Like people it's gonna be hard to get people to change their ways You know what I mean there's so much momentum, but that's what people people are what they go Oh, that's terrible and they go okay. Well if you want to fix that you can't let's say Coke I don't know if it's Coke, but let's say it's Coke. Yeah, you say. Oh, that's terrible I should do something about that you go well you you can't drink Coke and they're like oh well I'm not gonna do that, but that's terrible They're not willing to give up stuff or go put themselves out of out to do to do better most people Right, but we don't care about animals on the entire planet drink besides What it's like another thing it's like dog drinks, Dr. Pepper. Of course. What have people been drinking for the last however long people have exist. I've seen why do why did we switch it up and start adding all this sugar and all that it's just Jack I've seen a cola. I'll polar bear drink Coke I've seen that commercial too. Yeah. I mean that's natural They're red they're white and they want to give you cancer and they want you to die and they want you to pay medical bills and do all that shit Every time Trump does his hair we lose a foot of ozone layer in a polar set on fire. It's the goddamn truth Well, what I'm Joe Rogan Then the polar bears drink drink less Coke So damn sign the petition See you sleep we should air lie down there to Okachobee and we should just drive it down too far Yeah, would if we fly over we can get really cool footage. We can take Ben's plans true I have a plane that we can use for really Friend has a plane we can borrow we should skydive right into the fucking farm and go just talk to those people and see what they think And just put the camera in front of their face and hit record You guys see the video of Rick Scott eating in a restaurant and venting and getting booed out of the restaurant. No Jack's what why don't you go to his hat up? I don't know without a accomplish talk to him You will not talk to me if you sit there and go I You got to work our way over to I am he hates me. But if you go there and you you have a chance to be like the next Michael more I'm pretty sure that if you go oh Sorry, I'm pretty sure if you go there They I think if I don't know how but there's a way where they have to respond to you like I don't know if you go There's a guy's I feel always about if you send them a letter or something like that I'm pretty sure that they have to respond to you like these government officially His office is a public office. It's taxpayer money, but I understand that But is that gonna like is that gonna solve anything? You know well be interesting Anything but it will make noise and it will fucking raise health that's true We did get you know when we did the the prime age prank You know pranking the entire state. Yeah, we got a statement from Rick Scott's office Right, yeah, and that video. Yeah I think if you request if you if you write them an email or phone call tell them who you are and say you'd like to have a sit down I don't know if you'll get him, but at least somebody from his office that they will probably we can encourage more I'm saying to write letters call let them know if we get a hundred thousand that's what I'm saying if like if somebody comes forward And I get an email of like hey, this is something that we can actually do if we get like 100,000 million three million people on board with this like they'll have to do something I just don't know what we can if anybody watching it on the White House website Yeah, if anybody watching this video has any inside scoop into somebody in these People on board with this like they'll have to do something but I just know what we can do if anybody watching this on the White House website If anybody watching this video has any inside scoop into somebody in these offices that can get Jackson meeting Please hit us up and let us know you know what I love. I love the evolution of the jigsaw Trying a long way, man. I can't sit watch this shit happen. It just makes me so mad dude But that's what's pretty funny about about the power of the jigsaw as you go anywhere find a 13 year old kids Sorry Jackson and asking about the jigsaw. You're like you're like they're president. Yeah, oh, yeah Especially because we got like T-Fool on board now, too He's gonna promote the petition to either tonight or tomorrow Think he's we need that he could almost sing with him to lead at the last 30 thousand. I can get 60 thousand We need to talking days. We need to from now to promote this freaking petition dude All right, 72 thousand you have 72 thousand petitions signatures. Yeah, so all you need is signatures And how many more do we need 28,000 another 20 it's only to 100,000 totally yeah For the White House release of statement right and if that happens the state will have to take notice Hell yeah, there's one to for Donald Trump to resign and it already has 140 thousand Not Right on the front He can write right there was one like deport Justin Bieber back to camp 400,000 Do like the censorship on the White House website is unbelievable dude like you know for over two hours When I first launched the petition Nobody could sign for two hours straight during the peak of my video But do you think that is because of the because they were you think they're trying to shut it down a crappy website? They're the fucking White House They not have a website that can handle traffic think back to you When they had the health care enrollment it crashed like the first day they did it yeah, but that's like unlike oh bomb a care That was a huge scale that was a huge wide scale right? But I'm pretty sure that I'm wrong with youtuber I don't think they're really trying that hard to make the petition side of the site that great no for sure I mean dude, I literally I did an Instagram poll is anybody having problems signing 50% said they were not able to sign How many people responded to that Instagram poll something like 30,000 that's crazy So that's a that's a juke squad right there like that's a lot of time I'm so convinced we we have already had over a hundred thousand people try to sign this it's just it's not letting everybody sign it And it seems like the the closer we get to a hundred thousand the harder it is for people to sign which is crazy I have 48 hours So we're gonna have been on it 730 to talk about the other side of this Under 50,000 it was at like 54,000 two days ago now. We're at the 3000 we'll get there So I'm saying so then what then we expect to hear a response from somebody How's the time to directly has to release a statement whether it's on their website whether they Directly right. Yep. Well, we're gonna do something. We're gonna make sure Crazy shit make a documentary about it. We have to I've just you know, I've been brainstorming as much as I can it's just Oh, you know my my YouTube channel is If all right. Yeah, of course, but the reason why I've been so successful is because we you know We go in the ocean. We have fun. We do 24 hour challenges. We film all these videos like I don't even want to be on a backyard right now Right where you don't want to Almost a lot of why my channel is known is the videos we filmed in the backyard and it had to be at my house And like your your your You're standing in the film is infected. I don't even want to I don't want to be there I want to go back to LA I want to go to Georgia and film with the almighty or like just go anywhere. You know go back to Hawaii I love this town so much so do I There's more than I love anything in California or anywhere. Of course dude. I hate LA I like a lot of people in LA and I make really good content every time I go to LA But ten out of ten times old rather well think about like Danny like you're you're serious backhands like you like right now That would be like yeah We just Talked up to really how to actually that would be a good upset are they really out of jobs right now dude nobody's going on fishing charters They're like I will not buy any locally Any locations not buy and see food right now. I'm a best guitar. I don't eat red meat chicken I don't eat any meat other than fish from time to time and I will only eat fish if I know it's locally caught by like You know some of the deckhands by Merrick by somebody that I know Personally that caught it right. I like I won't do it now. I just know what no What did you become that when did you start? Oh three years ago just because the like I stopped eating meat when I looked into Where the meat that I was eating came from and I became so disgusted and so sick to my stomach like fuck if if you Know somebody that raises cows and like open fields that like live a good life, you know That's fine. I've absolutely no problem with that but like the fast food industry the meat like the Animals what they go through for you to get no one to watch some tender. Yeah That's the thing though. The video is a lot of you ignorant to what you're eating though like that's not that you should watch I just mean they're bad. It's horrible. It's so more most of these animals don't need to get to see sunlight Until the day they die, but that's the the view. I was talking about the people are they they go Well, that's terrible and they go but I still want my McDonald's so I'm still gonna eat there Those people don't matter but that's like everybody Get it like if you want to eat meat like because it puts you out It's like I want to eat my McDonald's. I want it now I don't want to have to do any extra work and if that's what has to happen then so I And well, they make it affordable for you know poor people to eat cheap food like yeah Yeah, you not go to end it out when you're in California. No, it's hard for me not to go I get it, but like then again, that's like That's like the difference between someone with Instagram followers and not you know It's just another person. It's like it's not like spec This person's not special because they have a certain amount of followers or they might be they might be really a really sophisticated smart person and in my experience with people who are very popular on social media Nine out of ten times they're very intelligent very hardworking like sophisticated people of course There's the one out of ten that's just super ignorant and an idiot and became famous off of being Ignorant, you know, yeah, but yeah, this is this is my standpoint on meat. This is the reason why I don't eat anymore I believe that you know say a hundred years ago Yeah, hunting and farming and raising your cattle and raising your pigs was a means of survival for a lot of people 200 300 years ago like on your own farm people. Yeah people had their own Animals their own cattle so that they could provide for their families that they could provide for their friends But we live in a day in an age where you can go to any store and get Literally the healthiest thing you could ever put in your body at any given time and still people are eating these animals that are being tortured and killed and just like Let's say I'm liking pens. They live in like they sleep on their feces and their piss and they Live on it and they get all kinds of crazy infections and you know they don't they're like oh this one This one's infected and it's covered in tumors, so we're not gonna sell it. No, they still sell that shit You know me tumors go through chickens like dude. I don't know I've bit into a tour I bit into a tour Where did you get chicken with a tumor on it? Chick-fil-A. No, no, it wasn't chick-fil-A. I was in California I think it was like a denies or some shit. Oh, I don't know back down disgusting It was like I can't even describe it hard with his thought And just I can't even like wait, you're driving down the road and you're like man, I'm hungry and you stop real quick Go get an apple go you been where do you even find one of those McDonald's on every block every gas station as a banana Right, but if you're that lazy then fuck yeah, you lazy like you can't fuck I'm in that category expensive health foods expensive. It's like you know what else is expensive? Dine a fucking cancer Yeah, you're gonna you're gonna die if you eat unhealthy I think it's worth spending a little bit of shot out to Newport The Newport concrete But that's the thing is like there's people that eat super healthy their whole life vegetarians and they die a can't ready Show me those people Do what yeah, I mean, it's the right thing to do man I just you know, I just want people to be healthy I want people to think for themselves and it's really easy to close your eyes and eat that burger without like you know Like I think that if you want to eat chicken and you want to eat a burger Go kill that animal with your bare hands. Yeah, no, but you know, but he got time for that with a bone arrow I'm just saying like you know like It's kind of selfish to just like taking animals life that you know nothing about I feel like It's like a conscious decision for me. I just it just freaked me a lot of people feel that way It's a lot easier for me to instead of pick up a burger to pick up an apple It's like I will nothing died. It's healthier for me like what the fuck was I doing? Yeah, the world would be a better place for sure if more people thought like that. Yeah, I don't know I mean that's just my personal stake. I don't look down on anyone free like I For healthy living. I'm not gonna look down on anyone or treat anyone differently for You know eating shit food. I'm just gonna be like you're you're an idiot Like why are you eating shit food like you could be eating healthy like I love you I want you to be a better person. That's why I'm telling you this. I'm not I don't like think you're a bad person I just think that you could like I don't want to say ignorant Like your ignorant to it, but like the death of the ignorant is uneducated on yeah I think it would be more like lazy like we're like for sure That's like my stance on it's like I'm hungry and driving down the road. I'm not gonna 7-11 get an apple like I'm not gonna be full after an apple I'm gonna make dolls get a dollar Salad somewhere you could get all sorts of shit. Yeah, there's 80 thousand edible plants and people eating you go to Wa-Wah Get a veggie sub real quick. I want to van a Harry's I got a veggie. I just take their yesterday I never liked him in a hair Have you wait wait wait wait shot of a van a Harry had a race and be away with your own Fuck with the Havana Harry's have you ever been to La Tera Cita in Tampa? I have that guest bro. I have to take yes. I took there's one on 66. What do we take? I took Edwin or somebody that oh Edwin and I and Brandon. Oh, yeah I'm taking you to fucking La Tera Cita and you will hate Havana Harry's after that It is the most it's the most ghetto hole in the wall Cuban restaurant you've ever been to there open till like 4 a.m On we have but he doesn't eat meat. He just told you so it's you can get you can get beans and rice You don't have to get meat. Yeah, I've been to more things I pretty much be done with the topic Have you ever you probably haven't but f4 am McDonald's you go through the drive-thoe and it's all uber eats Can you imagine like you're saying like people are lazy? They can't even go to McDonald's to pick up their own bad food. I think jacks even siptoes Yeah, I have you know, I want to know You're good That's what I'm saying like people are not only so lazy that they can't even go to McDonald's themselves That have uber eats to go to McDonald's. Yeah, we're asking them to do something like another level Yeah, that's what I'm saying like these are the same people that go there We're asking them like not eat their ever they're like they're not even willing But we're not asking those people that cuz they're not gonna do it We're talking to people who are you know might make that decision issue those people But there's a reason that there's a million McDonald's is because it makes one also here The reason why their stock is plummeting right now. Yeah, people are starting to realize like Why the fuck am I eating? Yeah, that's true that for the generational change between our generation and our parents Yeah, the only time I ever eat McDonald's is I'm fucking drunk as shit And I want a hot-fudge sunday or some fries and I just there's nothing I know it's 3 a.m. I will get chick-fil-a fries every now and then that's it though No potatoes were hurt making why is the ice cream machine always broke down I Know I always down if you're hungry and it's a Sunday McDonald's is calling and Chick-fil-a is closed You know I consider myself lazy sometimes because I use Uber Eats, but you know what I you breeds turmeric wheatgrass ginger shot and a Major major shout out to Ten bucks I get ten double cheeseburg $10 to ten pounds of raw veg. Well, here's here's what's funny think about ten double cheeseburgers, right? Think about how much resources it takes to make ten double cheeseburgers, right? How do you how were you gonna? Think about how much resource the next takes to make wheatgrass ten bucks also no think about that no That's I don't I don't believe that I disagree. You could grow grass. No, I'm saying McDonald's You would think that should cost more. It's got meat in it that have a cow Binance bull we talk about little take anything to make it's like another thing all right I don't want to offend you guys why the fuck do we get hot dogs still? Never one terrible Everything you never want to eat bro. It's like it's the it's the butthole Eyes and the brains they grind it all up and they shape it like dicks and people eat it I'm not he bring national bread shoot. I have a little tube My one of my favorite videos on YouTube is when it snoop dog watches how hot dogs are made any fucking narrates He doesn't know Everything that you don't want to eat on a pig that they do At the end he's like what is this hot dogs? He's like oh fuck no cuz I need Goddamn hot dog, man. I want to shout out Hebrew National hot dogs. They make theirs That's a hot dog, bro. I'm oh Yeah, there's a lot of stuff that looks gross when you eat it that's fucking Foul is there any fruit or veggie that looks gross? I had a jackfruit once it was so you got to pay attention to your fruits and veggies too because there's a lot of gmo Fruits and fuck up shit, you know seedless fruits and like you can't even trust your own fruit nowadays But also everything that is in those fruit is also animals and then the animal has to die fruits And you know fruit doesn't die. It doesn't feel pain Actually, they do know they don't feel a little plants feel pain, right? They don't feel pain They can they can kind of know We need to ask about this one Ben gets here. We need asking This is a Plank did hooked up to a lie detector test no, and then you think you picture the plant on fire in your head and it Starts going like this stop swear to god. Yeah, they're pretty smart man I saw on the Joe Rogan podcast the way the guy put it was like basically Can we turn off the hot dog video? It's like it knows but it doesn't I don't want to know where my hot dog is now You need to watch this for us because you're the guy. I want to see your disease This is gonna be seared in your little Jewish brain. I think you was brain Yeah, and those hot dogs were kosher too. I swear you don't want to eat those anymore I'm still gonna eat them. Let's be honest. Oh Look, that's what they do to you tumors. I give you some mention is like you know It's crazy to me is that vegans that promote health and You know don't want animals to be murdered. I feel like it way more hate than people who That do it, you know, but you know why why because the vegans are typically like the let's you know peaceful earth We don't like guns and the people that eat meat are the ones that kill animals But you're like yeah guns. I'm gonna go kill you if you don't agree with me. Yeah, that just numb. You know, it's really sad too because the meat industry more Carbon gets released into the air which is gonna be the end of our atmosphere. It's proven every every scientist who knows any like that knows what he's talking about whatsoever will stand by the Fact that once too much carbon gets released into the air We're all gonna fucking die. Oh, yeah It's guaranteed and most of the carbon that gets released into the air right now is because of the all these cattle farms That's true So that's another reason that I stopped eating meat is because I don't want to contribute to the death of our planet You know, I just don't want to do it every time I eat meat. I feel like I am because I take the fat people stand through it I stop eating a McDonald's it's not gonna do anything though McDonald's is not gonna close because I stop But he knows that It's one person It's not a big people stop. It's like but the thing is it's like this like 100 million people Do you personally want to contribute to the death of the planet or you don't worry about yourself contributing to a better planet? Yeah, I think about it this way. I think about you know, like thinking about everybody else and make your decisions Think about it this way. It is a really slow effect. Think about how people thought about McDonald's 20 years ago It was the greatest thing in the world versus how people think about it now McDonald's was like that's true When McDonald's first came out with that You were like these knee land. Yeah, my dad talks about McDonald's like when McDonald's came around like everyone ate there It was the greatest. Oh, yeah, it's the fucking place And then like it's like it's like the government pushing us to drink milk our whole life. Yeah, no filled strong Yeah, dude, I haven't drank milk. I have a drink milk in a decade. I did stop drinking Serious, yeah, of course I drink milk not a mess can I drink Coke I got a McDonald's I drink milk I drink You're an all gonna die. You're gonna all gonna die or I'll be happy. I grew up my whole life drink a little whole I get that dollar cheeseburger. I'm like, this is the best deal. I'm sure it's a drink milk Yeah, why not a lot of people The only animal on this planet that drinks another animal's milk. Yeah, that's fucking good. Yeah It's not natural if you think about it and watch some shit about milk Oh, yeah, drinking milk makes your bones more brittle another thing. No, I'm not sure that's Calcium makes your bones way Know what else is in milk listen to this do you know there's do you know there's there's more calcium in one Clobe of broccoli then there isn't a whole gallon of milk. I think that's fake Nutrition Comes from plants people like how am I gonna get my protein? Animal got its protein we're gonna have to do a follow-up with a nutrition is this is going off-top It's not I have a question This is a hyper you gotta do some research boys. This is all true. I gotta watch some Netflix documentaries There's like times more protein and kale than there's in me. Oh, yeah 10 times more. I hate kale I have watched see I'm not disforming it. I eat all of it dozens of Netflix documentaries directed by Left Democrats in any of you And a lot of those know I mean documentary Shit, but there's so much truth. There is there's a lot of truth like and the thing is like I clickbated this shit out of my last video I put a dead body in my thumbnail wasn't actually that body I just wanted to create a thumbnail that would get as many people as possible to look at my video because I know that it's for a good cause You know like if if you have to lie and you have to trick people For a good cause I'm all for it, you know like if People hate you for tricking them into looking at something that's gonna Greatly benefit the planet or the state or your life like by all means go for it I will never be mad at somebody for tricking me into looking at something that's gonna, you know, help my life Speaking about click bait. I want to talk about this is like way off talk, but dude Have you looked at Joe Rogan's channel? He is like opposite of click bait so real And it's so successful because he has good. Yeah, this is just a dog. That's that jack on you Like like let's talk about that for a second. That's like a really he is honestly He's one of the one most successful media outlets in the world right now Yeah, absolutely absolutely he's doing like not zero click bait It's like almost negative click bait because there's thumbnails the titles They're like all it is is episode number name of person you've never heard of but they talk about shit They get so much attention What I want to say about that is there are a lot of really dumb people unfortunately, but there's also Way more people that are actually really sophisticated the people that just sit in their house and you know like I like to think that like out of every 100 people 99 of them have more good than they do bad. Yeah, and like there's a lot of people who like get off on inspiring, you know educational like Commerce like conversations, you know when they're actually talking about something of substance instead of like Fuck bitches get money smoked dope like you know like there's a lot of people that are really that love that Yeah, but like the thing is like I watch all those videos But it's because I'm like is this really? What our generation is into and like a lot of people find it comical. This is like this I got a follow-up question in the milk thing. Yes, please How do you eat ice cream? I? Don't that makes everybody happy listen Candy tastes great you can make ice cream without without milk with in moderation. There's alternatives of milk like Milk and no McDonald's no candy no ice cream Even quality of your life would enhance I'd be so depressed for us Do anything fun like what you know I work and then I'm by McDonald's an ice cream with Anatomy satisfaction if you need to seek you need to seek out something good. You got to live your life Man if you want to eat a long- There you go man. There's a lot of other things that are way more fun than this But I'm gonna go home and I'm gonna eat ice cream probably you know that's fine Hey, you do that that fucking that date whatever that thing is that you jumped off of an LA. Yeah, how high was that? Oh 70 feet yesterday in the Bahamas I found we were driving through the woods and we found this big hole in the ground because in in Freeport Bahamas There's like this underwater channel of caves that run through the whole entire island of Freeport and like scuba Divers have explored it or whatever so if you're driving through the woods you can find these giant gaping holes in the rock That go into a big pit of water and that that water leads out like through cave to the ocean and We found this big hole in the ground in the woods and We jumped there was a ladder coming out so we jumped into it. I think it was it had to have been no more than 30 feet Dude scared the fuck out of me. I mean I'm probably I'm getting older or whatever and you do it all the time So like now being more milk and then you scared me worse But dude glad that was a joke No, but yeah, the forces serious I think it is a joke This is more than twice the height of that dude. There's no fucking way in hell. I would have jumped off it And that's that was that was easy for me. I've got a lot higher What's the highest you've ever jumped on saying he bridge? St. Hebrew when you were little did your dad let you have a big ass bridge my parents I drank more I drank more milk than all of you. I guarantee it. I drink. Yeah, that's why you don't break bones when you're jumping off all this Broken more bones and all of you put together to you again More if you didn't have before this might have been done any research on this force, so you just going off of what you've been told I mean, let me I can tell you why I'm thinking this So when I was little yeah, I drank like my dad according to what I heard two gallons a week, right? Which is probably not more than that yeah, I broke a bone in my life and then in fact I I had a baby did you ever do anything that you possibly would have broken? I literally had a thing risky I had to have a dentist extract my baby teeth because my bones were so strong from Because the milk house rotted them into your guns Those are your convinced us that his teeth are so strong to be dressed. We just lost the battery do you care? I'm not even playing devil. I thought that milk was good for you. No, right? And I do I did too, so did I I'm gonna seek but I professional But I've watched some some videos Nutritionist will you come back? Yeah, I'm finding that's I'm finding a nutritionist A but look I'll tell you what I can try to solve a nutritionist when I went to the gym I had like a free thing with my trainer and a nutritionist and the one thing they told me was to stay away from dairy For sure. Yeah, it is fall is milk dairy. Yeah. I guess What do you mean you can't milk is like the post book in billboard for dairy? Okay, look they try to fatten these cows up as much. Well that I understand Foremoans and shit. They pump into those cows on the daily Well, they're off if you don't milk them though. That's right, but you don't got a button You're not supposed to milk them their babies are supposed to drink the milk baby cows like baby cows Capped humans cow. Yeah, you know the cow looks like cows Right, I'm gonna have a nutritionist back here. You're a cattle rancher. It's a big sugar and we're gonna There's what I'm gonna say get them for still talk they don't give a fuck what's coming out of those otters Do you know how many cows otters get? Crazy infections where pos they check it. Oh, they don't they tested you think they test Yeah, millions of cows a day. No, they test the milk No, they don't yeah, they do. Oh, they fucking know. They're not allowed to sell it unless they test it Right, but you think they're really test what they what it would have Yeah, yeah, and that kills all the bad shit. No, you got to watch some videos They can't sell milk without testing this is what I Kill you instant right like they can still sell can't if you watch the process you're gonna be like What I'm saying they can't just suck it out of the cow and go here you go Look no, but they're saying here fucking suck it down in the past and the test with the test is bougie anyway Alcohol is legal marijuana is not alcohol kills so many people every year marijuana has killed no free the weed, but it's illegal and Alcohol Fucking anyone can walk into any storm by it at any time so that's where that's where the lines are blurred Let's say like like well, they can't certainly cancel if it's not if it's not okay Well, he's so fucking alcohol you drinking up that you're gonna die Guaranteed it's proven it happens all the time, but the thing is with milk pus and blood and all just them like the most disgusting Infected cows ever they suck that shit out of them tell their dry dude. I don't that's true like dogs They don't drink fucking cat mill and vice versa What they grow up right I'm getting into Tristan as we're doing we're doing part two. I'm literally Forest is in full blown Yeah, I give it like a month or two Taste of like she's gonna be fuck I'm gonna say Ben and Jerry's whatever's got the most butter fat from the cow taste amazing no, I Also taste amazing Like skinny people that look healthy like you get cancer too, bro I'm getting fat in my old age now. You know, I've been doing yoga, so I don't I'm not getting fat ever Just stop drinking milk Jack T yoga Stretchel I don't do yoga, but you gotta come to yoga. I'm down. Hell yeah every Wednesday at now. It's 545 You know, that's good for you. I'm down. Dany knows once a week. I don't fast I don't go in the summer wrong, but I heard that I just heard that your way better off doing regular yoga than hot Yogurt I heard that too. It's like you're not supposed to exercise in like when do you guys colding heat? I never have time to do that anyway Every Wednesday yeah, you should come for is oh my Yeah, then fuck you know, that's cool, but I heard that like Something about when you're in the heat and like the blood floating brain I have absolutely I heard it's not particularly Why the fuck he opened it in hot yoga. Yeah, why hot No, I don't know when you just wet more it's just like a trend. It's like I sure did sweat my fucking ass off one I have absolutely no idea I Know I do Amazing yeah, I like I tasted good ice cream tasted candy. Yeah, of course is that you just needed all the time No, I eat it one. I'm depressed or when I want to feel good Hey, yeah, yeah, he did all time everybody's got their life out. I do something productive I feel like man smokes a cigarette. Yeah. I work out. I eat. I go to the gym We drink we can buy you smoke a cigarette yeah, he knows fucking hell about I quit smoking cigarettes. I mean a quit drinking milk So that's good A conscious effort to become hell my way I wish I could be But it would be so hard don't do it just don't don't do it all once the thing is with me But I would like to be vegan yeah No, because that is the healthiest diet on the planet. Yeah, it is it's very hard though It is especially when every restaurant that you will ever go to tries to put cheese on fucking everything I like cheese. I do too. I know you're right and we shouldn't we should go back with you stand tries to put cheese on fucking everything i like cheese i do too i don't know what you're right and we shouldn't we should have a lot of that jammer damn it's just crazy uh... she's has milk in it you got a yoga i know i'm not trying to try hot yoga once but you gotta do just a couple little things all right now she's in his cheese bad for you bro you're absolutely right bring your girl to the little of it down to bring a weed brownie sweetie what's like the thing is just because a lot of people do something and because you grew up on it doesn't mean it's necessarily good cancer like i go to my grandma she's still like you know it's crazy too is like between my cousins and myself and my sister like tons of us are going either vegan vegetarian or pescatarian and i like why mcdonald is having trouble with our generation because they actually and are because our generation is figuring it out there like wow you're killing it we're going to fucking die hopefully our generation is too late and we can still save the world yet but we're so much harder than passion it's great millennials will spend great dollars on avocados because they're vegan it's because we see all the baby right there we know this about baby or the fuck shit up and so the younger people are kind of taking notice of it but it is a job to go i will drink alcohol on occasion on very special occasion i can't stop drinking alcohol but people drink alcohol what's funny is that i have friends that go to the organic supermarket they buy all organic food all organic this that spend hundreds of dollars on organic everything no money well spent yeah and then they had they rent their house they rent their car or they lease their car they don't know it was about any of that they spend all the money on so what for their quality of life the fuck you can't you can't take the fucking house with you when you die it's true or she's like a mini fucking bin because we're in business we make money not everybody's a giant place he's a jill we's a good jill right here your whole life is revolving around making money yeah it's like big good night bro fuck money here we would all just be sitting here green yeah fuck about it yeah true we do need you here i have a customer and he says he says people would say money doesn't buy happiness our liars because i buy you temporary happiness but a lot of them but rich people are as do aside also money can't buy health they people say that yes can because if you go to the doctor what do you pay them with you don't money with money look you don't have to go to the doctor if you insist that's what everybody gets sick eventually yeah you know not everybody you know who gets sick way less often no parents and vegan is that fake news no that's real facts we're gonna find out okay when i get this nutritionist in here I can't wait I want somebody friends with this guy no I want somebody that's literally like a professional but this is all I know about we're milk comes from or says that all that national devil's advocate force has no idea about that that's not even health homeschooled my entire life i didn't my own research yeah tell me about that explain that to me that's something that a lot of people don't understand and that's that's for somebody like me that's like that's that's kind of for your homeschooled your whole life what was it like being homeschooled give me a percentage how much that you learned in school have you not used in your life what's a ninety nine point nine percent of everything i think i thought of school i've never used that's not i agree there was a lot of a lot of i'm gonna be serious it's at least sixty five percent at least basic math and that's about the only thing i've ever used in my life probably algebra the only reason you would ever need to know algebra is to be an algebra teacher no that's not true i mean not no you're building something out of wood okay construction i think that's not your industry there's algebra there's uses for alge so if you're like an engineer in our country i mean if you're sure it depends on your job i'm fascinated by algebra i think it's whoever created the whole formula it's it's genius now what i'm saying it's like if so if you you know early on enough that you are not ever going to do a job pertaining to algebra then you shouldn't have to take it and that's what schools are going towards now is more what do they call it focus learning or whatever if you know you want to be a contractor and you get older you can just go straight to that you can cut out american history or whatever i don't know what they do that i don't think they let you do that they're starting to do that now it will be a little more maybe i'm trying to school that let you do shit like that doesn't like anything we have right now jack doesn't like the food that school jack what was it like being homeschooled the greatest experience ever i was exact opposite it was why was amazing why why because my parents let us express ourselves creatively and they thought there's a lot of shit in the public school system that my children are never going to need to know and they believed that they could teach us basically good morals and you know like basic math how to read how to write on their own they just thought that they could teach us a lot better than your parents talk to you yeah i'm on i had a tutor from time time okay but when it came down to it like i have to say i did do much i did not do much schooling compared to the average kid yeah which is awesome i think it's great i mean like you mean like your way away shut the fuck up because you and your brothers are obviously way different than all everybody but you guys are also extremely extremely lucky to be in the positions you guys are no that has absolutely nothing to do with love definitely i agree i has nothing to do with how many people are on youtube right now that have so many not a lot of views and look at you you have tons of views i've also been working every single day after the blood no no i'm not saying that you're not working harm saying if you didn't have youtube and you know what's that have to do with luck because just like football players it's like how many people play football how many of them are looking at football players i mean there's a bit of a bit of a luck the best people make it to the best they're lucky to get athletes that work harder to train that are better than other players hold on hold on the number one the number one i'm not sitting on your back wait the number one non-quarterback and the whole NFL is a is shorter than all of us because he's lucky that he has lucky he has no genetic looks he's lucky that he has whatever it takes to do the job better than anybody else he trained probably his whole life luck your luck your your luck you got the genes you got your lucky that one of your videos and Tony around is the shortest guy he had no lucky jeans he's the shortest no not lucky jeans he was see that's even more luck he was lucky that he didn't have the great job is it like he trained harder to run faster and catch the ball more than other people in it well what i was trying to say and i'm not shitting on japanese watery is luck that's the best football player in the world is not like not exactly i'm going to do it true i mean i guess that there's some aspects to where sometimes things fall into place but i can see that more of like fate doesn't like yeah fail but what i'm i wasn't i wasn't trying to be rude to you but i'm saying if you're trying to get certain jobs like let's say i'm a large majority of people in america have to get jobs or work for somebody else they can't make content or word so they go to get a job and they look at your paperwork and they go where did you were to school and if you were homeschooled and you don't have a college degree they're gonna throw your shit out you're ever even gonna get considered what's why you should never want to work for someone shows one work for yourself well that's a little to me i need people to work for other people well the world also 99 percent of the people have gone to traditional school and they were put through the system to believe their bread to believe that they have to be a part of the system let's say you need to get your brain worked right you have a brain tumor and you go to the doctor and he goes oh i was home would you would you be you're not gonna be a doctor you can't be a as well brain surgeon right that so that's what i'm saying is you want traditional schooling for certain clear choices but it's not for everybody right not for everybody but it doesn't have anything to do with luck either you can make it but i'm not talking luck anymore okay we're past lock i'm still going to come like a very specific thing like a brain surgeon yes but sure what people like this is my problem with this generation i the thing that pisses me off more than anything on the planet is when somebody says i don't know how i can't because i don't know how it's like how much effort have you put into figuring this out like i reached a point in my life where i was like if i didn't know how to do something it bothered me and i knew that i had all the tours we have the internet yeah you can do any virtually you can figure it out any answer any question any question be interested in it well what i was what i was saying like what i was worried about is you have a large large following of kids that are in school still yes and i don't want them to get the wrong idea seeing you say oh i was home school is the best thing that ever happened to me and then they go i don't want to be in school anymore jackses is wasted time why should i go he didn't say it was a real tough time that's what i'm saying is that drop the fuck out right now that go to college that could be very dangerous for a lot of don't go to college tell your parents you're fucking selves college is fuck dude right stom but on paper i mean i'm gonna get i'm gonna get shit on here hey but look if you want to be a youtuber like jack like the people that are looking up to you don't need to graduate high school you don't need to go to college to be the fucking talk you two i have also come it's on the floor as force as a map you have a master's degree yeah how much does that done and i think well if i when i see a customer and they come in and they go why should i use your and i go because i have all these right does not mean shit to me well you because that's you but i have million dollar companies economy and they go that you want you to do our work what can you show us why should we use you i say because i'm real good i respect you no because they look at my people you can probably fit better your own business first you're not right and it's not necessary not shooting every industry i think it's good for a lot of people i think that if you're going to school to genuinely use that as a tool to better your own business or your own life like do you work for someone or do you work for yourself do you run your own business work for myself so because you work for it you don't need a degree to work for yourself no you don't but it makes you look the way better when i was in school i was one of my professors for i never knew you even went to college until today i have two undergrad degrees and a master's degree i went to so much school people done with school right yeah how much money do you still owe on school nothing nothing all right so here's my parents that's impressive because my parents planned ahead and made sure that that was so that doesn't have to out of my parents doesn't happen to shout out to your parents parents are very financially intelligent they're Jewish and that's what they passed on to me not to be raised but what i'm saying what i'm saying yeah because that's you're racist shout out to the Jews i talked to the Jews i totally threw around the whole world i forget what i'm saying you're talking about your degree and your parents making you to the school and oh yeah yeah so when i got went after when i was there i was like this is the ways of time i'm already making money why should i even bother but now literally when when people people come to me and they go like what credential like i meet people from government like governor governors and senators and stuff like that your best friend's ricks got yeah yeah that's ben's best friend let's not go back to that yeah and um i met somebody the other night i want to name him because i don't know if he wants to be on the video but i met him and it's like well what credentials do you have and it's like oh i have this and that and they go oh okay and it's like it's like almost in their mind it's like now this conversation can continue you know i'm saying because it's like and when i was in college i had a professor and he said he goes everybody's here to get their ticket punch that's what he's told me so not necessarily you're not necessarily there because you want the you want to the knowledge that they're providing you it's that once you finish you have that degree that no one can ever take away from you and it makes you look really good i'm on paper like if somebody didn't know you and they didn't know jubsquad and they didn't know farce or whatever and they just saw both of us on paper and i had a degree and you did it for what jub it closed-minded way to look at it but they're automatically i'm not saying this is not true but they're automatically going to say well this guy had the wherewithal to go to school he must know more than jakda in that bed that's a situation that is correct but that's how i don't even think that's correct that's how employers hire but not everybody your as well job are you talking about applying you say okay i said my resume and i have a degree you don't who's getting we have a job yeah sure my eyes all right shut the fuck up everybody wait no we live in a book a lot of fucker at a time shut the fuck up if you apply to my head a construction company i work at i'd probably hire jack because he looks like you work twice as hard as you and i don't give a fuck if you have a degree because you probably can't even hit a mile with a hammer find a construction company call them up and say would you rather have somebody with a degree with construction nobody that we work with has a degree as everybody has a felony on their record because that's nobody has a college degree they have a I'm gonna get crucified in this video I should just leave it for it okay fuck with a degree all right this is 2018 i'm not trying to be angry no i'm not sure if i'm not making it well shaded just fucking drunken stone just letting you know force has a master's degree that we're all different i mean but respect for getting your degree force i do respect you as a person for going through that that's not why i haven't i didn't get it because i want somebody to respect me i got it first i got it because my parents made me but now that i'm done you're happy with it yeah that's okay that's not you yeah but i'm telling you i have it on the wall and i don't like put it in the front door but i have it behind my desk in my office yeah and when people see it they're like oh my god like you have that and it's like they change their outlook on me like yeah much more respect right but what's that's cool and does that everybody not me i didn't walk in here and change my own i'm so hey it's in school there are some people in school and it's right but that's not everybody want to be when you grow up ninety nine out of a hundred say i want to be youtubers yes and that's what i'm worried about why what are you worried about it that's where hey shane i'm sorry i'm trying i'm ever fucking time he says think i'm broke i don't know i have customers that are doctors and their kids say i want to be i have i have a lot of it he's a doctor he's a multi-millionaire doctor his son has a picture of you on his wall fire i swear to god and he goes i go what do you want to be watching that he's saying oh i want to take over dad's multi-million dollar business because i want to be a youtube star it's way more fun it is but like we need doctor we need smart not that you're not that's wrong on that right but that's not every that is we need people and if that's a literally turning into men i get another drink which i think that's how every single day this week and he's rubbing off yeah we got it we're gonna have to cut you off a band hey but look i understand you need doctors you need all those people but you do that doesn't mean that some kid can't be it want to be a youtuber how what was your dad telling you when you were you're a five eight eight nine ten years old like like before like elementary school age middle school age what was your mom and your dad telling you like you have to go to college everyone else is like they said school yeah that's interesting have to that's very interesting thank you but you weren't you weren't even in school so i want to know like what your your parents were communicating to you and you were that young age why did they want you to go to college if they homeschool do you because liberal i like it was fucked i think we can all agree that high school is corrupt and there's way more bad influences now it is than there are good and i don't know i just they just didn't see the public school system if i went to school i would probably go to a private school fortunately enough i had parents who are financially stable that would be able to afford for me to go to private school but they would prefer to do it on their own um they wanted me to go to college because my dad is very old fashioned when it comes down to it he is a firm believer that if you don't go to college you are going to be a fuck up when you grow up really he yeah he he pushed so hard for me to go to college told me youtube was fucking stupid told me not to make youtube videos told me that we're dreaming that we're idiots you know me and marek were like we had a very clear vision of what we wanted this youtube channel to be and we saw its potential and we were so confident in its potential but he didn't believe in it at all at the time to be perfectly honest now as you got hit two thousand in the super grandpa but i don't think the question or we yeah but i like to watch but no i want to add something i've been trying i've been trying to say for a minute can you focus can chime in after there are certain industries that are in no way reliant on social media however i'm a firm believer that most businesses now a days thrive online unless you're a restaurant like most last time there's needed social media now so are you going to go with somebody that has a marketing degree in college are you going to go with me somebody who has really good one i've heard and that's you know millions of fall down one thousand good one are you going to go to the guy that has a degree are you going to go to somebody with that has actual proof that they have way more followers that's true that's true to be perfectly honest that's not just social media like you can learn so much more online than you ever could in school like everything that you want in school you could go and figure out for yourself online you can become a mechanic you'd be a doctor what what was what like when your parents were raising you when you were young i want to know like what that was like because it's trying to be chair because i'm trying to be i'm trying to get some shit yeah we should get it so like because because my parents i just fucking had to go to school like the only thing i was worried about was waking up in time to get to fucking school and then i mean i didn't learn much other than like social skills or whatever but like like what were your parents telling you because you're a lot of your friends i'm sure we're in regular school right and so what did your parents tell you like why you were being homeschooled or what was the reason for it they just didn't like the school system they just like i can i can i never really i'm finished to a point i was very sheltered growing up yeah i was very sheltered from pretty much everything outside of my own life i i lived at the beach i was in the ocean every day uh you know i i did baseball growing up i did golf i actually have more golf trophies than i can count i was one of the best golfers in penels county for my age for you that's a rare fact yes and i will i have an entire coll... somewhere there's a storage unit of been somewhere completely stacked full of golf trophies i probably fucked up by not being a golfer because i was like it was yeah i don't know but um you know they they put me in like little league and and stuff like that to where i had like a social you know a social life and i was in i was in co-op which is basically one day a week home schoolers all go together and they do school together right so that i had somewhat of a schooling experience right but like you know i didn't make friends with people who were in public school for until i was probably 14 or 15 and it was because of skinboarding it was because of surfing and i ended up ultimately giving up golf and giving up baseball and everything that i enjoyed when it came to sports because i enjoyed surfing and skinboarding so much more and that kind of like that kind of like shape to i was because like the skinboard and the skate and the surf culture is more of like uh like beach bum like i don't know when you're a golfer you put on your button-up shirt and you make sure you're your collars straight and when you're at the beach it's way more carefree and it's way more like your form is not perfect you know it's like everyone has to know as a surfing as a skinboard you have your own style so like that was like a really awesome way for me to express myself freely and like i believe that the strictest parents raise the worst kids when it comes down to it maybe not every single time sometimes strict parents can raise great kids that become doctors and musicians and you know are like perfect like cookie-cutter children that they want them to be but my parents hardly ever said no like if i wanted to go out and i wanted to go hang out with friends and i wanted to do this i wanted to do that they really did not care what i was doing as long as i wasn't doing drugs as long as i wasn't getting wasted like they really said yes to a lot hey mom can i hang posters up all over my wall can i paint the fucking ceiling purple like whatever i wanted whatever any of us wanted when we were growing up as long as we weren't hurting ourselves as long as we weren't being mean to other people and like i have friends who are single-ch-ch-single-childs single-children who-only-childs you know-only-childs and um-childs are the only childs you know who i want them-who-hout-only-childs like my girlfriend uh she has a really like i don't want to see she has a problem sharing she's just like and in my family if i had a toy it was everyone's toy like we always shared everything with each other nothing was mine nothing was yours it was a very like like while we could do whatever we wanted we also had to make sure that we were fair to each other growing up and i don't honestly know where i'm going with this but it was just it was a very free like if i wanted to give up baseball that was my choice if i wanted to stop taking piano lessons that was my choice and i did i regret it because i really wish i knew how to play piano better now but but you can learn on the internet they were exactly and i have and i have and i've gone online and i've tried to go back i can play a couple out in johnson so i'm happy with that you know but like they were not strict and they pretty much just let us like freely express ourselves however we wanted and they never let us play video games growing up turner never played video games until he was like 12 or 13 that's so crazy to be one of the best gamers on the entire they were strict they weren't they were strict about certain things they were strict about certain things that they didn't think was good for us like they were strict about us not going to school they were strict about us not playing video games spending enough time outside but like i think they did it perfectly to be honest you know i think that the way that they rate like i'm not complaining my brothers and my sisters my two brothers and my sister are all great people very genuine would never want to inflict pain on anyone else wrongfully like i think my parents did an amazing job and like i am not book smart by any means whatsoever like i have you know when it comes down to it i'd say above average grammar like i can read and write very well my handwriting is absolute shit not good there's no justifying that i can't write for shit but i can type fluently like my entire life i was always like title short stories and you know like i can spit out a thousand words on the paper like it's absolutely nothing and i don't know like when it comes to book smart like i'm definitely not book smart i i'm i don't know science i i know history from what i've learned online like i like to think i'm pretty well educated on the stuff that i need to be educated on but like i don't know algebra i know basic math that's about fucking it pretty much but like that's nothing that i've ever needed to right you know the tools that you need for your life and and like i taught myself how to make a website i taught myself how to use photoshop taught myself how to use cameras taught myself how to be an editor you know i uh taught myself how to design products for my store i taught myself how to make stickers in order to buy hats to find the the cheapest hats online so that i can sell merch but like also a good quality because i don't want to sell people complete shit and i don't know just everything that i ever did it was something like that i was that i genuinely took interest in like they never forced us to do anything that we really didn't want to do and i think that that was so important and i've learned so much if i ever have kids one day which i'm terrified to have kids at the rate that we're destroying the planet to be perfectly honest i don't want to bring children into a world that's just going to be super fucked up because we're well on our way there right now but i don't know i think just just like freedom of expression just like letting them be who they want to be and letting them like learn for themselves and you know you can always guide them in the right direction but you're not always going to know it's best for them like my dad told me you two was fucking stupid i need to go to college right he was deadrock he was obviously wrong completely wrong yeah two years ago he was like turn it can't be playing this much video games i'm just set a timer i'm only going to let him play an hour a day he's fucking dying and there's no wrong about that so wrong so i believe that's where i talk that's what i was talking about luck like turn or might not like let's say turn or didn't make it then that would have been bad but you don't know but he maybe you would have been doing something else making money man like do you know how many times i've failed in making a viral video almost every single time there's very few times where the video will do as well as i had hoped or even better than i imagined you know and like what else is trial and error you got to fail a hundred times before you like you don't think of it as paying your dues you're like your full-time job is youtube right now right yes absolutely but it won't be for long i don't plan on that that's all i'm saying what i do for a sustainable for the rest of your life absolutely not i would have seen that as my tool in my next step i don't know i just know if my youtube channel got deleted tomorrow and i could never upload another youtube video ever again i am so confident i would still do just fine what would you do whatever i want here's another thing i dare that's scary i don't know i like back up over a thousand videos all of which have been backed up maybe i'll make a tv show maybe i'll put everything i've ever filmed on instagram maybe i'll go to facebook right you think i'll create a clothing company like i don't have time to try to get my clothing company into every search up or into walmart or into this and into that and like that's because i enjoy making youtube videos so much that i don't feel that i need to do anything else i see youtube as just the first step in whatever the hell i want to do in the future honestly right now i haven't figured it out youtube's working well for me right now if god forbid it dies tomorrow i'll go on to whatever i feel like doing next you know like i could make a living for myself in the skinboarding industry by selling simwards i'm a partial owner of a vx skinboards and i could push those for the rest of my life and probably be okay but you know i want to do better than that for myself would you tell merch to walmart what i tell you they're pretty corporate how i don't support sugar going back to how do you know that going by a fuck ton of sugar product i don't have a product for the kids you did it going back to how your parents raised you in like being home school and all that how because a lot of people may not notice it online but i noticed it how are you in turn are so different as far as like your personality you are so different dude it's crazy on how close were you guys growing up and not that close really we were we were but we also fought a lot we beat the shit out of each other really for a few hours who's older i have your older right what three years so explain to me from my perspective and a lot of people that are close to you how are you guys so why are you guys so different and how are you guys so so much different we always bonded on you know like we both love surfing and love skimboard and we both love cliff jumping and like yeah honestly when we were younger we like i was better than turner at skimboarding and i feel like i don't want to say he resented me for that it's funny we have skim videos on here yeah but but it definitely bothered him that i was better than him and he always wanted to be better than me and it's crazy because like you know i consider myself to be like i i want to say this humbly like one of the best skimboarders on the planet and like turner hands down one of the best longboarders on the planet i was skateboard yeah longboard skateboard yeah that was very good at longboarding but he was just so much fucking better and like you know i had skimming on him he had skating on me i have surfing on him and now he's like just the best gamer in the world pretty much right now and it doesn't matter what game he plays it's not just for a night like destiny huge game broke so many world records h1z1 huge game pubg huge game top of the leaderboard on those games and it's just the way his brain is wired he's just it was like you guys personalities like so like i i noticed like you're like really out going you're really you're really you know just outgoing over the top turner like is just so he's quiet like even there's videos of you like running into his his room on i think his birthday or something and like throwing money out of more than ever and he's like dude get the fuck out of here why would you give me this i don't want this get out of here dude like because he doesn't want to feel like he owes anyone anything he knows that he can be successful on his own and he doesn't need anyone's help like he's always very appreciative like like champagne party super stoked on that you know hyped but he's just such his own person and the thing is he is very quiet for sure he's compared to me and he's like i don't know i'm very just a little more shy and yeah well but the thing wider and about all the wits against turner i am he's fun or how he will like when it like if we're all sitting here roasting each other if i say something that i think is just gonna shut him down he will shut me down every single time he is he's a very very to each other. If I say something that I think is just going to shut him down, he will shut me down. Every single time he is a very very common thing with brothers that grow up to they always end up on polar opposites. Like as far as personalities go, like one will always be on the far opposite side of the other. Of course, do you have brother? No, it's sister. It was sister. Yeah. Older. Older. Yeah. Okay. How older? Four years. I don't know. Turn this off genius. I can never say anything bad about him. He is probably one of the most sophisticated people I've ever met in my entire life hands down. But just like, what does T-foo even mean? It's just a four letter username that T-F-U-E. What did how did he make? How did he come up with that? They just wanted of like if in the Xbox community, if you had a four letter username, you were an OG, you know, like if you had like a short username, it was dope. And they just literally hemming his friend Alex like just started like a randomizer of four letter username that weren't taken. They were just looking through him and T-F-U popped up and he was just like T-F-U, pretty dope. You know, turn his, turn his name, start to the T. I'm going to go with that. And everyone picked it up as turn your fucks up everyone. It's crazy how he's blown up in such a short time. Turner fucks up every way. I'll tell you some crazy. I was just in a rubo. We did. And we went to do some shit, build some dog houses and shit anyway. We stated this lady's house in a ruba and her son is like 13 years old and he knew that we knew T-F-U me and Mike and he was like the biggest T-F-U fan all the way in every like 10 years old. You know T-F-U? You know, I'm flying all the way to a ruba and this kid's like, oh, he wants to talk to me about his how for how close does T-F-U live and can he beat him and can I call him and I'm like, no, I had a customer in the other age. He's all over the world. Yeah, her kid was watching his iPad and like what are you watching? He's watching T-F-U on Twitch and I was like fucking wild. Look, that's crazy too. It's like, you know, it's Juke Squad PPJT. Yeah. That stands for Pat Pierce, which is my brother, Jack and Turner. Most people don't know that. I was just pulling pranks, Jack, Tenny, which is what I went with for a while because the kid Pat who was the like the P and PPJT, one of the P's, he ended up being a real kind of, I want to say scumbag because I wish him the best, but he just made some really questionable decisions real twat in my personal life. And like what I get all the time, dude, anytime I use Turner, like I like may put Turner in a video like, you know, champagne party with T-F-U, people like, you're using your brother for review. Quick clout chasing your brother. We've been doing the ship for 11 years together. Like I've been pushing Turner as hard as I can. Yeah, the Twitch like the amount of times I've tried to shout out his Twitch in my videos is like, I couldn't count. And now that Turner has more subscribers than me, I'm using him. Right. Yep. If you have vegetarian, turn it up. Yeah. That's your concern. You yeah. But we're working on a new right now for us. We got a lot of time. We got to worry about you first. Oh, what I was going to say, we kind of veered off this topic, but like when it came to eating meat and being a vegetarian, like I was the guy that never thought I was going to be able to stop eating burgers and salami and pepper. Like I loved that shit. Like every single day, I would eat like a salami pepperoni sandwich. So, you know, Italian, whatever. But just slowly, slowly, slowly, I would eat it. And now I just like, it just started getting weirder and weirder to me to the point where I was like, why am I not eating an apple or banana or something? And I was just like, you know, I'd still eat it from time to time. And then it's just like, I wasn't the last time I ate meat was in Mexico three years ago. Three and a half almost four years ago now. It was a street taco street tacos. Street tacos are fire there. And I know that that comes from like probably a local rancher because it's a small town where I was at. So I was okay with that. But it just came down to the point, you know, I watched some documentaries and I, you know, like Tyson chicken nuggets. They're in my freezer one day. And I was like, what, where does this come from? I looked it up and I was like, uh-oh, it's like never again in my life. Why eat me that I don't know where it comes from. And that's like my standpoint on fish. Like a fish lives a free life out in the ocean. It's not tortured. It's entire life and go out there, fucking shoot the fish, catch the fish and then eat it. Well, you know what they say you are what you eat. Ben, I'm a firm believer that like, that's here. All right. If you're stressed, you're depressed, like that shit gets stored in your body. You know, like your muscles will start to to get sick. If you're too stressed or if you're too upset. And like, if you eat the meat of an animal that's like tortured and depressed and stressed. Yeah, I'm stressed. You're going to go into that. Yeah. You know, and that'll affect your, oh, yeah, psyche, you know, and that was another reason I just, I was just like, it's not worth it. Like, yeah, I don't need to eat something that dies. Like, yeah, I mean, I still eat fish from time to time. Like I said, but like, it's only in moderation. It's only from a source. I know exactly where it's going from. And I was okay with but I do see myself stepping away from it entirely at some point. I just don't think anyone should try to do anything called. Yeah, same thing. Like for me where I am now, like the should I eat now is like, sporadically different from what I ate when I was in my, me too. Me too. I eat much. All right. Let's let's let's let's let's wrap it up. Let's wrap what do we want to say to the people man to wrap it up. Clean up. Hang on. Let's bring Ben in for like 30 seconds. Just for the last 30 seconds. So Jack and fucking put him in his place. Ben, come here. Come here. Come sit. We'll say Ben for the next one. No, no, I want him to, I want to put Ben in his place with Jack right now. We're going to tell him what we think about the red tide and his little friend Rick Scott. Come on. I got to take a pee break and it's over. Come here. Come join. Let's take a break for we get. Hold on. No, no, no. I want Ben on your. I want Ben on your. Let's get this over with. This is going to be half an hour. Ben don't take that Mike. You know, I would shake your hand, Ben, but you said some really mean things about me in the last. Oh, man. You were talking some shit about my friend Jack and his brother in the last podcast. No, I want to bring it up. I watched the podcast man. It was very mean. You were being my self and entrepreneur. You know, you can sit. You can sit and get close to the mics. We can hear you. I bet you followed. Nice guy. You know, I understand. Sit. You got it. You got to. You got to sorry, but you got to scoot closer. Well, just good a little closer. You're in luck. Oh, my son Aaron having to be a big fan of yours. My dad. Let's let's let everyone who said was wrong in the podcast. Yeah, you were being a real ass to his dad. No, I wasn't. Yeah, you were calling me a scumbag hip. I didn't say scumbag. I didn't say scumbag. I didn't say. Okay. I'm you're right. You were calling some names. You were, you know, here's the deal. You don't understand the younger generation of listen, if that's the younger generation, I do want me to be nice. If I cut if I cut my hair with you respectfully more, I want you to be nice. He probably would. He probably would. You know, you could live your life anywhere you want. I don't care. Do what you want. Everybody's got some nice in them, right? As long as you don't bother nobody, but do you do bother people. So that's the problem. Let's talk about we talk a lot about coming here and beat this guy up. I don't know. I want his son's. Yeah, we talked a lot about the red tide. We're going to find out all the figure out all the problems in the world. Here's the conclusion we came to Ben. We want you to look at the camera and tell everyone to go click the link and sign the petition. Please tell everyone all your fans out there to sign the petition on the White House website, which is in the link in the description to what is it? Ben, I would like to say we don't have a lot in common, but can you agree with me that if the ocean, if the ocean dies, we all die. Yeah, but you can't like all those dead fish in your backyard, Ben. What's the real deal? What we'll deal here is that a couple of dead fish floating on your surfboard while you were surfing and you're upset. Okay, you're white to blow it off and you move on. How are you going to sell? You can't even get in the water. It happens every year. 100 years and you need to scientists and maybe be able to figure it out. I think it has something to do with, um, I don't know. Must be something to do with something. cattle ranch or something? Definitely is something to do with something. It's been going over 100 years. So can't be the cruise ship. So can't be anything we're doing now. It's been going on in documented for 100 years. Yes, naturally it has happened a lot of times, but we have broken every yearly record of dead wildlife when it comes to dolphins, manatees and sea turtles in one month. More dead wildlife in one month than any previous year. And that's not that. Super red time. Super red time. But it's not that. I mean, they need to get to the scientists and all the oceanographic people out there. That what you call a shitography. Sure. You know what I mean? And get them out there and try to figure out what's causing all those algae and the heat. It has to do the temperature of water. Right, but they did figure it out. What do they do? I'll show your companies polluting waters and all that. That's the sides. I'm in the water and it's all the runoff draining to the ocean. You know, like like fertilizer, like phosphate, it's a huge industry, huge industry, but it's not good to put fertilizer in clean water. Can you wherever they found where the originates and causes it, they should stop it. Right, but they paid your buddy Rick Scott took a bunch of money, said they're allowed to dump it in the ocean. I don't know. I don't know what the case, but the point is that they determine where the source is coming from. They need to stop it. So here's what we want you to do. But they're taking money and spend. Coming right now, we should clean it up. It's easy for him. All he has to do is move somewhere else and sell real estate somewhere else. You're not able to sell shit in Florida in a couple of years of this keeps up. Nobody's going to want to live here. It goes on for a period of time. And you need to figure out what the causes is and stop it. And then that dolphins right there. Look at that fucking dolphin. Where would that see turtles? Two. Treasure Island. Clear water. That's in Jack's backyard right there. Yes, the whale. Yes. Two whales. Two whales. I have footage of him. And one weekend. I'm not wanting a video tomorrow about that. You know, it hurts me more than anything because I'm, you know, you own a hotel on clear the beach. But the point is, you know, they move your mics. You can hear you better. We have the beach, but, um, you know, they need to find out what the causes and definitely cure it. So me and Jack are going to fly. I think it's only a tide. We need to buy your plane. It travels like, you know, in a tide like or it doesn't consume the whole, um, it's Panama City. It's from here to Panama City. You know, 85% of the floor is coast, which is it never happened before ever in history. Well, it's also never lasted this long. This is a nine month red tide when the last, uh, the record setting red tide last time was six months. Stop put up in the causes. So they're not going to stop it. Panama City beach area. It's not coming up there. It's coming from the canals are eating drainage from the Chubby. Look at, like, Chubby. Because I think also Lake Apopka in, in Orlando is one of the biggest, is the biggest lake in Orlando. I think that's also really polluted with pesticides as well. Yeah. And that drains into Lake Chubby if I believe so. Yeah. Have you had been anywhere else in the country? No. Not at this. Not sure. Absolutely not. Well, you have a body of water. Only. Is definitely a naturally occurring phenomenon and red tide is classified as an algae bloom. So to say that this is red tide technically is correct, but this is not, this is no longer a naturally occurring red tide. This is because of the pesticides and because of the manure and all the runoff from these cattle ranchers that get drained straight into the lake. And if you know the historical flow of water, Lake Apopka is to drain into the Everglades. You know what, the Everglades are the way they are because all of the water in Florida drains south. They completely cut off Lake Apopka from draining south and they send the water straighties to west, which then hits the ocean, which causes this supercharged red tide algae bloom and it fucking kills everything. That's all. Red tide is the algae bloom and the algae bloom, the, but it's not a natural algae plant anymore. Right. Red tide is not naturally occurred on its own since 1920. That means picking up a bunch of music in the background. Sounds like it's coming from over there. You are the sound man. You're asking us the sound man is asking us for the sound man. What are you going to spend? I'm going to scratch. I fucking found him on Craigslist. I'm sorry. Send him back to radio shack or did not business in your office. He closed down. What's that computer running over there? Is it the map? No, that's some back there, man. No, tell me from over there. Forest, where are you picking up all your audio? That's a good wrap up. I think that was a good podcast. So what are they finding when they, when they, when they, when they, when they, when they take a break, when he take these dead animals, the defining and, you know, finding the bacteria in them, they trace the. Well, by that, I think by that time it's too late, Ben, by the time they find the dead animals, all you can do is just already dead. They're already dead. You can still do like testing on their tissue and then whatever disease is inside and I mean, and try to determine what the source was, maybe I don't know. That will be determined. They do determine. I tell you some like, oh, your Toby, the algae blooms in the lake have been getting worse and worse everywhere. So let's fill in a go, Toby. Ben, we're going to borrow your plane and we're going to fly down to Lake of the Toby. We're going to go talk to these people and then me and Jack are going to fly up to, uh, to the panhandle and we're going to meet up with Rick Scott and then, uh, what a part. Can you get us an interview with Rick? No. Hell, no, he, he hates me. Can you get us an interview with anybody? Only yourself. Did you know that, uh, Rick Scott cut $700 million of budgets from the Water Preservation Act? Nope. That was another problem. I'm not informed. Why? Well, thank you guys for having me. It's been great. All right. Yeah. The petition in the description. There you go. Natural water flow and the unnatural water flow. Well, this kid might know what he's talking about. the source of where the pollutant is being, you believe the pollutants coming from. We have. Like, like, they're going to be telling you. Yeah, but seven news. You never tell you. Where's the source? The Lake Okechoa. How's it getting into that? Like, I'm just saying all the cattle are in companies. Listen, um, all the shares entering into Lake Okechoa, the exact spot there of pollution and water. I'll tell you right now. Like, sugar, big sugar farms right there. Right. How come you don't pollute it? Look, they're all. They're all in the water. They're all in the water. They're built on swamp land. It's just like your lawn looks good, but the reason is because of all the fertilizer. Yeah. Exactly. And it's draining down the sewer. Those crops growing and not flooding. They have to drain all the excess water that falls on top, which then goes straight into Lake Okechoa. So all the fertilizer and all the pesticides that are on those crops get washed into the lake, which creates these toxic algae blooms and instead of sending itself into the river of grass, or would then be cleaned before it got to the ocean. They send it straight into the state of the river, straight into the ocean and it kills fucking everything. That's it. Sign the petition today. Jack, thanks for coming on the podcast. Jack, Jenny, thanks for having me. You are a broski.