Hello freak bitches. We all know there's treatment different treatment celebrities well especially in Scientology, right? No, it's highlighted it is Like nothing you could ever imagine it is so when people say Tom doesn't leave because they have information on him or John That's not the reason the amount of power they receive from this church is Is like nothing in Hollywood it is like nothing there is no reason for them to leave this environment Right, so it's super beneficial for them to be attached to it, correct? Okay, as employees they work for them all these people take care of us every need Yes, and there's policy on how to talk to somebody like you wouldn't say Like if you said go get me a Go give me a coffee and I want at this temperature There's no I can't get it were five miles from any you know, we're 30 They would be none of that kind of talk like not any kind there's policy about Don't you don't talk back like ever you don't Step out of line. You don't give an opinion. You don't make a face. You don't make a gesture You don't sigh if you step out of line in any way you are dealt with by the church Essentially has servants correct how many people a lot? A lot and by the way, I don't but grudge somebody with staff like if you can have it I go do it all day all night do it all day all night But when you believe as a Scientologist you are working for somebody who single Hanantly is saving the planet and you deserve that kind of punishment That's something different baby understand what like that that's it's an abuse that is not justified but it is justified Because you believe that you are single Hanantly saving the planet Mm-hmm. Yeah, no I get it. I get it so So he's the main figurehead right he's the main guy like right up with Miss Cabbage, right and then John Travolta somewhere in that I think John was given what a designation called cacant Where cacant cacant not can't Cacant yeah, okay H a K H a N okay, okay? He's given this designation of cocon which there's a policy that basically says you can kill another human being if you work Cacond if you're gonna look the other way and he was given that He was given that by Elvara. Don't we be allowed to do to make me pay? Don't First of all not very well you have any takes I ruined because it's like Kevin goes don't don't ruin this take I go no don't you're gonna do and I would ruin it I would ruin a gel because he made he would do some stupid show There's hands or something that you never rehearsed Cry from laughter Yes, and he was really highly inappropriate moments at me Pete almost feet yeah, okay, so he's a lot of kill people yeah, did one or I don't know I don't I should look at the policy again. I don't want to see you get it But you're supposed to look the other way So like if somebody said something wrong to John Travolta and pull out a samurai sword and cut their head off You just got clean up the body. He is gonna clean up. And because it's called ethics protection. Oh, okay Yeah, so everyone would be responsible for dealing with it Dealing with it Yeah, so you just leave the room and he would know that you guys would take care of it Correct, and there's also another policy and by the way the reason why I say these policies is because I don't like when people say I believe you I don't want you to believe me. I want you to look it up Right, I want you to look for yourself and make your own decision So I keep quoting these policies because I want people to look it up So that they can say that's shit's true. She's not talking shit. You know, I mean, right? There's another policy called ethics protection. There's another policy called the responsibility of leaders which he actually says exactly what you just said that Basically, you know what you got to do to protect the leader you got to do it if you see a body then you clean it up and the leader should never know