[Music] Dr. Gad Bara, thanks for coming. Pleasure to be here. Yeah, I uh I just got done listening to your podcast with Neil Gnostic Informant. It was fascinating stuff. Um and I'm excited to chat with you about this stuff today. Can you just explain what your background is? Sure. So my focus is is really on history of the um especially of of um uh the Iranian world uh the ancient Iranian world and the role of the Jews within that world of Jewish history within the context of the Iranian world the pre-Islamic uh what I call the age of empires. So the Aminate Empire, the Parthion Empire and the Cisanian Empire. So I'm focusing on these three empires um which together really kind of u um deeply impacted the uh ancient near east for about a millennium uh together. So uh these three empires unfortunately in uh scholarship have been relatively little uh studied uh little researched uh thus far and so I'm trying to correct that and to um and to focus on on on that uh that particular perspective of the Iranian empires in the ancient near east. Um and my main uh work uh is with the original material the actual primary sources. So I do a lot of uh epigraphic work dealing with actual papyrie uh leather scrolls uh ostrica and things like that. In Austria just for people don't know that these are shards of um of um u jars and ancient things you know uh objects household objects that were um broken and so people use that to write short messages on. And these so these ostrica um uh represent uh daily communications. There you go. Yeah. So daily communications um and uh short messages. These are the the that's the SMS of the ancient world really. Kind of the WhatsApp of the ancient world. These are these are Yeah, exactly. These are short messages that were uh that that people uh handed to each other. And so you can learn so much from these documents whether it's papyrie, whether it's ostrac uh what the ordinary people how they what they thought about these are people who never thought that these that what they are writing will be studied you know 2500 years later or even two days later even I mean they were just written for for someone to read at the same day or or or the next and so we learn this is purely unfiltered data um from antiquity. It's not Herodotus which is obviously filtered data. Of course, the Bible is filtered uh through ideology. It's not any of that. It's really the direct um record of what reality was in antiquity. And that's why it's so exciting. Um and I work with uh with those primary documents a lot. What set you in this direction from the start? like how did you get interested in this stuff and what led you to specifically dig into things like this? It's a great question. Um like I think everyone in my field it's uh things were not necessarily planned out uh from the beginning this way. Um I um I was initially involved with some uh with with a an NGO in Israel that was dealing with uh Jewish Christian dialogue and from that I started doing a lot of um um we started doing conferences and we I started doing lectures but I I really wasn't specializing in this field and people said well you need to kind of really start specializing in this and one thing led to another and I eventually did my PhD on um on the island of Elephantine. So that's an island uh in upper Egypt, meaning southern Egypt. Um like in the middle of the Nile, right? It's in the middle of the Nile and it's a an extremely important island, not just for Jewish history, but also for I mean mainly for Egyptian history for millennia, even before the Jews came there. Um it was already important for millennia. Anyway, this this island which is just facing the city of Aswan uh if for those who know um in in southern Egypt which is like 500 miles from Giza roughly um in miles I don't know but it's very it's really it's really it's not I mean it's about so it's about an hour and a half by airplane from from Cairo. Okay. So I I did make that flight and so I can tell you it's it's it's far from uh from Cairo and um and so uh Egypt is a pretty large country uh and and a beautiful place and so um Elephantine is this island just facing Aswan. You can I mean it's really close to to Aswan. Um and this island was extremely important for the Egyptians um daily life really and for Egyptian cult. Um and I use cult in terms of just a a a synonym for religion. I don't use it poratively just so you know, right? Um but it was um but it was a central uh a central island for Egyptian cult. It was uh there were the these three deities that were associated with the with this island that eventually became a triad of of deities, the ram, the ram god and uh and sat and anuket. uh two female deities um one one of whom of of which was his wife and the other was considered his daughter. Um anyway this island initially was the island of Satet as the as the main deity but the island was seen to be because this is the first cataract of the of the of the Nile it was considered to be the um uh the source of the annual inundation of the Nile. So what happened on that island had implications of for the economy of the entire country of Egypt. And it was on that island that in the sixth century uh before the current era uh a Jewish community settled and uh or was it was actually brought there as mercenaries um to um to guard the what was for a while the southern border of the of Egypt. 600 BC 6th century. So around 550 according to my to my calculations and my research there are some some scholars who dated uh much much ear I mean about 100 years earlier than that. Um but I I I've published on this and I show that that this is the uh the most u probable date is around 550 mm um BCE that where they when they arrived there 540 550 um anyway so there was a Jewish community on that island and they had a temple a fully functioning temple uh they had uh priests they had sacrifices they I mean it was a temple about the same size of the Jerusalem temple and uh and a very also a very important uh a very important place of worship. So that was what I did my PhD on on this community and one thing led to another. Um initially I didn't really look to like most of my colleagues I didn't really look to Persia. I didn't look to uh to the Iranian uh sphere but then I started noticing certain elements within these texts that pointed my attention more to because of course this was under the the already the Aminid Empire was the empire ruling that area. What what empire? I don't know. I'm not familiar with that empire. So that's the that's Cyrus, King Cyrus, right? The uh that everyone I'm sure has heard of. Okay. Cyrus the Great. Everyone except me. I know. I've heard of Cyrus you've heard. Um so Cyrus the Great was is considered kind of the founder of this empire. And um and that's the uh that is the first world superpower really. Uh it's a um it is a um very very important empire in the history of of humanity and certainly of Western. so-called western civilization. Uh the impact of the Akminid. So the Aminid is just the name of their kind of um um mythological forefather of this of this dynasty and um and so um uh this dynasty and this particular uh empire was something that the world has never seen before. Uh we've seen I mean they've seen other empires before the Aminid Empire but this is a superpower. uh it had uh not just conquered a an area that is greater than the Roman Empire at its greatest greater extent by the way uh huge area from India all the way to you know to to to uh to Greece or to Macedonia and to uh and to the in parts of the Ukraine uh so I mean it's and to Egypt and Libya today so it's a huge absolutely huge area um that they controlled and administered very very effectively and they controlled it uh with um I mean also with an an ideology of of of how to rule these peoples. So it was something that the world has never seen and it impacted the Greek world. It imp impacted Greek philosophy. It impacted the Egyptians of course the Jews as well. Uh it really the impact of the Akeminid empire is is with us to this day in many ways. Um so and when did that empire start? the Akeminid. Ake, how do you say it? Aminid. Akeidid. Akeid empire. Um roughly around 550 depending on how you look at it. But um some people date it from uh from the fall of Babylon to Cyrus. But uh really the ascension of Cyrus around 550 B.CE and um and then up to um up to Alexander the Great that um um destroyed kind of uh took over. Um Oh wow, that's a good map. Look, that's a lot. Yeah. So all that pink all that pink all that all well yeah and more I mean even all the way to India it this this actually Holy smokes. Yeah. This this actually shows you the different different stages. So the area in pink is just what Cyrus um the first the first uh campaign uh or the first phase of Cyrus all the way up to Turkey to the to modern Turkey and then he went down to uh to conquer Babylon and um yeah. So and and then of course the uh his dynasty um uh continued after that very complicated uh picture in reality but um but Cyrus um was the one to conquer uh to conquer this from the Mes uh the Median Empire which was there for a short while and um and then uh conquered uh conquered Babylon um and through Babylon of course he conquered he took over the uh what was already the the new Babylonian Empire before him and so that included Palestine. Um and um and yeah and he he was the first to kind of uh consolidate a the first uh phase of this empire. Uh he was succeeded by his son Kaiis who then added Egypt and parts of Libya to this and um and then Darius the Great. Darius the first actually made it into into what it later became as this major superpower. Uh there's the first is truly one of the greatest uh greatest leaders in antiquity. Uh truly an impressive uh a very impressive person. Um anyway, so um and these writings that you were finding were in what language? Aramaic. They're in Aramaic. Okay. Yeah. Interesting. when you first started with looking at looking in Elephantine and find you were finding these same things that were looking like fragments of vases and things with written Aramaic language on it, right? Um so I I wasn't finding the actual physical. So I'm not an archaeologist. I wasn't finding the physical um objects. These were already excavated in the in the at the beginning most of them at the beginning of the 20th century. Okay. Um and um many of them were published but not necessarily published correctly. Uh so several of my recent publications are correcting reading u bad readings um or incorrect readings uh like they were they getting the translations wrong. No, I mean the reading was wrong simply uh it's not just a translation but they weren't um reading uh the text correctly. They some of in some cases they weren't they didn't understand the text correctly. Um, in one case that I'm that's about to come out, um, I'm republishing an an ostricon, a relatively long ostrachon, um, that was first published in 1908, uh, but, uh, has been since, so for 116 years. Uh, it's been it's been, um, it's been read um the wrong way. So, inside out rather than, you know, so the the the direction of reading was was incorrect for this long. Um, but this I mean this is part of what we do. What what the work of an epigrapher is extremely complex. It's not just reading the text. It's not just trying to say well this is an alf, this is a bed, this whatever letter that is. Uh but the context um the material even the the materiality of the object needs to be really taken deeply taken into account and that we've not in in my field we've not been doing this uh really up until now the materiality was not not uh given the proper uh place that it should have. Um, so we look at the materiality and that might impact the way we we read the text because we we start seeing elements um on the on the surface of the object that we we didn't we didn't see before and that might point us to a different letter than what we thought originally. So things like that it's a ve epigraphy is very complex work um and it requires encyclopedical knowledge also because some of these letters some of these uh constructions and some of the context might be uh might come from a different culture. So for example there are loan words from Persian there are lone words from Egyptian that you need to know. Um it really um requires um a lot of um a lot of u contextual knowledge. So is elephantine the first place that uh the idea of yaoism developed? No. Where did yaism come from? Yeah. So that's a great question. But that elephantine is not it's not where where it initially developed. So yaoism well I'll give you my definition of yaoism first. Okay. So yaoism is s very simple. Ladies and gents, the day has finally come where we can use the power of red light to regrow our hair. The month of April is about fresh resets for nature. And you can do the same for your hair by using our exclusive code. The I Restore Elite is clinically proven to help regrow your hair using 300 lasers and 200 LEDs that send light therapy directly to your scalp. Just pop it on while you're watching TV or reading your book and enjoy the benefits. It's a system with proven results. Even in a double blind clinical study, nearly every participant saw an increase in hair growth with this technology. The I restore Elite uses Vixo lasers that feature wider beams of red light, which gives consistent coverage and results. Their unique use of optimal wavelengths reactivates dormant follicles to restore your natural hair. These lasers provide deeper spot stimulation, while the LEDs provide broader uniform coverage to fill in the gaps in between the lasers. Plus, they offer a money back guarantee, so you can try it risk-f free. I love my I restore because it's super comfortable and lightweight, and it looks badass like Tron. I typically keep it next to my bed and throw it on for 20 minutes before I go to sleep, but I also like to take it off and show it off to all my friends, and they're constantly asking me to use it as well because cuz everybody knows about the serious benefits that you can gain from red light therapy, especially when you use it on your scalp for hair regrowth. Give yourself the gift of hair confidence this spring. For a limited time only, our listeners are getting a huge discount on their I restore Elite by using the code danny at irrestore.com. Head on over to the letter I s.com and use the promo code danny dn y for my exclusive discount on the i restore elite. Please support the show and tell them we sent you. Hair loss is frustrating and now you don't have to fight it alone thanks to the i restore elite. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. Uh, it's it's people who um for whom a deity by the name of Yao is the head of the pantheon. Okay, that's pretty much it. Okay. Um, they have that element Yao in in in many of their names. So, is a theophoric element. Theophoric means holding the dity, holding the theos, the the dity. And uh so a name that has a component with Yaha like Yahusha or or Yosha. Mhm. Or or many other uh examples like that. So if they participated in Yahwehism or if they believed in Yahweh or Yahoo, they would incorporate his his name into their name. Yeah. So that in I mean not all of them necessarily, but but this would be very very common. Um and so uh Yaoism is simply those people who identify for them for their identity, for their ethnic identity and for their cultic identity. Uh the main deity, the head of the pantheon is a deity by the name of Yao. Uh there are no no specific um and unique cultic features uh such as commandments or observations or feasts that are necessarily unique to them. Uh there are no special sacrifices or anything like that. they they are very much like any other uh group around them. Uh they do the same sacrifices. They they they they generally speaking observe very similar feasts that are not specific necessarily to them but are like agricultural observances that everyone is obviously uh going to observe around them. Uh so we don't see anything about early Yaoism that is necessarily unique uh except for the the main deity that they have. Okay. Um and so um and so that's that's really early Yaoism. Very very simple. Um and that started um well it's hard to know exactly when it started. We can only say when we start seeing it in the record. Um now there is there there are debates about um where the first place that it's actually documented might be. um one place um there are two temples in what is today Sudan in what used to be uh southern Egypt or the extreme southern part of Egypt. Uh two temples of Ramsy's II. Uh one is in Soleb in a place called Sob and another in Amara West and um and these two uh temples have lists of uh of people groups. Um and one of and in in in these two lists there is a group that's called the shasu of Yao. Now there's a question if Yao is simply a place name is that really the daty Yao or or not? I actually for a long time I was uh I I I thought this this could not be uh the daty ya but now I think that because of parallelism uh it is within this it's in with it's that people group is within a list of other groups where where there's a shasu shasu just means the nomads okay so the people who are nomads so the shasu of yao it comes after the shasu of bal which is of course is another dity and there's also a not if I if I remember correctly So you have you have parallelism with other deities the shasu of other another deity within that same list. So it makes sense or at least it the probability now becomes higher that this might be the deity Yahoo. And if that's the case we're talking about you know 14th century uh before the common era. Uh already the name the name of that date of this dity century 14th century. 14th century. Whoa. So what does Yahweh mean? Yeah there are we don't know. We really don't know. There are all kinds of theories for that. I had somebody in here told me it meant hail Zeus. No, that's definitely not that's out of the question. That's out of the question. Yeah, but uh we don't know exactly what it means. I mean, of course, there is a much later um folk ethmology for it, which just means to be uh you know, and that's we find that of course in in the book of Exodus, right? But that's a much later folk ethmology for the name that explains it in as a as a name of existence. M um but uh but after uh these two after sob and and Amaro West in what is modern day Sudan um we don't hear about this for about this of this name for uh until the 9th century in the late 9th century uh in some stellas like the Misha Stella and the Teldon Stella. Um and Teldon is interesting because it also have has one of these theophoric names in it uh with Yao. Um, and so these are so for a long time we don't we it it goes off the radar and then comes back. Um, and um, and and what's but what's interesting is in the 8th century BC um, we have a person by the name of Yao Beidi, one of the most fascinating characters. We don't know a lot about this person, but he's what we do know is absolutely fascinating. He was uh he's mentioned in the Neo Assyrian um inscriptions as a king as a Hittite. Okay. And Hittite means that he comes from you know modern day Turkey, southern Turkey, maybe the the the border with Syria. And um but he is a Hittite according to the inscriptions who is the king of Hamat, a city in Aramean city uh in um in modernday Syria. And so he is a Hittite who rules a an Aramean city, a non-hittite city. And his name is Yaoidi. Now the um the first uh component of the name Yao is clearly the name of the deity Yahoo because in the Aadian language there are um determinatives. There are like little drawings next to words that make sure that you understand what the meaning is. This is a person. This is a deity. it identifies. Uh, so a lot of these ancient languages had identifiers like that or determinatives like that that deter that's that told you if this is if we're talking about the person, the people group or they would draw little pictures next to it. Exactly. Next to the next to the next to the noun. And so here we we see that there's the the dingir it's called dingir um determinative that that means that this is a daty. So that the yao component in his name is clearly the name of the dity but he's not Judian. He's not Israelite. He's not even Canaanite, right? This guy is a Hittite from um you know from modern day southern Turkey. Uh who was king of an Aramian uh city somehow. Um and he is a Yowist. I mean he is for all intents and purposes Jewish in that sense. Oh wow. I mean proto protojewish. Yoism is not is not synonymous with Judaism. And we'll I'm sure we'll get to that. But um but the uh but he is clearly a Yaoist and so um and that that is fascinating. That's really all we know about him and the only reason we know about him is that he rebelled against the Neo Assyrians and the Neo Syrians captured him and killed him in a very very gruesome way. They they they describe it and uh but the only reason we know about him is because he rebelled. I'm sure there are many others that simply did not make it into the record. Um but it but we do have proof that Yaoism uh existed outside of Judea, Samaria or you know Israel. Um and um and so and and is certainly recorded up north uh in modern day where is modern day Syria. M um and so it looks like from the data that we have, the extra biblical data in the Bible, there's other there are other hints that I think are much later and um and and and and um not necessarily historically um anchored. Um but from what we have from extra biblical data, it looks like Yahwism started in the Aramean areas and so in the areas of of modern day Syria um were um were um adopted by nomadic tribes in that area and some somehow at some point kind of migrated down to uh Canaan uh from Syria and uh and so Yaoism became more um uh more popular in Syria in in Canaan, but we already have uh we already as I mentioned uh we already have Yaoism in in Canaan already in the 9th century as well. So um uh so the entire region already had the forms of Yaoism in it u from I'd say at least around the 9th uh 9th 8th century before the common era. And did Judaism come directly out of Yaoism? It's a great question. So, isn't that like the consensus or is that is that is that that's the like academic consensus? That is the cons the consensus and what I'm actually uh what you're pushing back against pushing back against uh Yaoism. So, yo, you're right. Yaoism is seen as kind of protojudaism and it's and and and people usually argue that by the second century before the common era, Yaoism kind of disappears and we are left with uh Torah based uh Judaism before we when you say before the common era you mean BC. Yeah. Okay, got it. I don't use BC AD and yeah, everybody has different thing. Every single Bible scholar, they have a different way of doing it and I'm always confused. So that's why I try to like figure out what you mean up front cuz for me it's just AC a bc A simple Yeah. Yeah. And I understand I understand. So uh yeah I just use these more objective objective terms. Um so so um about second uh second uh century before the common era we have uh Torah based Judaism. So Judaism per se when you when you really uh want to uh to talk about actual Judaism you you have to talk about people who are following certain commandments that are written in certain authoritative books right so the commandments that are enumerated in the Torah for example though you know observing the Sabbath etc etc so that Judaism is by definition depends on knowledge of these commandments and observing these commandments. Um now we have we have thousands of documents from different Jewish um or yeahistic I should say really uh settlements in various places in the ancient world. So from Egypt from the southern part of Egypt as I said elephantine and all the way through um northern Egypt and then Palestine and then into Babylonia. Okay. Uh we have thousands of documents not all of them textual some of them are coins for example but but these are also very important right um but we really have thousands of documents altogether but none of these documents uh betray the slightest knowledge of the Bible okay they don't betray they don't show any they they have no knowledge of the Bible in any of these documents okay I mean even not uh no idiomatic expressions for example that and when you say the Bible you're talking about the Torah the Bible in general in general but of course the Torah is the main is the main document that you would expect um but uh yeah it has absolutely zero I mean there's nothing no even the names the personal names of people uh are not the names that we find in the of you know the heroes of the Bible like the 12 tribes or Moses or Aaron or Abraham Isaac Jacob none of the people that are Yaoists in in the this entire time period up until the beginning of the Hellenistic period. Um none of these people are named after literary heroes from the Torah or from the Bible in general. um which is fascinating uh when you when you think about this and now so so the the academic or religious viewpoint or consensus on this is that Judaism started around 1200 is that right or when what is the date that like Judaism talk about academic and and religious these are these are going to be different things right like by and large what what have what is the idea of when Judaism. So the religious I can't talk too much about the religious because there's a lot of different and I know that there there I mean like really kind of fundamentalist religious uh folks would say well Judaism started with Abraham really right so you know it's about 2000 uh before the common era somewhere like that okay um and you know and then they'll they'll they'll go forward from that um but so the earliest people will say is 2000 something I mean I can't again I can't I can't talk too much about the the the religious perspective on this but I think that that's what the okay what what is said in in in certain circles um in academia Judaism I think now it's pretty much consensus that Judaism as such meaning people who observe who observe these commandments uh such as the Sabbath and the Passover and you know all these feasts um tabernacles um and etc etc and kosher um diet and all of that follow the rules uh all of these rules 2 century of uh before the common era so 2nd century BCE uh that that's where we start to see uh to see people observing this extra biblically okay okay in the Bible that's a different story but uh from what we start seeing extra biblically outside the Bible outside the Bible um from these primary sources that I talked about earlier right we talked about the ostricha we talked about the documents that are written by the simple folks um that that you know they they they they trade things, they they do all kinds of activities on the Sabbath, for example, um that are not permitted by the Torah. Um they, you know, they do a lot of stuff that is that that goes squarely against what is prescribed in in in in the Torah, prescribed in the Torah. But um um we don't have anything to show adherence to the Torah. We have a lot of negative examples, but we don't have anything to show that they knew anything about the Torah at all in in that time period. So, Judaism from a purely extra-biblical perspective, Judaism starts around the second maybe maybe late third century uh before the common era. And if you want to not be extra biblical, you want to stay inside the Bible, when is it from? For I mean, according to the Bible, according to certain interpretations of the Bible, uh we're talking about Abraham, right? being kind of the founder of the uh in in a sense of uh like the covenant with God and and things like that. Um which I mean as a scholar uh looking at this for a lot of reasons this is this is mythological. Okay. Yes. Um and so uh and for and I can say that with with certainty in terms of uh as as a scholar. Um when was Abraham again? It was supposed to be around 2000. Got it. Got it. And um but the whole the reason I'm very certain about this is that first of all again we have thousands of documents and none of them know anything about about any of these stories. Uh no nothing. I mean even the name Abraham doesn't exist anywhere within the the sphere of of of Jewish life or yaistic life anywhere. But also the the idea so the the whole concept of Abraham and the patriarch. So Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, right? is people coming from the east to establish a new nation. Right? That's the whole concept of of the patriarchs coming from the east. And even when Jacob and Isaac need to marry, they they have to go back and marry someone from the east uh and uh and and bring them to Canaan. So the idea of people coming from the east and establishing a community is such a deeply henistic idea. So the in in the Henistic world, um when you say henistic idea, what do you mean by that? Well, in the Hellenistic world, it was really important for a lot of these uh Hellenistic means a certain time frame, right? Correct. So, we're talking really the the turn of the 3rd century, late 4th century before the common era and really into um into the uh the common era. I mean, that's that's a that's a much wider that's kind of Greco Roman now that we're talking about, but it's still So, like 550 BC is is as early as it gets, right? No, no, no. About 400. Oh, 400. Okay. about 400 not even not 400 about 300 let's say 320 to to be uh so the helenistic uh period around you know the the conquest of Alexander the great and forward okay uh so about three uh 320ish and um and into the Roman world the Roman world we talk we call it Greco Roman but it's really still kind of continuing a lot of these Hellenistic um sensibilities that they had and so for the Greek world um and for the Greor Roman world um creating the mythology the founding mythology of your people whether it's a it's a police in the Greek world or even Rome um was someone coming from the east which for them is always the kind of the early the the old world um this myth this this mystical oh world that comes from the east and establishes uh establishes their uh their country. So in several polies in Greece were had had these legends about a a this mythical founder coming from the east to establish them and even Rome at the height of its power. So under Augustus or one of the of the uh of the um heights of its power under Augustus Augustus commissioned um Virgil to write the Aniads. Uh so the story the mythological story of the founding of Rome which is about the same size as the as the Torah about the same number yeah number of verses and words as as the Torah um so it's a it's a lengthy work um now he had it to write to write it in meter and rhyme which the Torah the Torah authors didn't have to deal with so it's much harder what he did is much harder um but he um he did that and he also it's called the Aniads because after anos who was the this uh this mythological hero from the the from Homer from the Troan um war and and so they built this entire idea how he is coming from Troy so from the east to establish Rome. Okay. So this idea of someone coming from the east to establish a new race or a new city or a new uh a new uh settlement is something that is deeply henistic. Um and we see that here. So with the story of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, these these um these founders uh coming from the east that is so uh in many ways so hellenistic in its um in its core. Interesting. Um and again we don't we simply have absolutely zero zero knowledge anywhere. It's not I mean these patriarchs I mean and the names of the of the of the matriarchs either Sarah, Rachel, um Leah, etc. are not me are not found in the document record at all. None of the women that are mentioned anywhere in in these thousands of documents that we have are are named like that. And none of the men are named after these these literary heroes from the Bible. So no, there is zero simply zero knowledge of the Bible anywhere up until the beginning of the of the Henistic um Henistic era. Um so that's why for these reasons and others uh it is certainly clear to me that these things are mythological. Abraham all of these is this is this new or is this has this been known for forever? Well, certainly not forever. And um I mean like has this been how how long have academics been aware of this and been talking about it publicly? Well, not long. I mean the fact that there is such a uh deafening silence before the uh before uh Alexandria really uh the Bible and I will I will bless you scared the out of me. Okay. Um so the fact that there is this deafening silence before the turn of the 3rd century and I'll talk about Alexandria I'll talk about my my analysis of the uh historical background here. Uh but the fact that there was this deafening silence is relatively new. Um most scholars unfortunately um are really looking I think too much into the biblical narrative rather than the historical narrative rather than the the primary narrative. And the biblical narrative has its you know has its reset but that's something I've talked about on this podcast so many times with the various and that's another funny thing about biblical scholars that I've had on the show. It's they all have different ideas of things or different uh different opinions on events or or historical texts. And I always thought it was an odd thing for someone to be a religious scholar because typically those people are they subscribe to the very religion that they're studying and they're dedicating that their their work to. So like there's like a built-in bias to doing this. That's right. I write a lot about that and uh about this bias and I've lectured about this about the problems of bias. In fact, this um we talked before before we came on air, we actually talked about this Ostracon that I'm republishing that was read the the wrong way for 116 years, right? My quest to looking good and feeling even better in my t-shirts has ended with True Classic, who happens to be sponsoring this episode. They cut their shirts to fit my physique and not just the general human form. They understand you and they are intentional with everything from their funny ads to their royal treatment customer service. It's designed to compliment important areas like your arms and shoulders, giving you just enough breathing room around the body instead of bunching up or sliding around. It keeps you looking and feeling good from the gym to work to date night. I've been wearing True Classic TE's for a few months now and they still impress me every time I put them on. Sometimes I'll even take them off just so I can put them back on again. Forget the overpriced designer nonsense and skip the cheap throwaways that fall apart in a year. True Classic delivers premium essentials built for real life. Whether you're out on the town or even working up a sweat, level up your style with clothes that fit any scenario. You can save big on your order by going to trueclassic.com/danny. That's t r ue e c l a ss i c.com/dny and get hooked up with my discount today. The links down below. Now back to the show. Uh, one of the reasons that it was read the wrong way was because of bias. Okay, because of this built-in bias. Uh, another another article of mine that just came out a few weeks ago uh in a book that I've that I uh that I edited together with professor Ronard KZ from from Germany from Gingan um reanalyzes a document of papyrus called the Passover papyrus. Now it has nothing to do with the Passover but the reason but it was it was already um analyzed as something related to the Passover because of the date range that it uh that is uh mentioned in this document. And so the date range that's that's actually a perfect example um in this document which is very fragmentaryary but we do see something related to the date to the dates the 15th and the 21st of Nissan the month of Nissan which is a Babylonian name month name but it is used in the Bible a lot and these that corresponds to the Passover those dates do correspond at least to the feast of Matsot a part of the fast Passover feast. So they saw these dates and like oh that's the Passover, right? Ah but that's absolutely that that is not a critical approach to the text right that immediately you say well because I was raised in a Jewish or Christian background therefore these dates are meaning meaningful to me and they mean the Passover but if you step Yeah. Exactly. If you look at this critically you realize that these are this is simply the first full moon of the year the 15th of Nissan. it. Nissan is the first month of the year in in in both in Babylonian and in Persian in the Persian administration. So that's the first month of the year and the first full moon of the year and most importantly the beginning of the harvest. Now in the ancient world, the harvest was the season that would dictate whether you live or die. I mean if the dity if you you're about to harvest everything that you worked on for months uh planting and and and taking care of the your of you know and so you're about to harvest and if the if the dity is now going to um you know uh send hail down and and destroy the crops or flooding or you know all kinds of storms you will die I mean your family will not be able to survive for the next year. So this was an extremely important uh I mean the month of Nissan the beginning of the harvest was an extremely important uh time for the entire northern hemisphere not just I mean this is the beginning of harvest and so um so looking at the dates of that those dates in the middle of the month of Nissan as necessarily being related to the Passover is is simply not you know not understanding the ancient world. Um and that is that projection is is rampant unfortunately in scholarship. Yes. And then there's another problem where people don't like to drift from the general narrative. They don't like to they don't like to say things that most of their colleagues will disagree with or cast them outside of like the lane that they're supposed to be in because they had the risk of being whatever. shunned by their colleagues or their university or or whatever it is the institution that they're a part of. They like to be, you know, they like to be a part of the team. They don't want to go outside the box most of the time. That that's true. But I think in many cases they truly believe this because they were they they were they were we I mean I mean when I approached this text I also had this projection as well. I was able to step back and and look at it more objectively because of other things that I was I I was seeing. So then I started questioning this and then I was able to step back. But I also at the beginning had the same projection because I was also brought up in the same sphere right in the same and so I think for a lot of these uh a lot of these scholars this is this is simply this is genuine. I mean they they really think when they see these dates automatically especially if within a yowistic context this is not a if they see these dates in a Egyptian context the purely Egyptian context they wouldn't necessarily connect it to the Passover. But since they're seeing it within a yowistic context, they're like, "Okay, this this has to be uh this has to be the Passover." But even within a yowistic context, it doesn't necessarily have to be. Now, what they were a lot of scholars up to up to very recently have been saying, well, this document, this so-called Passover letter, uh, shows that the Passover was observed in the fifth century before the common era. meaning this is the first proof that we have extra biblically of anyone observing this particular festival. Now, every time as a historian, every time you deal with firsts, you need to be extra careful, right? I mean, it's very different dealing with a second occurrence or a third occurrence because you already know there was a first, right? So there so so you're not even asking whether such an observant even existed. But but when you're dealing with a first occurrence of something, you need to be extra vigilant. And this is according to many scholars this would have been the first occurrence of the Passover um as a as a festival. But then you need to step back and say well is is what is what we are looking at really the Passover. Okay. And and my answer is no. Um for a lot of reasons that I talk about in this article. Um and actually I I connect it to Zoroastrian um to the to the Zoroastrian cult. Um and again I use cult not poratively but I use this as a as a synonym for religion. Um but I connected to the to the aminate version so really early Zoroastrianism and I explained why in that in in that article. Um so um you know in in and that analysis connecting it to a chem orastrianism is based on a lot of data um or you know on significant data whether there is whereas there is nothing to connect this at that stage to the biblical Passover. Okay. So when you compare the two uh it's it the chances are much stronger that it is connected to a Zoroastrian or Zoroastrian related uh observance than it is to the uh to the biblical Passover. Have you received any sort of push back or any sort of backlash for talking about this kind of stuff? I mean I've I've had people disagree uh of course which is normal. Uh I not not nothing really too aggressive uh against this but I did have people disagree with this but without a lot of um I mean just people just saying well I don't I don't buy this but without explanation without saying well these are the reasons why you know I would expect um people to and I'm fine of course I mean science always progresses through people seeing things differently and and disagreeing and and and we all progress together but when people just say I disagree without explaining it, you know, just I disagree because I disagree. That's not a good uh that's not a good approach. So, and I've had a lot of that. I mean, not a lot, but I have I had some of that. Um the thing is in the article I I really try and in my different, you know, lectures about this in different places. Um I I start by showing how just how wide the Zoroastrian impact on the elephantine yawistic community was independently of this uh particular document. And then I zero in on this document after the the reader already understand that there that this is not the only place where you find Zoroastrian influence. Right? So there's a much wider context and then we zero in on this particular particular document and it's really important to go that way. Okay. In order to understand that this is not just a singular event, the the the influence of of aminid zorastrianism um was deep uh and very intimate uh to the people uh at at the elephant and I think to to to the yaists or early Jews um in general and Yahweh back then it wasn't necessarily like an exclusive thing to be a Yahwist. You could you could partake, pick and choose a dozen religions and practice them all. Just like you go out to a restaurant on any given day of the week. You can pick you can pick and choose. It doesn't have it's not like today in Christianity and Judaism where you subscribe to one thing for life essentially. Yeah. I mean there was no You're right. I mean it was different. It wasn't exactly like this. It wasn't like picking and choosing but it was also not exclusive. Um so in the beginning in the early period at elephantine uh the Aista community we do find documents like where people bless each other um by the name of Yao and Canon who is the local Egyptian god. So I bless you by both deities. Um or they take oaths by the local uh female deity uh goddess uh sat or other cases like that. And a and very common just I bless you by the the the gods plural all the gods. So I don't mention a specific name. I just you're blessed by the gods. And so that's very common in um in that period, not just the Elephantine, but in general, just not mentioning all the gods because there are so many you you're blessed by the gods. And um but these are Yaoists. Um these are Yaoists. Um but there wasn't the reason I I use the word cult so much and not religion is because these are uh systems of um um of adherence to to to specific deities for specific reasons. But religion properly speaking when we talk about religion these it's a system of observances um you know like like going to mass for example for Catholics or going to to the synagogue and doing certain specific very specific and unique things for that specific religion practices um practices in antiquity you didn't really have religion as such you had cultic systems but there were a lot of them had common they were so so if you would go and um and and and and observe a sacrifice in awistic temple and then you go and you observe a sacrifice in a Phoenician temple. Um they would be almost identical. I mean these these these observances would be very very close to one another. So you'd have cultic differences but not really religious as such. The the observances themselves were not that different. Right. uh the language might have been a little bit different um possibly um and and things like that but the uh but the actual practices were not that different from one another. So we don't use the word religion at that point. That's that's really what I uh what I wanted to to say but actually going back to what you said earlier about yaoism being early Judaism or not. Yeah. Um that and that's really important. uh Yaoism as such continued so it spawned Judaism around the 3rd century uh before the common era. Judaism uh so when the uh when authoritative texts that eventually became the Bible um started to become uh to be collected and um made into a corpus of texts which is about the 3rd century. Um at that point, Judaism started to to take its own uh its own route. But Yaoism continued unabated. It continued uh in parallel to that. And you had Yowists who did not subscribe to these authoritative texts and um in Egypt and other places. So Yaoism continued, it spawned Judaism off and then Judaism spawned off Christianity. Uh but the but Yaoism continued and Yaoism continued to be the most popular and the most um important really the most central form of uh adherence to the deity Yahweh um while Judaism and Christianity were being were were developed in parallel to to that. And so Yaoism, if we were to be transported back now, maybe 1,800 years, 1900 years, or 2,000 years back, um, and wanted to know what form of Yao cult is the most popular, uh, Yaoism would be the by far the most popular at that period, more than Christianity or or or Judaism really. And the reason I say that is because we find all over the Roman Empire and even outside the Roman Empire, we find um texts uh amulets, uh curse texts, um you and and and all kinds of um you know uh magical paraphernalia that people used um in order to protect themselves by the name of Yao. Okay. And so and we find them all over the empire. All over the empire. It's much more it is so it was so popular that even Roman um Roman um historians and Roman philosophers wrote about who are not Jewish who are not Christian um they would write about Yao and and his importance in the in the federation of deities and so um and so Yaoism continued in parallel to the development of Judaism and Christianity and that is something that's really unique about my research. So my research focuses on Yaoism um as as a as a religion as almost an unseen and unknown religion that we didn't really see before because we're so again because of these projections that we have looking back at the Bible. So there's only New Testament in the Hebrew Bible. There's nothing beyond that. It's so crazy. Yeah. It's these are the blinders that we have. I just read this book by a guy named Thomas Payne. I'm sure you're familiar with him. But he he lays it out in such a compelling way where he explains that like the Bible is essentially a book of testimony. So today in today's world in court, if somebody has a testimony, it doesn't mean it's truth, right? It's just a test. It's somebody's recollection of something that happened that they they claim to be is true. Doesn't mean it's has to be true. It's up to the jury, right? Okay. Now take it and make it anonymous. So now say we have we have testimony but we don't know who the person who said this is and we don't actually have it straight from their mouth. Right now take it to another level and say it's the most extraordinary thing you've ever heard in your life by an anonymous person and his testimony they say the sun and the moon stood still by the command of one person. So like if that's what the Bible is made up of that's in that's so crazy and it's just like it really like that book that he I forget the name of the book right now. I think it's the age of reason where you know it really really lays out the history of the different versions of the Bible and how it was edited, redacted and added to over millennia. Right? So yeah, so I mean that's I'm not familiar actually with that book, but uh the Bible I what the way I explain um the Bible to my students and to in general is is and I believe the correct way to look at the Bible is it's a battlefield um of ideas. And so like people often say well you you you you take the testimony of Heroditus, right? And you you you put more weight on what Herodotus said about the history of of those those that period more over the Bible. So why do you trust Herodotus more than the Bible? First of all, I don't uh even with Herodotus, I'm extremely critical and I do not trust anything just blindly even if it's Herodotus. But there is a big difference between Heroditus and the Bible. The Bible is a book that defined the identity of a people and of different sects within the the Jewish uh realm, right? So you had a lot of different sects competing for ideas, you know, the Pharisees, Sadducees, the Essenes, etc. You had all of these different sects competing for and and the Enochians and we had a lot of different sects competing for uh for ideas and and the theological ideas. um what what is redemption, what is salvation, what are the end times, what you know all of these different ideas uh competing uh against one another. No one was defined no one's identity was defined by Herodotus. Okay, that's not in he did not no one said I'm a Herodotian, right? But people did define their identity by the Bible. So that's a different a completely different um corpus and the impact is completely different. Now, the reason I say it's a battlefield is because the different redactions, the different additions, the different uh um uh um treatments that the Bible um had to go through um were different different ideologies competing against one another. And you see that in in the text um you see things that are, you know, go to one direction and or the or another direction and the text in the text contains all of them. And if not if the Bible does not contain works that are that did not make it into the Bible apocryphal texts do contain them. Okay. So even the addition of the Bible and and eventually making the Bible into a canonical work that process also is ideological deciding which book would get in and which book is not going to be in and things like that. So the Bible is truly a battlefield of ideas and I think that's part of the beauty of the of this work. The fact that it is I mean the Bible is a very beautiful work um regardless of of of uh of religious um the religious perspective. And I think the main beauty of of this book is its humanity. And what I mean by that is is that the power of the of this text comes from geography. And what I mean by that is that it was written at the place which is if you look at at the at where Palestine is, where Israel is, right? Where the where that um plot of land is. Um in the map, you see it's the bridge between Asia, between Europe, Asia, and Africa. That's the land, the only land bridge between these three continents. every single um empire, every army had to go through that region. So every every culture in antiquity from from uh western Asia and Europe and Egypt, of course, not China, but every every military, every culture from those areas had to leave a mark on that land and on the people. And so they they shared their ideology, they shared their theology, they shared their views with the people of this land. And that's what gives I think the Bible its uniqueness because it just it's a big this huge um mixture of of different p different perspectives that were left behind by the great empires and the uh and the different groups that came in and out of that region. So it's really a product of the geography of where it was composed. And the beauty of it is really that we see elements that from from Indo-Iaranian through the Akeminids for example from so from the indo-aranian sphere we see from the Greeks we see a lot of the Egyptian and the Assyrian and the Babylonians etc and the Hittites. So we see all of these different elements come in and get kind of mixed up in the in the biblical text. And I think that's what gives it a lot of its um a lot of its beauty and richness. uh you have these all of these uh cultures coming together. Um and for my research I I kind of reverse engineer this. So I look at that and I go back into the uh into the um into the um actual cultures uh and and see and and and look at the um the at the try to re reverse engineer the original direction that they took. um and and especially looking at the um at the Iranian world which which had a tremendous impact and who who was the first person to mention Moses. Um this is one of the things extra biblically, right? Yeah. I spoke with Neil about this. Yeah. And he was explaining to me essentially that Moses wasn't ever mentioned until like a thousand years after he died. Well, if if Moses is a historical person, which if he's real, which he's not. Okay. Um, I mean, I'm going to say it very clearly. It's that's it's it's not and we shouldn't be surprised that it's not a a a historical person. And why do you say that? Um, well, Mo, so I'll I'll answer your question first. uh Moses is really kind of the first extra-biblical mention of Moses uh is found in Heatosphera and who was the Greek uh writer writing around the turn of the 3rd century uh before the common era and um he talks about a Moses. Now there are about according to my calculation about between 11 to 13 different Moses in Greek in the Greek sources and these are very different. It's the same name but completely different stories about this person. Same similar stories or no no different stories same name but different stories. Um and that's very really very very interesting. Uh so we have Moses as this military leader, great military leader defeating the Ethiopians. Um we have uh Moses as a Egyptian priest. H we have Moses as the teacher of Orpheus. So this great musician, the you know the the great singer musician and and the teacher of Mo and the reason why because it it look it sounds like muse right Moses. So he's a teacher of Orpheus. Uh we have him as a magi, as a ma as a as an alchemist, as a as a magician. We have so we have all a lot of different and and we have him also as a police builder. We have him as the as the one who built Jerusalem. We have him as the one who divided the the the Jewish people into 12 tribes. Things that are not in the Bible, right? I mean, you you uh the idea of 12 tribes does exist in the Bible, of course, but not as tribes that Moses divided. you know, it's not it's not the same story. Mhm. So, we have we have, you know, 11 to 13 different Moses and we have about four different Exodus narratives in the Greek world around in the 3rd century. And many of them are simply ignor they don't know about the about the biblical version. They're not pmicizing. They're not arguing with the biblical version. They're just saying this is the way it was. Um how on the flip side actually the biblical version is pmicizing against these uh these other sources. So clearly it's later right? In order to to to disagree with someone, you have to come later. Right. Right. You have to know about it and to uh so so the biblical version of the Exodus narrative is pmicizing against a lot of these Greek sources and trying to correct them and to and to protect um the Jewish people from some of these interpretations that seem to be uh offensive to the Jewish people. Um and so that we do find in the Bible. So the Exodus story is clearly later and clearly uh reacting to these um uh to many of these Greek uh Greek sources. And that's a good reason to say this is mythological because you have so many different modes and you have so many and you have at least four different um Exodus narratives and and the biblical version of that just pmicizes against all of these other sources. Wow. And uh so it comes later and it's it's eclectic. it it it looks at all of these different directions. So, um yeah, so that's um I think a very compelling argument. It's not from a lot of people say, well, Moses didn't didn't exist and the exodus didn't happen because of archaeological reasons. We don't find any archaeology to support Moses existing and and and the Exodus of the people out of Egypt. Yeah, but that's an argument from silence and that's true and it's certainly true and it's important to take into account but um but ultimately people can say well you know they were nomads um we we might have somehow missed that particular point in time. So archaeology is is very convincing up to a point but then it's argument from science. What I'm showing in my research is that and I put archaeology aside even though again it's important but it's it's simply not not a slum it's not it's not a absolutely 1% convincing argument. I think when you look at the Greek sources and and you see how how many different view I mean even within all of these sources that I mentioned there are um there are uh later generations that amplify these these uh these stories about Moses and add data to it later on. Um, so you have a lot of different of I mean even several generations of these stories developing in parallel to the biblical one. Oh wow. I mean we are talking about a very very rich um corpus about a person a very well-known person called Moses. Um not necessarily um the Jewish mo or not necessarily the biblical Moses although he's always associated with the Jews in some point at some in some way shape or form. Um but sometimes he's associated with the Jews in a very offensive way. So for example, he's uh he's depicted as a leper and he's depicted as a leper and the people the Jewish people are a people of leper according to this Greek um to some of these Greek sources and that was of course offensive to the to the Jewish people. And within the Torah they picize against it. They fight against that idea and they say, well, and that's why in the Torah you see so much about leprosy. Uh there's so much dealing with leprosy and dealing with keeping pure. I mean, leprosy was a fact of the of daily life in the ancient world. It wasn't something you would obsess over. But the Torah is deals with leprosy all over the place. Even with Moses, Moses is a leper for a short period of time in the in the um story of the burning bush. So in the source of the burning bush, he kind of puts his hand into his cloak and takes it out and it's lepers and then he puts it back in and it's healed. Um but then also all of the people uh have to deal with leprosy and there's a lot of rules about leprosy. Even leprosy of the house and the leprosy of the clothes. I mean things that are not natural, right? And and so this obsession with leprosy I believe is part of the push back against this um this um kind of porative view of c some of the Greek sources against the the Jewish people. Okay. I want to talk about Alexandria. Yeah. So is it true there was there was absolutely so I think basically what we've already what you've already said um is that there was no evidence of the Bible before the library of Alexandria right I mean more specifically before the 3rd century BC that corresponds to the founding of the library of or of of Alexandria as a phenomenon. Mhm. Yeah. And so who you I know you explained this on Neil's podcast. I thought it was fascinating the the two guys who were students of Aristotle who created Alexandria. Well, that's Alexander the Great Malmi. Uh, okay. Childhood friends who uh studied in the academy in Aristo's academy. Um, and uh and later with I mean Theoprastus who was the heir of Aristo uh took over the academy and uh was probably the visionary uh for the library of Alexander or for the okay the phenomenon of Alexandria. The reason I say phenomenon of Alexandria is that Alexandria in antiquity was truly a science fictional uh uh city. I mean it was something that the world has ever seen before. It it wasn't just Silicon Valley something. Yeah. Kind of something like Silicon Valley but um but truly I mean what they had uh if you go to I mean it was new a new city. I mean it was built by I mean it was conceived by Alexander and and and and and and um and and and uh constructed in a way to reflect the the the uh vision of Aristo for a kind of rational city that is designed in a grid, you know, in a grid as a grid. And it had the coin operated machines for example. It had what? Yep. Yeah. It had coin operated machines like vending machines. Like vending machines. Exactly. No, it was truly it was truly it was truly uh ahead of its time. It had um automatic doors that open automatically. Um really? Yep. Yeah. How did that work? So that particular I mean the not everywhere of course but in the temple uh the automatic doors um the heat of the sacrifice that you offered before the door before the door of the temple would cause this hydraulic action uh below the surface that would make the doors open. So you you would offer the sacrifice and that would cause the do the the the doors to to actually uh open seemingly automatically and and have the uh uh and have the um um the deity accept the the sacrifice. That's crazy. Yep. Yep. Automated. Oh, this says using ropes and pulleys. Okay. Yeah, but it it was it was um it was um uh triggered by the heat of the of the of the fire. Wow. And what were the coin operated machines for? Like what did they use those for? I don't know. All kinds of uh I mean that's very when you have a coin I mean the weight of the coin open like a lever and a pulley, right? I mean that's very straightforward but even you have to think about that in order to do it. Oh yeah, for sure. Um and so yeah that I mean in in antiquity you would go anyone would go there it would be truly science fictional something that you've never seen before. And um now the library, we often talk about the library, but the library was a part of a part of a of a much bigger uh complex. No, no, just a complex of the palace of of um of Tommy. And so there was a this huge palace complex that included a a um temple for the muse for the muses. uh this this place where you would you could walk around and philos philosophize and and think and uh and come up with with new ideas. So these the the the place this museum which we use for museum today but this museum uh this place of the muse had within it a library okay so that's the library of Alexandria the famous library of Alexandria now what's unique about the library of Alexandria technically we had libraries even before Alexandria but those library like the library of Banipal and and other uh great monarchs of antiquity uh those libraries were really more arch arives than libraries. They were there in order to store texts and to train scribes and mostly to store omen texts, texts that predict the future and they wanted to be able to store those texts and refer back to them. Um, and so these those other archives really were very different from the library of Alexandria. M the library of Alexandria was also about storing of course keeping keeping important texts in stored but they the main goal there was to um implement the vision of Aristo um on how to deal with the with texts that don't that disagree with one another. So different manuscripts. So they had different manuscripts for example of Homer and they saw that there that there are all kinds of contradictions between these manuscripts of the same work and uh they developed the methodologies to uh sometimes put them side by side in different versions, sometimes harmonize them, sometimes modify them uh or or remove one version and keep only one. um all kinds of methodologies to deal with different uh versions of the same story and different manuscripts. We see the same exact methodologies applied to the Bible. Okay, exactly the same. We see like, you know, we see two accounts side by side. We see harmonizations. We we see we see the same type of of um editing methodologies applied to the Bible as well. It's like chat GBT of antiquity if you want to look at it that way. Yeah, but it's uh it's uh it's the um as as I said before Alexandria. So before the the turn of the 3rd century, I should say as a historian, I came to this uh from a different angle. I I noticed that um before the turn of the third century, there's z there is nothing. Nothing. What do you mean nothing? No, as we said, there's absolutely no trace of any hint of knowledge of anything biblical um in all of these thousands of talk we talked about earlier. there is absolutely nothing. There's this deafening silence before the turn of the 3rd century. But around the third the turn of the 3rd century, we see those Greek writers starting to talk about things that are reminiscent at least of the Bible like Moses and and and and things like that. Not necessarily that doesn't necessarily mean that they knew of the biblical text, right? Again, if we talk if we go back to what we talked about earlier about projection, the fact that they mentioned Moses or they mentioned the 12 tribes doesn't mean that they knew about the biblical text. They might have been familiar with this was the source for the later biblical. This is could have been the source first sources taken out of context for the later. What I argue is that some of the biblical text is is kind of arguing against these Greek right these Greek uh sources but they might reflect um certain traditions that were oral traditions in the among the Jews of Alexandria for example at the time um they they might reflect all kinds of other other traditions that we're not familiar with but they don't necessarily mean that they were familiar with the biblical text because they not ar they are not really arguing with the biblical text that's the main point they're coming in and saying this was the case and they're not trying to show that the biblical text is wrong. Whereas the biblical text is trying to show that they're wrong. Right? So that's that means that the that actually hints at certain a certain precedence here of the Greek sources over the uh the biblical sources. Um and so because when you're arguing against something, you clearly are coming later. By the way, what um out of all of the texts that were in the Library of Alexandria, do you know like what language they were in for the most part? I mean, um for the the vast majority of course is Greek. Um and that's that's another thing. Um, the library of Alexandria was constructed in order to organize the Greek world, the the works, the great works of the Greek world and to create authoritative editions and and clean editions and the most accurate editions according to the scientific standards of that day um for the Greek world. Okay, so they were very helenocentric. Okay, there is in um in scholarship and uh historically we a lot of people claim that the uh there's this idea coming from the letter of Aristas uh very famous document about written to describe how the uh um the Hebrew Bible was translated into Greek. Okay. But it's it's also a a a myth I mean it's not a very historical document. We call it often in in scholarship we call it pseudo aristas. Uh and there's a lot of that's what you're talking about before. Interesting. Okay. Yeah. And so that it's a very important document but it's not a very historically um you know uh trustworthy um um document. Uh but it's a very important one because it does show what the Jews wanted to show to the world in the second century of the common of the before the common era um to the Greek world how they wanted to present themselves. And um and in it in that document in this letter of Arisus um it supposedly the the the king Bartholomei wanted to um to commission a um a a translation of the Hebrew Bible into the Greek. Okay. And um in to in order to keep that in the B in the library of Alexandria. Um there are a lot of problems with that mo with that idea. First of all, as I said, they were not really interested in in anything that's not Greek, right? Uh the idea of them commissioning a work like that is simply antithetical to the to to how Alexandria operated. Um they were not this, you know, cosmopolitan. There's a much later kind of romantic idea that Alexandria was this cosmopolitan place where all cultures were treated equally and there was this great kumbaya of cultures. Greek supremacy. Yeah. Yeah. And a lot of that comes from actually from the the the time of the French Revolution where where the intellectuals wanted to show that Christianity is the source of all evil. And so look at the at how humanity was before Christianity with this absolutely uh great universal uh you know everyone was working together and then it was destroyed. Uh but the reality was that that Alexander was very helenocentric. Mhm. Um, now another really important point that a lot of scholars miss is that the Septuagent is not Greek as such. It's not Greek Greek. It's Judeo Greek. For people who are new to this stuff, can you explain what the Septuagent was? So the Septuagent is this translation of the especially of the Torah of the first five books of the Hebrew Bible into something that is Greek related. Okay? And the reason I'm saying Greek related because it's not it's not actual Greek. It's Hebrew Greek. It's Jewish Greek. It's Judeo Greek. It's kind of like Yiddish. Judeo Greek. That's crazy. I've never heard of that before. Right. It is. So I come I come from classical studies and so I studied Greek, classical Greek for a long time. And so for me coming into and reading the Septuagent or the New Testament which is a an extension of the Septuagent in in terms of its language um it's it was it was almost shocking. It was almost uncomfortable uh for anyone coming from classical Greek or from Greek Greek to read the Septuagent because it's not um in in some cases even look it seems to be wrong. It seems to be badly written, right? Um some of the terms that it's using don't make sense in Greek. But when you know the Hebrew term behind it, uh it's a exact translation into the Greek of the Hebrew term. Interesting. Um so it's Hebrew. It's really very much sure a lot of people listening to this are know about Yiddish. So Yedish is Jewish German, right? That's the it's a it's it's a German language but adopted by the I didn't even know that. Yeah. Okay. So Yiddish is Jewish German. Um and it's the German it's based on German language but it has a lot of words in Hebrew also kind of kind of sprinkled in. And um and that's the same thing with the Greek of the of the Septuagent. It's not so for for Tomi or anyone to commission a work that would be written in a Jewish Greek, not in Greek Greek. Um makes little sense. Yeah. Why would you create some new Jewish Greek? Why wouldn't you just make it into real Greek? Right. So that was probably the Greek that was spoken by the Jews of Alexandria. So it was written for them. It was not. So that's the the language that the Greek that they had for for their own identity in Alexandria. And there was a pretty large uh community within of of Jews in Alexandria from the beginning from Alexandria. Alexander had Jewish mercenaries uh with him and he gave them land uh or at least he settled them in Alexandria. Um and so uh and so this language that it was translated into is not Greek Greek. And that's extremely important to realize. Uh and unfortunately a lot in many cases that is not really um people don't realize this as they should. Um so so when you want to compare Hebrew to Greek, how much Hebrew literature is there from that part that time? Oh, that's a great question. Um the Dead Sea Scrolls are from when again? So the Dead Scrolls are are later. They're like 200. Yeah. I mean, some people date really the first uh first fragments to uh late 3rd century. I'm not sure I would necessarily subscribe to that dating. It's all based on on on the script on the format of the script rather than anything else. Like how much like when it comes to uh Hebrew versus Greek? Like how much I don't know how much philosophical text, medical text, legal text do we have in Hebrew? almost nothing as as medical texts and philosophical texts as such prior to to the you know um to the maybe second century um wow before the common era you know it starts maybe if I want to be really generous the late third century before the common era um but it's hard to date these things of course why do you think that is well first of all we don't really have a lot of Hebrew um anywhere um before before uh the Dead Sea Scrolls. Um Hebrew was not dead language. Oh, that I mean that's a really great question and I and it's not it it wasn't completely dead. Uh some people obviously knew it because they were able to write the Hebrew Bible using Hebrew. Um but the language that was spoken by the Yahwistic um people living in Babylonia or Egypt or wherever uh was Aramaic mostly. Um most of them spoke Aramaic most of that period. Uh in Babylonia it there was still some Ocadian that was being used of course even into the Persian period. But Aramaic was the lingua frana that it was the the language that was spoken all over the place and the language that for a lot of people it became not just lingua franka but also lingua materna meaning the the mother tongue. Um and so uh and so Aramaic was the central language for everybody and it we do have Aramaic text of course also in the Dead among the Dead Sea Scrolls. Uh Hebrew was more of um I wouldn't even say lurggical language. We don't have any proof that it was liturggical language anywhere. That's an important point to make. It could have been but we don't have any proof of that. Um but but clearly it was preserved somehow because people were able to write um write the Hebrew um Hebrew text. Now again I'm not also I I want it's important to point out I'm not saying that everything in the Hebrew Bible was written in the Hellenistic period. Clearly there were uh texts that were much older as well that were compiled that were collected and there and and then implemented and and and put together as part of this enterprise of of putting together an authoritative source based on the on the same methodologies that were developed in Alexandria. I'm not saying all of these texts were composed in the in the Elenistic period. And of course also I mean I also have an article about a portion of the book of Amos uh that I can date uh I can date not necessarily the text but I can date the story uh there to the end of the uh 8th century beginning of the 7th century before the common era. So these are this is a very old text and the reason I'm able to date it is because I can compare it very precisely to neoassyan inscriptions that were uh common at the time. I'm so every time I have an extra biblical anchor I can I can use that in order to date uh certain texts and even then you have to be very very careful and not assume certain things because even even if there are certain parallels between you know uh texts that are extra biblical and the biblical text doesn't mean that necessarily they were composed at the same time because you have access to that text for centuries later. Right. Right. So we have to be very careful every in everything that we do um in order to to make sure that we are as objective as as scientific as possible in coming to our conclusions. Uh but in this in the case of Amos I also show in in my article that um there was only a very short window in which these um these idioms could have been fully understood and I show how they were later misunderstood. So I can I can narrow down the time frame to roughly the first part of the 7th century. uh before the common era for that partic for a small passage of from the book of Amos because I have these parallels but so there what I'm trying to say is that there are clearly there were texts that made it into the Hebrew Bible that were much older maybe 8th century 7th century um but the there were people Jewish people that were inspired but what by what was going on in the Alexandrian library it wasn't they were not working for under any kind of commission by the king to translate the Bible or anything like that but they were inspired by this by what was happening in Alexandria as others were not just they were they were not the only ones it inspired Egyptians it inspired other other uh uh people uh in in the in the region and um and they said okay we're going to apply this approach they're the the the the Greeks are are applying this to their own corpus we're going to apply it to our corpus And so they were able to to get uh texts from various sources and apply these methodologies and compose new texts in many cases as well and to compose the glue between different texts uh to put them together and um and and and also imagine in the case of the Torah specifically, imagine all kinds of answers to the the the Greek view that we mentioned earlier like about the leprosy and all of these other things that they were they were concerned with. And so this enterprise that happened uh started in the 3rd century um before the common era to collect, edit, redact um compose, harmonize and and really kind of put together a a more authoritative version of of the of the authoritative corpus uh that of of yeah of history, theology, ideology, and all of that. I mean they didn't think of of history the way we think of history today. Of course that's not a that wasn't a concern at that at that time. They really weren't concerned about precise history really. No. No. I mean even even Heroditus uh that's not history the way we do today. I mean he basically walks around asks people um about certain elements of their culture and writes it down. Okay. Often through a translator. So it it's often even lost in translation. Um and uh so he writes it down and just goes with it and he doesn't necessarily sometimes he has critical sometimes he's more reserved sometimes he's just um you know runs with whatever he's been told um so even Herodotus is not really he's considered to be the f father of history right um toadus who came after him called him the father of lies because of a so many inconsistencies that he has in in Herodotus but Herodotus is certainly an important source and he is kind of pseudoistorical in many ways. Uh we certainly have to use to use him as a source but always with a grain of salt um in our research. Uh but again in antiquity history wasn't really a science per se. It was people writing things that they've heard sometimes asking questions sometimes doubting right um but it wasn't really a a main concern. In the case of the Bible it was more about identity. It was about building identity. about establishing their own kind of cocoon, ideological cocoon um in parallel to the Greek one, right? The Greeks were were were doing the same thing with the uh um with their sources with Heziod, with uh with um Homer and other and other sources. And they were, you know, looking at this critically at these at these different um critically in in in for their day. um and and the Jews were simply just uh applying the same methodology to the sources that existed or they would develop new sources. Mhm. So a lot of this I mean I according to my research certain important layers within the pentatque within the the Torah uh are new are newly written within the in the um in the Henistic period like the the the the story of the patriarch of the patriarchs that we mentioned earlier that is so henistic right in its in its overall features. Um and so um these were composed um I believe in the um in the Henistic period but but other elements that are um that are that that found their way into this narrative are could be older. So my understanding of the languages and the translation was that is that especially when it comes to Greek and Hebrew is that Greek is this deep complex language that has over a million unique words and Hebrew only has like 7,000 unique words give or take something around that which is like an insane uh the difference between the two is crazy right and um when you translate that you can't translate from something less technical to something more technical. Now, you saying that it's JudeoGo Greek is a whole different it makes it it really like throws a wrench into this whole thing, right? But like the way it was described to me before was that Greek and this is just my analogy for it is that Greek is like a flying saucer of a language, right? And then Hebrew is like a a single engine propane. So, how do you find a flying saucer and then try to reverse engineer into a single engine prop plane? Like, it doesn't make sense to go from something super technical and deep to something way less technical and deep that has way fewer words, unique words. And then in some in some instances I've seen on a uh on a debate actually on Neil's channel where two people were debated debating this is that there are words in um Greek that actually take like three or two or three words in Hebrew just to make that one word in Greek. Yeah. I mean of course I mean we're talking also about different language families, right? I mean this is Semitic and this is uh Indo-Uropean. U so we're talking about completely different dynamics. Um and and so it's the comparison is is um there are and and there are cases where it's the other way around. I mean where you can say things in the Semitic language that are much more compressed compared to a the Induropean version of it. So but I I I mean technically the translation can happen and it did happen right um and Julius Aricanis also said something I think that I heard around the 2n century AD or something like that where he looked at it and said this looks like a original Greek work. I don't know if I don't know if that you go that far into history that I I've read Julius. I don't know I don't remember that particular part but uh I don't know what I mean he said what that the original he said that the septuagent looks like a it it reads like a Greek original is what a Julius African alleged allegedly Stephen maybe you can find that uh on surprised if he if he did uh say that because again like I said anyone who has been trained with actual Greek uh and goes to the Septuagent it's it's weird it's just it's a it's it's a in a sense I think for a lot of the of actual I mean people who came from the Greek world and were exposed to the um to the subtuent um it made them feel maybe even uncomfortable in a way because it looks like it looks like parts of it look even erroneous. Um parts of it are just um unexpected turns of um of phrases and and things like that. Um and certainly the the vocabulary is different uh in many cases. It is of course Greek like Edish is is German ultimately but um but it's not uh it's not Greek Greek and it it makes you feel like you're in a kind of almost parallel universe right it's not it's not even a difference like the difference between you know British English and American English it's much more than that and so um and so um and it is a a a in many ways an artificial language uh the the Jew Jewish Greek it's the Greek that was spoken by the Jews in the Bartholomeic Empire and especially in Alex probably mostly in Alexandria. Um and so it was written for it wasn't commissioned by the king. I mean the chances of a king commissioning something in JudeoGreek rather than actual Greek I think are are slim to non-existent. And uh I'm not you can't completely discount this but I think it it makes little very little sense for a work commissioned by the king to not be written in actual Greek. And you can of course you can you could have translated the Hebrew into Greek Greek. You could have but they didn't. So it trans it is translated into the J Greek and I think it's translated for the Alexandrian Jews who are as I said pretty pretty significant community and how what like as far as like a time frame of when this translation took place like how how much time is there between the Torah and the Septuagent the translation? I think very little time. Um, we're talking about the 3rd century before the common era. I think in the first quarter of that uh of the of that century, uh, we're talking about kind of the Hebrew text starting to uh, to to come together of the Torah. Mhm. And then the, uh, the, uh, translation was very, you know, within a decade or two later on. A decade or two. Yeah. I mean earlier I mentioned uh Virgil and and him writing the equivalent of the Torah. That took him 10 years. That's it. It took for one person to write the equivalent of the Torah and more because he again he had to write it with a meter and rhyme. So it was much more work to do this again but the same length of text 10 years to do to write it. Now he was also using uh existing material. He didn't invent the entire story. um uh just by himself. He he was the the idea that the Romans were children of this hero, this homeriic hero from Troy, from the battle of Troy, of course, predated him. And we we find the uh echoes of that already in the in the in the second century before the common era in Rome. Um but he so he's using existing material and um and um you know re reworking this into to fit certain rhymes and and certain meters and um and adds to it and composes this incredible work uh known as the inads and so but it took him 10 years to do. Now a a much more impressive um example although uh from from much from about thousand years later um is the Shaame the the the the book of kings in the Iranian tradition. Um an amazing I really recommend people look it up the Shaame probably one of the best greatest epics of humanity uh ever. It's an incredible story. It's an incredible book. Um written by Ferdosi um this great uh Iranian poet also in in rhyme and meter. Um that book is about 1 point 150% more than the entire Bible. Okay. Including the New Testament. Wow. It is a humongous work. Okay. Um and it took him 30 years to write. One person also using existing material also not inventing everything but he but one person for working for 30 years producing a a work that is Shauna. There you go. So a work that is significantly larger than the entire Bible. Okay. Wow. So uh yeah the book of Kings it is I really recommend people to uh to to become familiar with this uh incredible work. Um anyway so this is one person for 30 years. So people can if it if there is the uh if there is the if the resources are available if the time is available if the will is there uh people can write large works very relatively quickly I mean within 10 to 30 years within the lifetime of of a single person uh well within the lifetime of a single person. So um so I I the work of writing and collecting the Torah uh could have been accomplished within a decade or two technically. I'm not saying that it was but you know it could have been um and the translation could have happened even in parallel to it because if the uh if the goal was uh to work within this Alexandrian um state of um of of mind. I mean if this this Alexandrian ideology, this Alexandrian uh methodology that was developed in Alexandria at the library at the time and they wanted to follow this way of doing things and to prod produce something for the people for the Jews in Alexandria so that they feel that their identity is also receiving the same kind of treatment as their Greek neighbors. Um the the uh the translation into Jewish Greek again uh would have happened very quickly. Yeah. And even with like the al the the the library of Alexandria, it was right on the water, right? So it was not a great place to store texts. Like those those works would get diminished by just like the the climate and the humidity there. So like they constantly had to have people that were rewriting books, right? And making copies of them and like who knows what was lost during that. Yeah, of course we lost a lot. I mean the the library of Alexandria continued for centuries later on. It was under Ulus Caesar. It was there was some kind of um of fire that that that that uh destroyed parts of the library. Mhm. But the library continued well well into the common era um and slowly kind of diminished later on. But we lost a lot of course. I mean, um, yeah, it it was a truly a a treasure trove of It's such an interesting thing the way you say that they didn't look at history the same way we look at it. And the way that people today in our culture look at history is so much different. And then when we try to fit that into our frame of view of history is crazy, you know, and when you have people doing writing about this stuff for different motivations, whether it be just mythological or if you want to call it historical or if you want if if it was for, you know, any sort of economic gain, if you want to get later into like Christianity, these people writing it to develop these religions to create this sort sort of a like a society like Plato's Plato's idea of this noble society you know he wanted to create this sort of Santa Claus character to make people you know to build it around fear so people would obey and he wanted to get rid of Homer and in like the the schools and stuff and they had just different motivations for things and then if you extrapolate that to where we are now like if you wanted like an example would Something we've been talking talked about recently on recent podcasts is like uh Plato's Atlantis and Plato that like up until a couple like a couple decades ago, there was just this gap where no one would talk about Atlantis and some guy wrote a book about it on how it was this crazy lost city that somehow was lost during the flood and went underwater. But like if you go and talk to Plato about it or if you look at any of Plato's other work, Plato's only wrote about like philosophical allegorories, right? Ideas like his cave. Like we aren't out looking for Plato's cave, right? So why would we be looking for Alexandria? Well, there's people like now we write book like people often write books just to to build a name for themselves to make money on things. There's just there's so many motivations for developing these works even today. So to look at it to look at history through the same lens we look at now is just it's kind of crazy. Right. Right. And we need to we always be very careful. We in academia we try to we try um to be as um methodological about this. So we always we have to look at we can't just look at one data point. We have to to to find where they where as many data points meet uh to draw uh conclusions. um it has to be as scientific as it can be. And in the study of history, we are now moving in this generation. Um and and that's something I'm really trying to to focus a lot of my energy on is to make the study of history to be more scientific or more like the the the hard sciences rather than just, you know, coming up with ideas and trying to see if it sticks. Um which was the way a lot of the the history has been done thus far. And I'm not saying that a lot that I mean we've we've made a lot of progress in the study of history, but in order to put history on on on very solid ground and to make it less subjective and more objective. Um there's a lot we can do and so one of my project I'm not going to go too much into the detail is not to bore people but uh the um but we're trying to um to work especially on epigraphy. Now I mentioned the pigraphy already a number of times which is the study of these original primary documents the ostricha the actual documents that were written in real time by the people living in real time not thinking that this will ever be studied um again right so epigraphy is the heart the beating heart of the study of history of ancient history at all because that this is the primary material that we have okay it's more than Herodotus which is not a primary source right Herodotus of wrote his his his um um his books, but he did not um first of all, we don't have his original document, his original uh manuscript. Um but that was uh that was not something that that that it's not the daily life. It's not something that people are just, you know, you don't have this visceral experience. Um the uh the epigraphic material is the most um basic the most um original the most raw material that you can have and you build and on top of that you can start you start building historical uh um analysis of the of the of the data. So ep epigraphy is really the heart and soul and really the blood of uh of historical science. our mathematics in history um is grammar. Okay. So if you look at these texts and you want to to really identify what did they actually say, right? It has to to correspond to the rules of grammar and syntax, right? And and if it does not then you are probably missing something. So the way for us to to check whether we are reading it correctly or not is is through the rules of philology. So we are looking we are starting to look at history more scientifically more precisely um and and and more and trying to be more objective. In order to do that we also have to be as transparent and that I think is the is really the main innovation now is to shoot for maximum transparency. Now in my work I try to be as transparent as possible. That is the most important thing for me more than accuracy. Now, I try to be as accurate as possible in my restorations of texts, right? But I'm human. I'll make mistakes. What's going to what is more important than me being accurate is me being transparent and explaining with as many photos as I can. And I and I always offer microscopic photos of different aspects of the text and and of the object that I'm restoring, but as many photos as I can and always explaining why I reached these conclusions, what were the other options that I had in front of me and being as transparent as possible because I the transparency is the is the key for the study of history. Yeah. because we are always working together all all scholars and I want them to look at my work and find the mistakes if it's transparent they can find where I was wrong right much more easily and I want them to be able to correct because we are working together for the progress of science ultimately and so we really shooting in this generation now of historians shooting for the maximum transparency that's new that that is new uh maximum transparency maximum methodological uh rigor and uh and I think we're already starting to see the the the first fruits of that uh really starting to uh to lead us into a more stable um vision of history. Yeah. And it's tough too like even with the Dead Sea Scrolls. I had a gentleman on here who's a um an expert on uh deciphering the Dead Sea Scrolls and he was explaining to me how um when they were doing all that work on the Dead Sea Scrolls, they came across a lot of forgeries where people were basically trying to sell fakes at Dead Sea Scrolls and the Antiquities Mark and they would put them under microscopes and they would see the degradation of the actual um what is the word they use for the animal skins that they were written on? Parchment. Parchment. Yeah. So, so the parchments they were they would see like degradations or like like uh depressions where part of it was torn away and they would see the ink going over that. So, they knew that this was like obviously not an original. This was a forgery, right? Which is Yeah. Which is crazy. And that's another landmine you got to try to avoid with this stuff. Absolutely. You always need to be very careful about these sources to check whether they are actual actually original. um you know if they were found in an archaeological context that's best because you can actually uh with the stat stratographic um dating you can know which which layer uh in the archaeological um excavation it was found so you can date it right um so yeah but a lot of these documents unfortunately don't have this this data associated with them so you have to date them in in in in different ways but of of course um Checking with whether these are forgeries or not is is is really important. It's really tricky. Yeah. And and people try to do that for multiple different reasons to help push a narrative or just to make money. Just just make money. And the thing is a lot of um forggers are very are people who went to academia and probably did not make it uh the way they wanted but they are really good in I mean they know Aramaic they know um they they they've learned how to um how how to copy and uh and mimic the hand of scribes but they also have a lot of money um they are sponsored by people who can sell this and they have more money than we have in academia for sure. So they have more re better resources in order to to make these forgeries. Uh so we need to be very very vigilant and and make sure that we're dealing with actual sourced material. Um and and but again a lot of these documents in the Dead Sea Scrolls are clearly ancient. Uh some of them are not but uh yeah we always need to be on guard uh for that. I know this is a little bit outside of your expertise but what language do you think Jesus spoke? Do you think he was a real historical figure? I mean, I think most uh most historians say that there was a rabbi, a very influential rabbi uh at that time who was probably crucified and and there was a Jesus movement after after that. Whether that person also resurrected from the dead, that's more of a a faith thing than than the historical. Um but um yeah, that's that's really not my my my field. Um the languages. So we're talking about first century of the um of the uh common era. Uh Greek was certainly a a major language uh in Palestine at the time. Uh so I'm sure that people at the time not sure not I don't know anything about that particular this particular figure but people at the time certainly spoke Greek in the marketplaces. Um Aramaic was certainly a very important language as well. uh it. So I think between these two between Aramaic and Greek um those are the languages that he would have uh or people at the time would have uh mastered uh primarily and Hebrew would not have been a living language as such. Uh but Aramaic and and certainly Greek was a very important language. Yeah. too. And I also I I I get the impression that a lot of these these cults and these ancient religions like Yaoism, they and correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems like that they viewed them much differently than we view religions today. like like they viewed them as mythological traditions that ne didn't necessarily have to be objective facts, but they were more of just uh traditional myth myths that they subscribed to because for whatever reason. Um maybe it maybe it helped them get through life, maybe it was just an important tradition to them, but like today it's more of a hard black and white thing. Absolutely. You're making a very good point. The um in antiquity um things were much more fluid, much much more fluid, much more interesting as well. And um and and very energetic. The energy, one of the things that always really excites me in my research is the energy that I see in these primary documents. the the and how people were so keen on learning and on um and exposing themselves to new to new ideas and to new uh um new traditions and um and the the fluidity is is is very very very you know really stands out in these texts. And what I mean by fluidity when we talked about Yaoism. Now Yaoism had Yahweh of course as the head of the pantheon. But um but as it continues it developed it evolved like any other uh cultic system/ religion. Everything evolves. every religion even today right even today Christianity is constant and Judaism are constantly being constantly evolving um and constantly have to deal with new new things new new data I mean evolution right that's now Christianity has to or and Judaism have to now elaborate all kind what what is their position versus versus new um new data that comes out whether they accepted or dis or not accepted but how and you know which texts are should be read differently or whatever. So any religion, any cultic system has to develop to to evolve over time. In the case of Yaoism, um it continued to develop into what is called um I mean even so before before I talk about how it developed in its own right, even the uh the the quote unquote orthodox with the small O Jews of the time, so those who did live according to the commandments or their interpretation at the time of the commandments in the Penetuk in the first century, um when they had a a sick child or they had problem. They would go and and use cursed texts that are completely um you know come from a different tradition. I mean from the Gnostic what's that? What did you say? What was that word you used? Curse curse text. Curse text. Okay. Curse text like amulets and and all kind of curse texts and and the protective uh texts that would protect their children or their family or or whatever. And those texts were typically were more yaistic in that in in the sense where where there's this deity yao really central deity. Um but they also had other terms that are very are known to us from the bible that they saw as deities like Adonai was saw was seen as an its own it its own god like the word adonai which is very familiar to to people who are familiar with the Hebrew Bible. um that is a in the Bible it's really a title for God or at least it's seen as a title. Um but in later Yaoism or what's called Gnosticism I I don't like the term Gnostic because it's a pjorative term. So I try I but there's no nothing else really available. So I'm using it for convenience. But uh the Gnostics are um kind of continuing Yaoism as in in parallel to Judaism and Christianity. So the lay of the land in the first century uh of the common era, the time of Jesus um was very complex, very energetic, very effervescent, very uh with a lot of um kind of cross-pollination between the different uh the differenti faith systems and ideologies. Um you you would take something from I mean even the idea of the son of god um if you walk through the Roman Empire um every milestone literally stone that every mile of the road right the milestone um would have the name of the Caesar that that established this road and often will it will have the name and it's it would say son of god right so that idea of a son of god would be would be all around you okay in in in at that time it wasn't just Jesus, right? Son of God, but it was also the emperor, the emperor. Um, and so all of these ideas came from imperial cult, from Egyptian cult, from the the Gnostic field of of a lot of different sects there, from different Jewish sects, um, from different readings and even interactions with the Persian world, um, interactions with, uh, with, you know, this this early Zoroastrianism that we talked about earlier. um everything you know you would there were no really kind of strict walls between these different religions that we have today uh like you said I mean everything was flowing in and out cross-pollinating and uh that's why I love about this this period because it's so rich so energetic people are always kind of looking and and you can feel it in the uh in the primary sources and so um and that's what caused ultimately I think one of the reasons that Christianity was able to spread quickly and very successfully was that Yaoism was the engine that that that enabled um the spread of uh of of the cult of Yahweh in general and and certain certain uh um ideological um ideological concepts that that enabled Christianity to later uh because people were already very much interested in aspects of Yaoism. But they were not Jews. Okay. But they did have amulets of Yao. They did have Sabah as a as an as another deity or or Adonai as another dity. So they were the the language was more was becoming more and more familiar. Um and um and and I think that really helped prepare the ground for the spread of Christianity as well. So Yaoism is a is is an important engine uh in in in that um as well. Also, are there any other myths that are so as ubiquitous spread across so many different cultures in so many different parts of the world like the flood myth like the flood of Noah that like the the Sumerian flood and it's you find it there you find it in Egypt you find it in Central and South America. It seems like this it seems in it seems crazy that that that it's known from all these different cultures from all these different parts of time. Yeah. And it's and there's been there's like literally there I think there's geological evidence that proves that there was like some sort of catastrophe around the time that I think it was talked about which was like 1200 BC or something along those lines. Yeah, I think you're mixing things here. I mean the the 1200 BC is the what's what's called the Bronze Age collapse roughly speaking and that's not related to the flood. It's related to a lot of other things including climate change. Well, there's this there's this there's this uh theory called the younger dus hypothesis where they they imagine that there was uh there's a couple different um ideas, but one of the prevailing theories is that there was like a cosmic comet impact that hit the North American ice sheet in some other parts of the world as well that melted the ice cap, ended the plea scene, and then created like an enormous flood that wiped out a huge amount of uh humans and mammals. Right. I don't I'm not familiar with that one, but uh it might be maybe I'm not again I'm not familiar with it. Um I don't think I have not that did not cross my path. So I'm not sure that this is real maybe. Um but uh but I the it's not hard to imagine. I mean people in agricultural society we're talking about all of the ancient societies are agricultural societies and they have to deal with floods always. I mean by definition if you're an agricultural society water is critical to your to your daily life and uh you are planting seeds and you're you're trying to be as close to water as possible. On the flip side of that flooding right if you're close to the water water sources you will be flooded. So flooding was a daily um I mean something that you would constantly be worried about uh and concerned. I mean not maybe not daily but but certainly every year that would become in around the springtime that would become a concern um about potential flooding. And so it's really easy to to understand in every agricultural society across the globe why there would be a legend surrounding massive flooding uh that would develop. It doesn't necessarily mean that there was a global uh event and it doesn't mean necessarily that they were they there was influence from one tradition to another. It's really easy to uh to imagine why, you know, massive flooding would become a a a a mythical force. It's not we do we don't necessarily need to go that far in order to understand that. It's like with with pyramids. We find pyramids in different places. Yeah. Same thing with pyramids. Um we find the same structure in South America. We find possibly in Europe. We find possibly in in you know in Asia in places and of course in Egypt, Indonesia. Indonesia. So but this is just because this is a geometric for a form that make that is very very stable and it makes a lot of sense. It does not necessarily mean that there was any kind of transfer of knowledge. Um so not necessarily right so we can we can start to think about maybe aliens or whatever but that not necessarily the case. It's really simple to think that certain elements like the flooding uh flooding is again everyone in who's living a an in agricultural in agricultural society has to deal with the danger of floods right everyone has in some in some cases the flooding is so extreme that it would destroy the livelihood of people in you know miles around and these things are very it's very easy to see how that would would would eventually develop into a a a a myth a mythological story and that would happen all across the world really because every every society is agricultural in antiquity. Uh and the same again with with the pyramids. It doesn't have to be necessarily we don't have to go the the route of aliens in order to explain it. It's it is great. The pyramid the especially the py the great pyramid is is such an astonishing feat. It is. It is. It is. and the uh thousand I mean five I think there's like I don't know if there's thousand ton stones but I think there's f at least 500 ton granite blocks that are in at the top of that pyramid that are from Azwan which is a long ways away we talked about that yeah that's that's the that's the how in the world they were very good um yeah and then these things I'm sure I don't know if you're familiar with these vases that they found in the bent pyramid but these vases u the guy you're going to see Matt Bell he actually purchased a bunch of these on the antiquities market and they're made out of the hardest granite. I think red granite, one of the hardest granates on earth and he had them measured in light scanners and they are perfectly symmetrical within the deviation of a human hair from the from top to bottom. Perfect set of symmetry and it would it to create that out of granite today we would need a CNC machine like we'd have to create this on a computer. The fact that they did that 2700 BC is like it doesn't it doesn't compute, you know, like almost Yeah. Yeah. I mean I it's not I mean people were very very good. I mean they they they were brilliant. Uh and I don't think that um Yeah. I think that I think that the description I think I think so obviously they had to have been to create this stuff. I just don't think like the conventional theory of how they did it with like copper chisels and pounding stones or like a something like that in the middle of it to make something as perfect precise as that, right? It's like a piece that go in a jet engine. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I I certainly agree with you. There's a lot we don't know how they did it and we don't have the uh the knowledge and the uh the technology necessarily today in order to do that. Um but um I we do know that these were brilliant people and um they were able I mean sometimes today when we look and we try to to to to see well how we would would we produce this today we we are stumped and we we because we think according to our technological knowledge in a certain direction. They did not have those this technology. So they they had to really maybe think on a completely different level and come up with uh with solutions that we don't uh don't have access to. So I you know I tend to look at these things and say and just say they were really really good as also with the um the building of the pyramids. I mean the um if you look if you go to Aswan to that region and you see the quaries from which they they cut the these granite stones you see that you see how they worked. You you actually can see how they worked. see because they they didn't in some cases they didn't finish the work. So some you actually see see the work kind of midway and and you can see actually how they did this and we can see also how they transported it up the Nile um down the Nile and so uh the um the uh um a lot of this technology we know how they I mean practically we know how they did this. It's very very impressive. Uh it's extremely impressive but um it's you know we know how they how they did most of it in some of these temples for example these massive temples in Egypt um that that you see uh parts of the ramparts that that on which they were able to pull these stones up still exist. Um and so we are we we we know a lot about how they created these massive uh buildings. Um and that's all very very normal and natural. It's not, you know, it's not extra. Um, have you seen the the thousand ton obelisk that was never finished? It was never pulled out of the core completely in in Aswan. Yeah, I was there. Yeah. Underneath it. I've seen I've never been there, but I've seen photos and videos. There's like It looks like ice cream scoops taken out of the out of the granite. The holes. Yeah. The underneath like when they're they're underneath it like digging it out. It's like it looks like Steve. I don't know if you can pull a photo of it, but it it literally looks like ice cream scoops out of the rock. And that that's in a lot of the places, too. Even in um even in uh what is the where where are all those? Oh, the sarapium. Like the sarap Yeah. In the sarapium, there's those granite boxes with the scoop marks out of them. It's like what? It's almost like they had some sort of like chemical that we don't we just don't have any evidence for that was softening it or something. Yeah. Yeah. Possibly. Um Yeah. Look at Look at that. Yep. Yep. You know, they they were very very impressive people. Um yeah, and they had to deal with problems that we don't even um know how to approach. Uh but yeah, but it's all um it's all it's all part of their genius. I mean, they were really amazing amazing um people. They were. And what's amazing also when you go to Egypt and visit these places and you visit the temples. I don't know if you've been to Egypt if you're highly recommend to anyone listening if they can. Um these temples are huge, huge. And of course the pyramids are huge as well. And a lot of this people in Egypt were driven by the ideology of the Egyptian cult. I mean the idea was that they really believed in in the in in life after death and the idea was that you work for the pharaoh and you will you will live with the pharaoh after after death you would be part of this. So of course um you know every person participating in the construction of these massive uh massive you know uh monuments monuments really yeah that's so so this is Abu Symbol Abu Symbble now what you're seeing here so this is Abuyol today of course and you I don't know if you know this but the entire this entire side of the mountain was transported from its original location in the 60s to what you're seeing here. Oh, really? Yeah. So, every rock, every it was cut in using modern technologies. Mhm. Because, you know, um Kamal Abdul Nasser wanted to create this dam and there's Lake Nasser. Um Right. And and the original location of Abu Symbol is now submerged under that that lake. So in order to conserve this they actually move the entire the entire temple because this is a temple inside the entire temple they moved it out of its original location in the 1960s. Okay. Engine modern engineers moved it to this location um very very accurately except when you go into this uh into this temple on the um on the uh solstice day on the day of the solstice solstice the the in the morning the um the sun comes into this into through this entrance and shines straight on the um there are uh statues at the end of this of this tunnel there are statues of of Ramsy's II and and a triad of deities around him and it shines directly in the in the center on him and um and and the other gods around him and um and that's exactly at a certain point time at a certain day of the year in the original location here modern engineers did that but they missed one day it it's not so it happens a day and so in in with modern technology we were not able to replicate this even it's I mean we were able to cut to to move it but we weren't were able to be as as precise as they were um in antiquity so this is really really impressive right um but people people at the time were truly amaz they had in many ways they had less distractions uh they had they were able to test things out um and and Um, and yeah, I mean, I just think the humanity of it is just so so impressive. Um, they were definitely on a different trajectory than we are on right now. Different trajectory. Absolutely. Absolutely. And um yeah, but I don't think there's anything supernatural about it. It's just it's just humans uh doing what humans do and and figuring out solutions to problems. Uh and sometimes we don't we don't have the solutions today, right? But uh they were able to do that and some and often times they actually write it. They they so they did write and they did express uh how they did things, how they moved large slabs of granite around, for example. These are things that that they sometimes do. They had there's texts that explain that. They have text that talk about that. Yeah. That describe it to a certain degree. Maybe not to the level of detail that we want, but uh what do they say? Do you know what they say or I mean they talk about I mean this is not my field. Egyptologist, but I do know that they uh they do describe to a certain degree how they moved things around and what they did with it. Um so I mean Egypto Egyptologists do know a lot about how the pyramids were. You know, you read in popular culture a lot about well we don't know today how they built the pyramids. It must have been aliens. No, we do know a lot about how they practically everything that there is to know about how they built the pyramids. Um and uh it is what's truly breathtaking is just the level of ingenuity that they had at the time and the ability to come to to find solutions for these really engine pro deeply engineering I mean really serious engineering problems and uh and to do it so precisely. There's um a gentleman I had on the show a while back named Christopher Dunn who spent his whole life studying these pyramids and and he was actually an engineer at first. He was an aerospace engineer and um he discovered the pyramids. I think it was like in the 80 early 80s maybe maybe even 70s I think it was and then he started going he went to study them and like look at them and and measure everything and he even like like rented out the whole pyramid by himself many times where he could do his own studies and stuff. um and he came up with the hypothesis that it was uh like an ancient power plant and he's talking and he like through his early years studying the 70s and 80s and 90s he obviously got a lot of push back from Egyptologist Zahias um and now he's published a second book on it and he's is explaining to me how there is a whole new generation of Egyptologists that are coming up young people who are questioning the fact the idea that these things were originally tombs and they're looking into it more and trying and and pushing back on this original idea and it seems like the the idea is evolving with um young people coming up in Egypt now it's interesting in his book it's interesting he he looked at the capium and he he measured the blocks and how much they weighed and everything and he went to a um a company the biggest granite company that cuts grant in the United States. And he basically asked them what it would take to replicate one of those boxes in the sarapium. And the guy was like, "We would never do that first of all because it's one piece. If we were going to do something like that, we would take multiple take all the sides and bolt them together, but even just to get a piece of granite like that out of the ground and transport it." He's like, you're talking like $500,000 with today's technology, right? Which is insane. Yeah. Crazy. Yeah. Yeah. But you know they didn't have I mean they didn't have budget limitations. Exactly. That's my point. Right. Um I mean a a pharaoh like Ramsy's II was so powerful. I mean really limitless power practically in his day. And so and and the but the people believe that participating in the work of the pharaoh would also bring them and their family into the the the the next life. Right. the life beyond. And so they did this. They were and they were not slaves. They were not slaves. They were paid for their work and they but they also were deeply religious in that sense of the word. I mean they really believed in what they were doing. Weren't there temples that were built specifically for people in the afterlife that weren't like temples people would dwell in? They were just like they existed for when somebody went to the afterlife like the Oyerion and I think Edfu maybe. I mean no these are temples. Um, these are temples for, you know, for now, for not for the afterlife, uh, per se. I thought there were I thought there was temples that they built that were actually not inhabited. They were like had doors that went nowhere. Oh, there's all there a lot of doors that go nowhere in in many different places, of course. Uh, but um I'm not sure that that's built for the afterlife. That might be symbolic. Again, that that's something you should ask an Egyptologist or not. Um but uh but having visited the Egypt a number of times uh this is uh yeah I I' I'd be very cautious about reading too much into into you know um supernatural or extra uh this is uh it's fun it's fun to talk about it super fun it's c it's certainly fun but it is uh but as a from a scientific perspective um all of I mean it's when you do go in Carneack for example massive massive temple, beautiful temple where the colors, the original colors from you know three millennia ago are still there. Uh you can still some of them are still preserved. Um you walk around this massive building, I mean really massive, huge that was built every detail people really cared about. I mean the the level of of of professionalism, the the the level of artistry um not just art but artistry the the the the the impact of you know the working with the material and you see how people cared about every element that they were working with and um I mean the Egyptian society ancient Egyptian society is something that is truly mind-blowing without we don't need to have recourse to to extra you know to to extraterrestrial or supernatural the the the the society itself was so incredible in what it was able to to to achieve that now there are a number of features for example the fact that there is the the Nile is there they don't have to worry too much about rain right and they don't have to worry I mean they were wellfed because they they had all a constant source of of of of nutrition so they had their fields around the Nile of course there wasn't the desert back then. Well, it was the desert around anywhere but the Nile, the the Nile was already also desert by back then. But just the area surrounding the Nile, okay, was very fertile and is still very fertile. Uh in antiquity, you had the annual inundation of the Nile. So there were three a period of about 3 months where you couldn't um everything was inundated. So you couldn't really work the but after that it was very very fertile because the Nile would recede and it would there would be a residue of very fertile uh elements that would remain in in the in the soil. So it was very fertile and you don't really didn't have to worry too much about about being fed. Uh so you had time to do other things. You don't have like anywhere else you always have to to to fight for your for your survival. in Egypt, you don't really have to fight that much um for for your family survival and things like that. So, you have time to do to to think about other things and to do other things. So, there were seasons where they would participate in in building projects like this. Oh, wow. Um and so they were truly an amazing society. Um in many ways, Egyptians even to this day are an amazing society. I I love Egypt and and the people also today. Um and um and some of the nicest people you'll ever meet, really really recommend uh uh visiting Egypt. And so um but truly when you think about the innovation, the the the the groundbreaking uh ideas that they had and the ability to see them through and actually implement them in in such amazing ways. That's due to the people uh that's just due to the to their ingenuity parts of it which we don't understand uh even today. But they are it's still uh to be to be um kind of assigned uh to their own ingenuity. Definitely. Well, thank you, man. I really appreciate you coming and doing this. Thank you. Uh where can folks that are listening or watching find more of your work? Um or get in touch with you. Yeah. So, I think the best way through my academia uh page. Um I'll I'll give you the link and you can post it if you want. Um and my book uh that just came out uh edited book uh with with uh articles my article but also several uh of my colleagues we have 19 people contributing uh to this and that's a lot that that focuses on Yaoism really on the history of Yaoism the early history of Yaoism in the Aminid period. Uh so that's a book that's that's uh available for free download. So it's open access. Uh if you want a physical copy, you have to pay for it, but obviously it's physical copy. Uh but you can download the entire book for free uh from the website. Yeah, that was really important for me to to be able to um to make it available uh for free for people to just download and read. Mhm. Uh and that was a what was made available through a very generous donation by the or assistance from the um uh Gutenberg University the G August University in in in uh in in um in Gingan and Professor Reinhardt Kratz who is the co-editor of this book with me and so uh they were able to sponsor this open access uh to the book so people can read it and just download it for free. That's amazing man. Um, all right, Steve, we got a couple Patreon questions before we wrap up. These are our beautiful paid subscribers on Patreon. Had a couple questions for you. All right. Um, Kyle says, "Hello, professor. Do you have any thoughts on Homer the Iliad and where its inspiration came from?" A lot of the look and a lot of these questions may not be relevant or whatever. We don't have to spend a lot of time on all of them. We can do like one minute. It's not my field. Uh, I'm not a Yeah. So, I can't talk about this. Okay. Sean says, "My question is, how much of a leap is it to make the claim that religion came from early drugs and then was adapted by the Catholic Church to control the masses?" I won't talk to the second part of the question, only the first one. Um, so the first one, uh, um, early drug use, I mean, I I'm I'm I'm sure that drug use, uh, was played a part in practically all right, um, all early uh, cultic forms. Um so yeah I mean to a certain degree I mean when we say drugs we just say you know all kinds of mindaltering sure um even medicines I'm sure. Yeah and and even I mean even just certain herbs that you can consume that without any so I think people didn't view drugs the same way we do. They definitely didn't. That's right. I mean yeah exactly. So I think that uh that I mean I'm not saying that religion came from that but that was a part of the development of of of religion and the way to communicate with the divine. So clearly when you're consuming certain substance substances uh even natural substances uh that you're consuming that cause you to hallucinate to and to kind of enter this this state where you are communicating with the divine or that you're seeing visions. Of course, these play play a role in practically every uh every cultic system to a certain degree. Absolutely. Um Jacob, hello, Dr. Bernay. In the podcast with Neil from Gnostic Informant, I heard you say that the Jews from what is considered the first temple period worshiped a god named Io. Yao Yao. Okay. Yao. And you equate this god with Yahweh. Is it possible that the god Io predates the Jews and is worshiped in Greek culture since the name itself is the root for whatever that is? Yeah. Yomi which means to heal in ancient Greek. Hail Satan. Okay. Okay. Um thanks Jacob. Okay. I got the best I got the best fans. Yeah. So going back to Yao. Yeah. I don't think it's uh it it's it goes back. Uh it does not predate because it's not mentioned anywhere. I mean, it only is mentioned much later after the ya the the the Aramaic/Ebrew. Ya. So, it doesn't I don't think it's it's uh yes, there is a verb that that's that sounds uh uh similar, but that's just uh that there is no there is nothing that connects this verb to to Yao directly. And again, it's not it's simply not documented anywhere. Okay. Uh Blake. Like what is the tree of life and how is it misinterpreted? Straight to the point these guys. Yeah. Yeah. Uh how is it misinterpreted? Um yeah. I don't know how to answer this. There is no tree. There's Yeah. It's that you know they're talking probably if if they're talking about the Bible, they're talking about the the Eden Eden and the tree of and what is considered the tree of life there. Yeah. Um there were tree of lives the the trees of life uh depicted in Neo Assyrian and in generally in the in the ancient near east in certain places that are considered to be trees of life um but that's not necessarily directly related to this right and uh yeah it's not uh it's not something that I can talk to in in in too much detail. Uh Cormarmac how did digital tools reshape our understanding of ancient texts and what is the most compelling evidence of Zoroastrian influence in Jewish traditions? Okay, so this is a great these are two great questions. So the uh digital tools today uh are still reshaping what we're doing and I mentioned earlier that we're trying to do me and some colleagues we're trying to do to make the study of history become more and more precise more and more objective more and more transparent closer to the exact sciences and we are using a lot of digital tools in order to do that a lot of AI work uh both on the visual capture of the doc of the original document so how we capture um the uh how we visually capture the the visual data for these objects. We do it in 2D and 3D and all kinds of filters, all kinds of mesh uh algorithms in order to do that in order to absolutely fully capture capture the um these original documents in a way that is as precise as possible and at least as transparent as possible. We have an entire team in Germany working on that. Um we have u and developing these algorithms and are also AI there's an AI component to that. We have others uh other other teams also in this project that we're kind of really uh pushing now um that does um AIdriven OCR. So it's OCR of course optical character recognition but in order to do that for the ancient world it's not like OCR that we do today for printed documents where everything is printed and everything is obvious. Uh for the ancient world you have to we you have to be very I mean it's a it's a very very complex uh process of how to do that. But yeah, we have a lot of digital tools, a lot of uh um I mean really an entire set of digital tools that we are using now in order to ultimately produce these uh uh these um um this historical data in a in in the most transparent way. Oh wow, it's fascinating. Yeah. Now the second question yeah is Zoroastrian most the most compelling evidence of Zoroastrian influence in Jewish traditions? I will now start not with the Bible uh but with the day-to-day. And again in in several of my articles um also in this book um Mhm. this open access book. So that my article there I talk about the um about the existence of a fire holder not a fire altar. uh I don't like the term fire altar but in atrodan the name of the of the object is um that was that existed within the temple the yahwistic temple at elephantine now this temple is a temple to Yahweh it's a in that sense it's a Jewish temple h in the fifth century before the common era but they had according to their own sources they had a fire holder in the temple within the pre the the confines of the temple they had a fire holder and they use the term the avestan term atrodan or the indo-iranian term um for a fire holder which is one of the main um components of zoroastrianism right the fire holder the veneration of the fire it's not an altar because nothing is offered on it it's just it's it exists for the v veneration of the fire and the vire the fire in zorastrianism is seen as the the son of a mazda the son of the deity of the main deity of Zorastrianism. So um so we do have and this is very compelling because you have within a yaistic temple and they had their own altar on which they offered other sacrifices but within the temple they also had a fireholder and they are using the term the Indo-Iranian term for it and they could have it just if if it was a just a regular fireholder they could have just used duda in Aramaic or what you know they could have expressed it in in pure Aramaic. They didn't have to use a technical cultic term in order to refer to this. So within the temple, they actually had a Zoroastrian clearly Zoroastrian um um uh fireholder within the the the the confines of the temple. Wow. So that is very compelling. That is very strong in terms of uh influence. Again, it does not mean that they converted to Zoroastrianism at all. I mean as I said there is cross-pollination constantly between all everyone everyone is constantly con that is not that does not mean that they turned into Zoran nothing was exclusive exactly there's crosspollination always taking ideas taking concept especially with the empire I mean this is the empire that is now controlling everything about your life and so um and so the uh uh so clearly that does not mean uh anything more than just showing that you are a good citizen of the of the um of the of the Aminate Empire. It does not mean more than that, but clearly they did adopt things in a more intimate level than than possibly other cultic uh cultic traditions. We don't know. This is the the earliest um uh evidence that we have for a fireholder um directly uh in the I mean in textual evidence that we have for a fire holder in anywhere really. Wow. Um we have fireh holders depicted in the Aminid empire depicted on um on on um inscriptions uh depicted as a as an image. Uh we do have um images of uh Zoroastrian priests around the fireholder. Uh so we do know that these uh these were um these were part these were part of the cult in the Keminid times not just at Elephantine. But we don't have that as a text. we don't have that a textual reference to it on outside of elephantine. So this is the first textual reference we have and it's within a yistic context. So I think that's really the most compelling um evidence of of this crosspollination between the YS/Jews and the Anzarasians. But there's a lot more uh there's a lot more. Um, in my article I also talk about this so-called Passover letter where that has that actually shows elements that are u of of an observance that is very close to or um or almost identical to the um uh to the Zoroastrian Yasna which is the Zor Zoroastrian liturgy. Um and so we have that uh yeah we have a lot of different elements and even the uh even within the Bible the uh the idea of the um of the eternal flame and the eternal al you know the the the the uh the holy flame that comes down uh even the burning bush which is an supernatural flame right the supernatural fire. I I have an an lecture coming out two weeks from now in Paris about this specifically about this the burning bush and the really and the um and the and the theophony there uh with and its zorastrian aspects there um which are on several levels there in that in that particular story um and I have a colleague um from Hifa Dr. Professor um Itamar Kisv who wrote an great article also in this book uh about the um about the um uh fire sacrifice in the in the Bible uh in the in in Leviticus and other places as well. just a great analysis of of this dating that to to ach influences and so yeah we're we we're seeing a lot of ele of of of property zor as Asprian elements in the uh in the um in Jewish uh um sources whether in the Bible or or external to the Bible. One thing we need to be very careful uh is to identify what we mean by the Zoroastrianism of the Akimeid period because most of the sources that we have are much later from the Cisanian uh period that's you know roughly uh third late third fourth century really um and um and and to the the rise of the of Islam and so um that's most of the sources that we have and even then the actual manuscripts that we have from Zoroastrianism are much later than that And so um for my research what I try to do is only limit myself to things that I can prove already existed in the Aminated period whether it's in pictographic representations of these liturgies or texts or even names components of names. So for example uh just in one example the name Darus Daria Wahush in in in Iranian um in old Persian is a is based on a quote a direct quote from the avesta. Okay. It's a it's a titam to say in in German. So it's a name it's a citation name from from an authoritative text. Oh wow. So it's not even it's not Persian it's avestin. Okay. In dia wahoo means the holder of good and vahush element here is means good but in old Persian you would say na to say good it's not it's not he's not even using Persian he's using a veston which is the liturggical language of zorastrianism and so the fact that he chose that as his throne name when he ascended the throne means that obviously not only that he quoted from the astan text knowledge of the the oldest part the Gotha which is the oldest part of the Avestan text not not necessarily all of the Avesta that we know today really only just the the the earliest layer of the text the 17 hymns that are that are part of the what's called the Gotha in the in in the Avestan so knowledge of the all of these quotes uh are from the Gothas and um so not just his name but other names as well um but it means that he that that he expected people to understand that this is what he's doing with this name so people were familiar amilar enough with the texts not just him but all those also his citizens. Right. Right. So that so we that teaches us a lot about what at least what part of the texts of the avesta might have been available at that at that time. Um and again pictographic and all of that. So I'm looking at all of this and I'm and I'm limiting myself in my research to things that I can prove existed in the academic period and not only sometimes I more cautiously refer to things that are not yet there and I say well I I and I and I say that I'm speculating um but it might that these things might have already existed but that's more much more reserved to to make an a a a to to to make a precise point or a strong um uh research point. I always use the stuff that I can I can I can show existed in the Aminid period. But clearly the Aminids were Zor were Zoroastrian to to a certain degree. They're not Zoroastrian in the same sense that we have Zoroastrians today, but they did have at least the Gothas to this early layer of the of the Avest text. And um and Ahuram Mazda, I mean that's that's a that's the um clearly the the uh the uh Zorastrian daty. Um and they saw him as almost exclusive the the only deity. Oh, really? And um I mean they they acknowledge the existence of other other gods but they talk about the Hura Mazda pretty much almost exclusively especially in the early period and uh which is interesting also because they were more they kind of gravitate more towards monotheism so to speak. It's not monotheism but monolatry um in the early period and then they became more quote unquote polytheistic later on. Right. Usually we think that that people evolve so not not that I'm attaching any kind of quality to it but it but the move towards more of a mono type uh monest monest um religion later on in but it's not always the case things are always yeah cycles it vacasillates yeah absolutely wow that's fascinating stuff well thank you again for your time man this has been this has been super enlightening and I I'm going to download that thing and read it to myself. Um, that's super cool that you're doing it for free as a free download. That's I think that's incredible. That was very important to us. Yeah. Yeah. Um, cool. Thank you to the patreons for your question and thank you again for your time. I really really All right. Good night, everyone.