First of all George pleasure to meet you Joe great to talk to you to you to and Jeremy Good to see you again. I'm a joke. Good to see you. This is we're doing this often. This is becoming a thing George I think that You're probably like one of the most important figures when it comes to journalism in UFOs and when you broke the bog bizarre story was that is that 89 when was that 1989 1989 I remember reading about it. I remember hearing about it. I remember watching clips on television and watching Countless Bob was our interviews. It all came out of you. I mean, did you think at that time? I mean what was your thoughts about UFOs before you had met Bob Lazar and how much did it change? While you got to know him and hear his story Change quite a bit. I had not really given it much thought at all You know probably the same level of curiosity as most people you go about your life You pay your bills you go to work you love your family And it's always out there somewhere. Hey, I wonder what the deal is on that But not had not really dwelled on it until it was a day in 1987 into the studio comes a guy named John Lear and I had heard sort of a little bit about him His family was famous his dad developed a Learjet the eight track tape John had run for the state Senate and he had a certain amount of credibility with our news organization Kale STV because he had helped us break a really big story and the story was the stealth fighter the f-117 He had told my boss Ned Day Managing editor about this amazing plane that was invisible to rate our flying up in Tonopah in Area 51 We had an interest in Area 51 not UFO related, but Ned broke that story. It went national So John Lear comes into the station one day with a stack of what turned out to be UFO documents Plopsimon Ned's desk and says Ned this is going to be the next big story the biggest story in history It's a UFO cover up aliens are here technologies been recovered Ned takes a look at it and says I'm not doing this story If it was true, I'd already know know about it. This is crazy What I'm eavesdropping as I tend to do a Mecurious person so as he's going out I said Lear let me take a look at this material and I looked at it I thought well, this is kind of interesting. I would at the time I was Producing and hosting this little public affairs show 30 minute interview show It would air a Sunday morning at six o'clock. Nobody watches it. It would be Interviewing a city councilman a county commissioner What the heck I'll put Lear on there and I let him go and he told me this big scenario about secret treaties with aliens and recovered technology in a giant cover up some of the information sounded outrageous Some of it seemed like it would be worth checking out Suddenly the phone starts ringing off the hook. I'm getting calls about people though Who was that guy? What was the deal on that UFO stuff? Is it real? I had him on again? Six months later the response was bigger had him on a third time Where the guy named Bill Cooper? I? Regret that and he told him and even more elaborate conspiracy. He's the behold the pale horse guy. Yes Yeah, I read that book and halfway through I was like what in the fuck is this yeah He tied in the JFK assassination and everything bases on the moon aliens are there right now He had this scenario where he had seen these documents when he was in the Navy and He's going to tell the world about it then he's gonna go away Well every time he told the story the documents got bigger and bigger and anybody who criticized Bill Cooper Became part of the secret government including me So we do this third show with Lear and he hints that he knows a guy who might be going to work out of Area 51 and know Something about alien technology that guy turns out to be Bob Lazar, but Lear didn't give me the name at that time couple months later I am anchoring the five o'clock news on KLA us and We have a Nightly or evening Interview segment five minute segment live interview our guest doesn't show up and we're scrambling to find somebody to fill that Whole and I thought about Lear So I called him up not knowing what had been going on in Lazar's life or Lear's life and I said Hey, is your that UFO guy told me about his year round? What do you do an interview? Just turned out that Bob had been through the ringer in the lot of stuff going on in his life He fell threatened and he said yes, we had to block out his face We do this interview and he spills the basics of the story. I worked out there at a place called S4 I saw nine flying saucers and an underground base. This is technology that came from somewhere else. I'm in fear for my life Holy cow the phones start ringing off the hook my news director comes rushing in the station manager Is that for real? What's the deal on that and we realized we had touched the pulse of the public in a way that I didn't really understand We arranged to go meet Bob Lazar my news director Bob Stolo and I that following weekend and put him through a Paces where we would ask him questions about his background and how he got the job We spent a couple hours with him and we walked out of that meeting thinking Holy shit. What if this is true Um, you know, this is really risky for us as journalists at risky for our personal reputations If it blows up in our faces and we do this story and it would really damage the reputation of our news organization Which is KLS is a jewel. It's always been a leader in in Las Vegas One of the best TV news operations in the country. We're putting a lot on the line. Well, look we decide Let's take our time. Let's look into this guy's story and in an order to understand Lazar We'd have to look at The bigger picture of UFOs So I started a cramp course on ufology and I read everything and I spent eight months like Cramming for a final exam that never happened. I read everything. I interviewed people that same year Muffin had its its international symposium in Las Vegas And I there all the worlds UFO people came right to me. I got to interview him traveled around went to Los Alamos Lazar took us into the lab. We took cameras in there He walked us around waving to people. We didn't even have to stop for security Took us into the lab like it was a rabbit going through its own burrow. He knew of the play his way around We were allowed to take a camera in there. We put those stories together Put them on the air in November and man. It just went through the roof Every night of these nine this nine part series people got the audience got bigger phones luring it off the hook People calling giving us information Suddenly it's on something called peronet which was sort of a precursor to the internet And it was huge and and it changed my life for sure. I had no idea That there were so many people out there interested in the topic And I was hooked and I really got hooked on Lazar not only because his story Be personally, you know, I was interested in him. We became friends I saw what happened to him after that live interview and in the seven and a half months before we went and I revealed his identity The people really messing with them. I mean there were you cannot convey what it was like how weird it was then Breaking into his house leaving the windows open Messing with things in his in his home Breaking into his car leaving the doors and windows down Just messing with his head and you think that was the government that was doing that I do I think so and then So I had put out a call to people. Hey, I want other people to come forward This is before his identity was revealed I'm not explaining yes. I am actively seeking information from the public if you ever worked at very 51 or S4 You know anything about this. You're at Nellis Air Force Base reach out to me. So I started getting calls and Six people right in a row Who had talked to me on the phone and offered to give me information were visited right after the call One of them was a guy who did tax returns for people at Nellis Air Force Base And he had got to know these guys really well and got information about crashes There were a guy who was a golf pro at Nellis who had gone on our road road trips with officers and told him about This weird stuff out at ere 51 that seemed to be from somewhere else He gets visited and told the shut up There was a lady who worked in the court system A cop told me about her and I talked to her on the phone and she had worked at the court system But before she had worked for a company called Holmes and Narver which is a defense contractor And she said she sat in as a stenographer in these meetings and heard these conversations between the government contractors and Air Force officials about crash saucers and they would after the meeting they Took take the tape out of the typewriter and destroy it and take all the notes and She agreed to tell me the story. It was just a tiny piece of the story the next day She's visited by these two guys in suit. They tell her Look you are still subject to your security clearance. I hope you know that and then they said we know you travel to LA To see your daughter and we know she comes here. It's a big desert out there Be terrible if something happened to either one of you this lady is scared shittless She didn't make that stuff up. So six people who had offered to give me information on the phone one right after another get visited And it made me mad That dealing with you know trying to fill in pieces of Bob Lazar's life I know there's some gaping holes. I know it better than anybody. I've had to deal with it for 31 years But I always thought if if he worked at Los Alamos in classified projects And a scientific or technical capacity then it would make sense that he could get hired into a program like us for As somebody who thinks outside the box Despite personal shortcomings or whatever They might bring somebody like him in to help him crack a problem that they hadn't been able to resolve themselves So I focused on Los Alamos I knew he had been there. I talked to people who remembered him from being there But the lab kept telling me no no record of him. He's never here And then I showed him well look, I've got the Los Alamos newspaper. It's a small town paper There it is on the front page a front page story Bob Lazar physicist may sound facility Los Alamos lab It's a story about his jet car Nope, still have no records of him and then I found his name in the phone book from the arrow when he was there He's in the lab phone book He had been hired by a company called Kirkmeyer, which is a company that's a headhunter that fills positions at Los Alamos Emplaces like that So great. I'll reach out to Kirkmeyer. They said yeah, we hired him. Yeah, we've got records Can I get it? Can I get his employment records that would show where he went to school? Whatever information you guys had yes Couple weeks go by nothing Couple more weeks go by. I call him again. I start writing him I've got a stack of letters that that went on for two and a half years and finally by the end of it They said he was never here when I have any records That that pissed me off. It made me mad And I think that that is really what got me hooked in the story Is that I was being jacked around by government and national facilities like that We should explain the Los Alamos thing because the Los Alamos thing coincided with him doing work at MIT right is that correct? That's how he's explained it to me. Yeah, and the way he explained it to me I don't think I'm at liberty to say what the project was because the project the way he was describing it is Essentially internationally illegal like what they were working on and that's one of the reasons why he was saying He explained what the project was It sounded very feasible also very evil and then it was it was basically a weapon and then he Said that this was the reason why there was no actual record of him studying at MIT It wasn't important that he got a degree. It was important that he understand The technical specifications of what they were attempting to accomplish That's my understanding as well and you know It's always been the most problematic part of his background and it's where a lot of people in the Boblas are story That's where they stop But the thing is when you listen to him talk and when he describes thing It's very clear he's educated always a brilliant guy But here's I had always told him and I've you know Bob your my friend I want to have a conversation with you about these claim degrees because I didn't believe that he'd ever sat down You know in those days you go to a college like MIT or Caltech and get a degree You've got to take classes in something other than science. You've done. Yeah I could not imagine Boblas are taking an English litt class to save his life But he is a brilliant guy. He I'll give you an example in April COVID thing is is raging my wife and I are staying at home We're getting packages delivered for food and things of that sort I'm a little worried they didn't know about contact whether you can get it off a cardboard boxes or whatever And I mentioned a bob in a phone conversation I'm thinking about buying one of these UV screener systems. He goes wait a second Don't buy one. I think I've got the parts that I can make you one in my garage And a week later it arrives this thing he's got it in this garage Handmade this big scanner with these UV things that they'll work to just whipped it up in his garage I'll remind you you got the scanner. I got a laser gun You got a laser gun. It is super powerful. So it's like a handheld toy that he retrofitted with a super power So I'm like lighting shit on fire in my house So it looks like a handheld toy, but it's actually a toy It's a toy with full noise But he put a diode in there and it's super powerful. It can light shit on fire But like hey, so I got the laser gun. You also got the flame throw though. Those are made of flame throw this before your buddy Elon Made flamethrow and armament are yeah. Well, it's a massive flame flame flame through massive Yeah, he's obviously a very intelligent man When you listen to him talk, there's no bullshitting going on when he talks about very when he talks about Undeniable concrete things when it comes to science when it comes to elements when it comes to propulsion systems he clearly knows what he's talking about and The really confusing thing for people that are detractors is he really hasn't changed his story in 31 years, so really is the same story and that's really hard to do even if you tell a true story 31 years later you get it screwed up a little bit It's hard like when you're calling on 30 like if I had to remember things from 31 years ago That's like a one year in a stand-up comedy 31 years ago. I don't remember it I bear like I'm gonna tell you like oh, yeah, it was a Sunday night and then my friend Greg go actually his Wednesday Okay, alright, it was Wednesday. Who is a host? You know, we'll have it. I don't know. It's a blurry slideshow But Bob has been remarkably consistent the only thing that he's vacillated on very little bit is the whether or not he saw an Alien or whether or not he saw someone who was Looking at something that was the size of an alien like a small figure like whether or not they were trying to determine How large a creature would have to be to use one of those small crafts because the crafts were very small in terms of like For for a human being they were it was more like something that was built for a child and He walked by a window and looked inside and then some of the earlier Discussions of it. He believed that he might have seen an alien, but he was really clear that he only saw it for Literally a second as he was walking by saw something and again, you know how the brain works in memory you could You can really plant false memories everybody wants to pretend their memory so good memories are terrible Well, Bob admitted from the beginning and remember with the first interview we did I think it was June of 89 so it was a little after we did that live interview but months before We went with his ID and that was really we recorded it in case something happened to him He was afraid he was going to be killed There were a lot of really weird things going on and I was worried about it too I wanted to get it on the record and clay case suddenly he disappeared So we recorded this long interview and and always he downplay stuff like that that's an example. Yeah I might as I saw something that was that size I don't believe it was an alien. It was just a glimpse. Mayweather messed one with my head He also admits that they did mess with this head That he had to they underwent some kind of hypnosis that they made him drink this weird green liquid probably hell Steve Maybe they said it was an allergy test, but yeah, I mean, you know to your point just real quick is After 30 years. It's not that he changed his story. He has changed so when I was interviewing him You know, he cracked the book back open with me It was like he was saying the science and technology is what I know I had my hands on that I can't attest to what I read in the documents. Yeah, I saw something for a brief Millisecond through a fucking window, but I don't know what that was so so people have taken what he said and exaggerated It Bob has always been skeptical of the things he didn't have his hands on and I admire that and he's changed as a human as a human He's matured so now he's saying okay. Let me look at it rationally. I don't know what I saw through that window Right, I appreciate that he's so straight Yeah, he's very straight. You know they Various scenarios have popped up over the years about why he came forward There are people who believe he just made it up He was trying to make money or he wanted attention There are people who believe its government disinformation to distract attention from something else that was going on out there Or they believe both of them which you know, they would seem to be mutually exclusive Bob would admit that he had no business Being there that they may be that there were much more qualified people to work on those kind of things Maybe he was a guy who thinks outside the box who might give a new slant on trying to figure this stuff out that they had had for Decades and had not had not been able to do but we should explain that a little bit the Los Alamos lab story was him He put a jet engine on a Honda, right? And it was a functional jet car that he built himself So he was a legitimate propulsion expert and again like a super science nerd Like where he got his education is what's weird I finally got an interview with the guy that wrote that article two weeks ago. So the guy Terry English Finally after all this time we come back three years late You know what I'm gonna put him in the movie and I said look here's the point You said Bob Lazar was a physicist at Los Alamos So how did you base that you're writing a paper and he goes yeah, and it got picked up by AP news He goes if I had misrepresented that he was a physicist at Los Alamos I would have been black bald by everybody at Los Alamos. They take that very seriously He was a physicist. I reported it AP news picked it up. They repeated it not word one from anybody saying he wasn't a physicist at Los Alamos It's little things like that that you know when nothing Bob has ever said Have I joined up? Yeah, this is a real hot rod And he did the story because the car was badass when he fired it up When he has a history this he also made a hydrogen-powered Corvette later on Yeah, he's a wizard. He's a very smart guy You know, he will admit to you that maybe he was picked for the job They figured all right in case he blabs we can discredit this guy like that when we're done with him There's things in his background. He likes it to blow things up He likes explosives He had a pirate flag on his on his house at the time that I first met him He he liked machine guns He you know, he had an illegal fireworks show that would go out in the desert every year that became a world-class event he got into some legal trouble after he'd worked out there So there's a lot of things in his life they could use to discredit him But the people who still maintained that Bob was a disinformation plot It was meant to distract attention out from something else going on out there Whoever came up with that idea should be fired because as a result of Bob coming forward at that story Area 51 is now known all over the world I'm sorry, but the Bob was our version of that The tale is the one that prevailed. It's known everywhere. It's been in movies and books and TV shows it It's launched a thousand different You know project products like that the hat that Las Vegas 51s are AAA baseball team became the 51s because the lizzare story The ET highway is created and christened by our governor You know that that story that birds and that he told is now known all over the world whether detractors like it or not And if somebody was trying to distract attention away from something going on at area 51 it failed miserably Because tens of thousands of people made the trek out there even today 31 years later every single day There's somebody with binoculars or a scope or something looking for whatever is flying around out there Every major news organization in the world after giving me nothing but grief has made a beaten-up path to area 51's door all of them they have all done it and Bob's story about reverse engineering Craft from somewhere else is now part of a much larger and current Series of events that we can get into yeah and that story that he told when he was on the podcast here Got phenomenal response. There were so many people that I talked to that were my friends who were skeptical about that shit They they'd call me up. We go hey man. I'm starting to believe this is real And I'm like you should watch the documentary and then you should watch the commander-fraver interview where he talks about the tick Talk you the tick-tack UFO that they encountered off of San Diego because you're talking about a rock solid military man with no shenanigans in his background Who is telling a story about a craft that they cannot explain doing things that defy Physics in our understanding of propulsion systems and Quite a few people from that interview have completely changed their tune friends of mine who thought it was a total horseshit I've done a 180 and they're like fuck is this real and then the New York Times story came out of course And the New York Times is showing all these images of these UFOs and these these things that they can't explain that all exhibit very similar propulsion Methods or at least Speeds that they can't explain they move the same way and there's legitimate people the legitimate scientists now that are starting to take this into consideration Say okay if this is from earth Then there's got to be some sort of a program that has Technology that's far beyond anything we knew was possible How did they do that? Is it because there's some super geniuses that the government gets a hold of right when they're in college and they Immediately ship them off to the desert and having to create this stuff or Are we in fact encountering something like us from the future or something from another place That has had a completely different path to technology, but it's not outside the realm of possibility We're here we're here sending videos through our phones to each other You know, we're talking to people that you know, it's being relayed But through the sky we're watching films that are instantly downloaded wirelessly From these servers. I mean, they're just the technology that we have right now is completely alien to anybody who was around in Roswell 1947 from 1947 to 2020 in terms of the universe is not even a half of a blink of an eye and then boom things have changed so radically It's not it's not crazy to think that something from somewhere is far ahead of us Yes, so that's one of the big things getting commander-fraver in that room with Bob with so-called because people Bob talks to whoever He's talking with he helps you understand what he's saying he can go into high specify detail and stuff But typically he's just talking to whoever's there when when I got him in front of commander-fraver all of us in Matt We're on the room. It was amazing because commander-fraver saw it too He saw something like Bob saw it and the way that the craft the tiktik moved it Cannot be something that we have because it was clearly gravitationally propelled This is something they talk about commander-fraver saw it bouncing like a ping pong ball on the inside of a glass The inertia being able to ba ba ba ba and the coolest thing Bob said was with command-fraver Dave it could have been a subject to at a time distortion so you're seeing it one way and they started talking about gravity amplification It was just so cool to see them talk without an audience What the fuck did commander-fraver see and Bob was it's cool that when he can be calm and chill like that and just talk to another human and What's crazy is what commander-fraver is describing is what Bob was describing the propulsion systems of 1989 They were working straight up. It's the exact same thing even the way it turns sideways To move to move off that's exactly how he's describing. Yeah. Yeah, that's which is crazy the gimbal craft You know we have this video and everybody says oh, it's this it's that it's another plane in FA 18 Dude, I've talked with a dude at Boeing now who who He serviced these pods that it was caught on the gimbal That thing is self rotating. It is a Saucer shaped thing that is rotating mechanically against the wind We they all know that this is has to be a gravity propelled program We understand the science that it takes to do it. We can't replicate it. We pulled it. So I always do that It's okay. We have it right up to her. We can't replicate it right with our material sciences our best information at this time We can't replicate this technology, but we do understand how it works Fundamentally fundamentally. We just don't have the power to actually make it the material science even just the actual physical material Science the materials it's made out of and that's what's been in the news now Metamaterials that there are materials from craft that we have George will talk about that but Lazar is parallel with what we're seeing today. Yeah And what's also really bonkers is in 89 he was talking about element 115 It wasn't even scientifically proven to exist until 2013 So in 1989 we was talking about this is science fiction. He's making things up in 2013 they actually were able to create for a brief moment an element 115 which is this insanely dense element that they believe is Perhaps the propulsion system for this craft It was always theorized of course element 115 but fabricating it was an achievement But yeah, if you're talking about being a winner every time history writes itself, right Bob is it's insane. He's batting a hundred percent 100% hey, he knew there was a place called S4 there had been no No articles about that no mention that I look for it. You know, I called Noah's Air Force base and ask him Do you have a place called S4 anywhere on the range? Yeah In fact, we have more than one second. Can you tell me where they are? No Can you tell me what goes on there? No. Well, there was a facility at Papus I think it was built in the into the side of the mountain and you can see the dirt road on the old satellite photos Why were people going down there and then of course the video? He goes out there with his friends when he thinks he's gonna be killed or or he's gonna disappear any and three weeks in a row You've talked about on this program and they videotaped it and all the Witnesses who were there have verified it and it was not over-air e51 it was over Papus Which officially has no no facility nothing has ever been there Bob knew a lot of stuff That he couldn't have known otherwise and it's it's been proven over here And he didn't know stuff that was disproven it's he didn't come out He didn't make up a bunch of crazy shit. There you go like like the William Cooper book, right? I like there's a lot of people that have speculated what that was all about where the William Cooper was just gets a Frantic whether he was Writing some truths mixed in with crazy things so you could discount the truth I mean that is that is a real strategy that the government will employ if they know that Information is gonna get leaked out and they want to somehow another discredit it They'll connect it to really loony stuff that is absolutely not true and they'll say where did you get that information? Oh, I got it from behold to pale horse. Oh, Christ. Did you read all the stuff in that book? Right? I mean so there's there's that thought, but there's none of that with Bob with Bob Everything that he talked. It's so eerie every time you turn over a stone I think I'm gonna find at first. That's how Georgia and I met I thought I was gonna see these guys cooked it up That was my first entry point in 2012. I thought they cooked it up every stone you turn over to be clear what Georgia said Bob always said there's a place called site for that was never mentioned anywhere at Papus He verified it in 1989 with head of public relations who was a home of his at air 51 We then call 30 years later and they give us the funniest fucking answer trying to not talk about site force So he confirmed it every time he turned over a stone man every time Bob's proven right and it's it's annoying What was the experiment that he did with element 115 that you guys videotaped? It was available online could someone watch that no, and so it was called a cloud chamber test So he he had this stuff. I know people don't believe that it exists and he never had any of it They're welcome to believe it, but he had he had a piece of it The only time I ever saw it was in his lead shield round disk and he had it for a while It was in a lot because it's radio radio. I think it's stable. I don't think it's radioactive That's how it was shipped to him so it's in a list of discs protect it from bombardment because it will become unstable very quickly That's how he says they used it in the craft. So yeah, he had it in a puck and and and a hockey puck looking Yeah, like a metal sandwich. It's lead. Yeah. Yeah, yeah I think yeah, and I showed it and I had it in the background in one of our stories Just out of an inside joke and sitting in there But Bob used to keep it in front of a particle accelerator that he had built at his home, you know Every every non-scientist every non-scientist builds a particle accelerator in their home And he had it there when he thought he was gonna be killed He was sort of a defense mechanism for him. He had it right in front all he had to do is flip a switch and He thought it could explode. I think you meant to scare people from coming in and trying to trying to take him out But this cloud chamber test was the only And he thought it could explode. I think you meant to scare people from coming in and trying to take them out. But this Cloud Chamber test was the only time I think he ever took it out of this thing. And I got there right as the experiment ended where they had this little chamber and it bent light. They showed me the video. I don't pretend to be a scientist. I don't try to be an expert on things I really don't know. But it looked to me like light was bending in this experiment which shouldn't be able to do. It's like a laser that bent. I've seen some of this. Jeremy has a little piece of time. This was a search for George from day one when I was... Do you have it? Right now. On video? On me it's in my movie. Right. Okay so but basically what happened is it's so annoying. I'm like you guys have footage of this because Bob never filmed this to put out to the public. It was to show his friends like taking them to the test site, show them the saucers. It was so his friends didn't think he was fucking crazy. So they film it and won't be whole. They give it to George. It's in a brown case. It's somewhere in his archives. I've stored it through his whole damn house man. I can't find this tape. So then I asked Bob, is there anywhere this could be anywhere else? It's important footage Bob. And I find it sandwiched between two golden girls episodes on some tape. He kind of recorded over. So I got out to the public what 17 or 30 seconds of this cool down phase of the test. It's not online anywhere. It's in my film. I can put it on. Right. But is it online? No, no, no. I got it. I found it in these old tapes. We know how people take little things from movies and sometimes. Maybe somebody had it. I'll post it man. It's cool. It's cool. It doesn't. Bob says he's so impressed with everything. He's like Jeremy that doesn't show the cool part of the test. It's just the cool down period. And I'm like well it shows that you film this with your friends back then and at least you believe you had 115. So what I have in the film, it's not definitive proof. But it shows that they weren't lying that they filmed it. George was there. Bob would just assume that that goes away that people not talk about it. Is this it? That's it. Jamie's the best. Jamie. Wow. So what's happening here? Explain. This looks like he's growing a plant or some shit. Right. So this is why Bob was so unimpressed with what I found sandwiched in his personal home videos. That's the disc. That's the top of the disc. We're going to look across on top. So he was trying to show his friends like today if you had a laser pointer. So here's the here's the cloud. You can look it over there Jeremy if you don't want to turn around. Oh got it. So so Bob had a laser pointer back then with the principles of the 115 which he did get out. Where's the 115 this image inside of the in that disc the clamshell inside of the puck. So that's the surface. We're looking at the surface of this clamshell. On top of this thing. And so he had he'd have it in there. Now the whole sensitivity for him is this real world implications. If he's telling the truth to us about it. I don't understand what I just saw though. I didn't see anything. You didn't see it. We don't see it. It's the only piece of the tape that still exists but it's not the key part of that. All it shows Joe is that they filmed a home experiment back then. He demonstrated for his friends how light was bent by the material itself. I understand that but I'm not seeing that. You're not seeing that. This is the only piece of the tape that still exists but it's not the center piece. Was this in the film? Yeah it was briefly. I didn't highlight it because it was like I did. I'm not seeing anything in this. This is what's confusing to me. This seems like nothing. Like nothing's going on at all. Right. That's the point is that he has a long version. George. Blame him. But I understand but why is this in the film then if nothing's happening. It was a splash over him when he was talking about 115. He doesn't like how he got it out. But it was like an Easter egg. You wanted to demonstrate that it had been the recording good exist at one point. But that's the only piece that's left of it. I'm the guy who got the tape. So you got a full tape. I got to do something where it is. Is it in your house somewhere? I doubt it. I mean look. He's looked. I've looked. Where could it be? Dude you should see this. Joe I looked for years man. I went through made him take and digitize all these tapes. I took hundreds of tapes and digitize them looking for this little two minutes. That seems like a big deal though. Yeah it's a really big deal. I mean I've got thousands of tapes from that era. And I have saved them all and I've moved them around. And then I use them in different productions. I can't find it. I know that that is very unsatisfactory for people. And I've been accused of making it up. It's actually very appropriate considering the history of this stuff. Yes. It's kind of funny. Frustrating as fuck man. Of course. But kind of funny. The aftermath of Bob coming forward. Of course it messed with his life in a big way. And he was not all that much of a sort of a semi- I think. he was sort of a semi-recluse anyway. But the stuff that goes on here even thirty one years later. You know what it's like these fanboys. He's got people that got the Bob Lazar disease really bad. And they still deal with them. They spend their days now all these years later focusing on Bob. Two weeks ago somebody put something on Twitter. It was an interview. Some of these guys had gone to New Mexico to find people that had worked with Lazar a long time ago. And then tried to dig up dirt. Hey you remember working with Bob or you knew him back then? Yeah. Did he have a teenager's working form at his photo shop? Yeah. You ever seen anything weird with him and little girls? No, the guy says. And then the interviewer says what we heard that he tried to solicit a fourteen year old girl to work at a brothel. And then they put this, the guy says I don't only think about that. They put this on Twitter with the headline, Bob Lazar solicited 14 year old girl to go into prostitution. Who's doing this? Just some guy's controls. People who've got it bad. And there are so many of them that every day they post something about Bob Lazar. Really? Every day. Oh my God dude. Well I think UFOs attract a certain percentage of schizophrenics. Totally. But this is like so horrible the way that his story, I mean they just I've never seen it like this. I've never I get it. But I did a film on Bob. I get death threats because of Bob. That's how that's his life every day. You know I had a military guy who I had asked years ago about disinformation. You know you guys have to see disinformation out there to discredit the UFO story. He said we don't have to plan anything. The UFO people do it all to themselves. I mean they're nuts. Yeah. I had a I got a PhD in ufology in essence by working on that story and then subsequent stories because the public had reacted in such a way. All right I'm going to stick with it. But what you run into in the topic it's no wonder that you've gone back and forth on it. So why? Questioning whether is this a good use of my time because there are so many of them that are absolutely nuts. And psychopaths and they make stuff up and they also make a living doing it. Like Jamie and I were watching H&A on the other day and we were laughing. We're like what are the qualifications of being a UFO researcher? You don't have to have a degree. You know just you have to be a bullshit artist who's willing to get on the history channel and talk about UFOs. Like literally you just have to know a few facts that you could spit out and some guys were clearly reading off of a script. I'm like this has got to be the lowest bar for like in terms of like what does your son do? Oh he's a scientific expert on the history channel. Amazing. You know but what is he really? He's a fucking UFO researcher. Well what does that mean? It just means he's a guy who's in the UFOs who can string words together in an appropriate sentence that seems like he knows what he's talking about. So they put him on TV and when I did that sci-fi show Joe Rogan questions everything I lost all my faith in UFO research. Yeah yeah. And I brought it back because of your your documentaries what brought it and Dave Foley because talking to Dave. I love Dave. I love Dave. Yeah. But he's so into it man. I'm like really he's like you gotta look into this you gotta look into that. You know he's telling all these things. I'm like all right one more time here we go. And then when I watch your documentary I was like holy shit. I'm so really rekindled my thoughts about Bob Lazar because I remember being really interested in the 90s. The topic itself discourages serious inquiry by journalists by scientists because you have to wade through so much crap. You know 90 95% of it is total crap or it is honest misidentifications of prosaic objects. But that 5% it's really interesting and it's why the government is now you know looking into it once again. Yeah it is really weird to see the government looking into it openly. That's what's strange like the fact that they're like the younger version of me would be like bracing myself for contactable. It's common if they're talking to us about it now because my thought was always like they probably if UFOs are real and aliens exist they have it in contact. They probably don't think we can handle it. So they probably want to keep us as calm as possible and just dismiss everything and go back to work go back to sleep. Do what you got to do don't pay attention to this. This is all nonsense and that's what most people do. But when the government is actually openly discussing the fact that they not only have been studying this but they have some video footage of some things they cannot explain. And they're saying this just out in public in legitimate recognized publications, newspapers, television shows it's it's weird to see. Very weird for me now it's you know 33 years that I've been chasing this and I become I don't want to talk about me but I mean I become the UFO reporter whether I like it or not. I'm not the UFO reporter I'm a reporter who's interested in that. The UFO stories I've done and all that time it's been a lot but as a percentage of all the reports that I do it's small. News guy I chase bad guys mostly for the I team but those those UFO stories have gone all over the world. The UFO field is so polluted with with liars and exaggerators and fast buck artists and and people who appropriate the story for their own political agendas. To make money to get attention it it takes 90% of your energy just a way through the crap and get to the heart facts and there aren't that many of them. And to figure out who's telling the truth who's reliable who's honestly trying to pursue the story and get to the truth. It's it's a it's a task that is difficult and I don't blame other journalists for not given it a fair shake because it's not something you do at a week. I remember saying to myself this how cocky I was in the beginning is you know I'm reading these UFO books and boy this field is a mess. But there is some good information in here give me six months and I'll have this figured out well there's 33 years later. I know less than I did now I know I have a lot more facts in my head but all the big questions we don't have answers to them. I don't think anybody does who they are where they're from why they're here what they're interested in us what the long term agenda is we don't know that and I don't think anybody does. I've gone pretty far up for high up the food chain as a career journalist what what did it feel like to you when you started seeing the government actually coming out and saying we are trying to investigate these reports we know that there's something to them. These are real claims by you know real pilots real scientists have reviewed these things and they find them troubling. It's a it's a mix the most immediate reaction as astonishment because of all the years I'm chasing this everywhere you go you run into brick walls when dealing with the government. That's really what got my attention and where I wanted to focus because I can't go out and wait for UFOs to show up although I've done that. But I wanted to follow the paper trail the government has this whole big long history of documents that they exchanged reports memos incident reports about UFOs before the freedom of information act became the law of the land and they're very candid with each other they're not that way anymore they hide stuff. But back in those days they were candid that this is from somewhere else this is real it's not fictitious we need to look into this we got to make sure it's not Russians or Chinese. And we have figure out who's got this technology because we don't it's not ours and then of course when freedom of information act became the law of the land all these agencies that have lied about it nope we don't have any UFO reports have to cough up thousands and thousands of pages they have absolutely stone wall this and lied to the public for a long time. So to finally see them admit yes we're taking it seriously which I have known all along of course they have to study this unknown craft float over our nuclear missile bases disarm the missiles. We have fighter jets go after them they leave them in the dust they can fly circles around our best technology they mess with nuclear power plants nuclear weapons nuclear facilities like Los Alamos it is a national security issue and they have been paying attention to it they just have been telling. us so for the New York Times to come out in December 2017 and say yeah there was a program and yeah they've been looking UFOs oh by the way it's all done now. It's still a mixture of lies and and some glimpses of truth but I never thought I would see this in my lifetime and never thought I'd see this much progress the last two and a half years. The most astonishing time in the history of the subject and I'll take it Joe there is stuff bubbling right under the surface now that is going to rock our world I think in the next year so. Did you see Trump on TV being interviewed by a son yeah it's kind of hilarious yeah there's very interesting things very very interesting we're going to open ros well open ros well I think one minute or 51 yeah well he's barely paying attention I think he has been briefed yeah I think he has been briefed more than once you know I think because he watches Tucker Carlson. and Tucker's got UFO people on there once a month does he yeah he's been he's had for the last year he said UFO people once a month or so Lou Elizondo and Chris Mellon people like that and I thought that would if anything that would get Trump's attention because you know that's what he pays attention right that's that's hilarious. stories about UFOs over nuclear bases and weapons facilities and things along those lines is that been substantiated oh yeah yeah so this happened in the stories 1975 they called it the northern tier case so we have a string of bases up by the Canadian border all the way across the US from Maine to Montana nuclear missile facilities they were ready to go in the darkest days of the cold war. those those missiles ICBMs are ready to go aimed at Moscow and other places and in 1975 74 and 75 one after another these bases were visited. they thought they were mystery helicopters or something lights in the sky right over the missiles in a couple of cases they they disabled the missiles if we had gone to war we wouldn't have had those missiles being able to fire. there are some indications that the launch control codes were interfered with and then we scrambled jets the military personnel had reported this up and the things go away. we can't catch them whatever they were it clearly is a threat to national security. can I stop you for a second? is there an official record of these encounters? yes and those documents you can find them. Washington Post broke the story in the 70s they had attained some of these documents after freedom of information that came forward and then the most recent study. Bass, all sat that we can talk about they also really focused on the northern tier cases and they looked up some of those guys they found some of the nuclear missile officers and security personnel and interviewed him and they told the story all over again. there's a guy named Robert Hastings UFOs and nukes he's has been his specialty for the last 30 years he wrote a book made a film. it's chilling part of what has happened is it not only happened to us the US but in Russia. so once I got UFO fever and became a UFO reporter I traveled all over the world and one of the places I went twice was Russia. after the fall is Soviet Union it occurred to me that maybe we might be able to learn more from the Russians about what our government knows about UFOs than our government will ever tell us. and I met a Russian physicist who was here in in the US to lecture on disarmament issues at national labs. he was getting ready to go back to Russia he had been the national security advisor to Boris Yeltsin. he was the national security advisor to the Russian parliament. he had taught Russian cosmonauts how to spot American nuclear submarines from space he was connected. so I had a beer with him at the suggestion of a US congressman and I said hey Nikolai you ever hear any of your guys in Russia at high levels talk about UFOs. I can't really think that I that doesn't ring a bell we have another beer and he says you know I do have a guy at the KGB who told me that they had looked into it for a while. and I thought well they had just the KGB had just released its Oswald files that maybe this is a golden opportunity to find out what they know. because they are a superpower they have nuclear weapons they would have seen the same things we've been seeing. so I went to Russia we sent Nikolai over to back to Moscow gave him a stipend and his instructions were fine. people who were in a position to know high up in the military or the political of the government who have never talked about this before. and it took about eight months for him to report back and get all these people lined up and then I went to Russia and madam and interviewed him. and these were former military guys there was a guy named Colonel Boris Sokolov who was a gold mine of information. he told us about a previously unknown study probably the biggest. UFO study in the history of the world for ten years from 78 to 88. the Russian military empire every military unit in Russia in their whole military global. if they saw any ball of light anomalous aircraft UFO anything weird like that they had to report it to the KGB. and they're all that information went to one desk at the Ministry of Defense. Colonel Sokolov was that desk and they had thousands of reports that had never been made public before. he told me about 45 different incidents were Russian war planes and chased UFOs. couldn't catch them. three of the instances these UFOs shot them down. two of those pilots died and after that he said the order went out look if you see these things don't mess with them. he said their study was for a very practical reason. these craft could do things that the Russians could not. and they wanted to get an advantage over the Americans in terms of stealth technology. so they wanted to do what people in reverse engineering programs are doing. figure out how the UFOs work so they could have an advantage over us. I had to smuggle some of these documents back. if I had been caught with this stuff because some of it was classified. if I'd been caught I'd still be in a gulag somewhere. but I got it back. I shared it with some people. it eventually found its way into the US government hands. and it tells us basically a lot of what we now know about our own government. that they have always taken this seriously. and one of the incidents I'm sorry I made the long way around on that story. was an ICBM base in the Ukraine. Colonel Sokolov says that a giant UFO appeared over this base. these are missiles that are trained to go to New York and Los Angeles. they're very serious stuff there. it's a very secure facility. giant UFO appears over this base. it splits into pieces. and then it melds back apart. and it performs this dazzling display for a couple of hours. that bases on high alert and all of a sudden the nuclear control facilities. lights up like a Christmas tree and whenever this thing was, it entered. the launch control codes. the missiles were enabled. they start firing up. they're ready to go. and then pof UFO goes away. the whole thing shuts down. it goes back to normal. Colonel Sokolov said his team. he and his team sent there to investigate it. to take the machines apart. could not figure out what it had done. and he told me on camera, we think that they were sending us a message that these are your most powerful weapons. but we're not impressed. same kind of thing happened here. we don't like to admit it. but there's a pretty strong paper trail that it really did happen. now what is a bigger national security issue than that? or like the tiktok. you got a nuclear-powered carrier there. and other warships around it. and you got these strange radar sightings for a while. and other radar sightings for a couple of weeks. right off the coast of the US. this is an intruder. and even though these aliens, whatever they are, are not firing beams and wiping out our cities, you have to consider it a threat. that's the job of our defense department. they don't know what it is, but they know it shouldn't be there, and it's not ours. and I think that's what the program is going on right now. it's a legitimate national security issue. it deserves to be investigated. in spite of the larger social implications that we're not alone. the tiktok craft or tiktok craft, tiktok can't get away from that bird. the tiktok craft that was spotted off San Diego, it performed something spectacular in terms of its ability to go from the surface of the water to 60,000 feet in how long? less in a second, but there's actually more to it. there was a craft. remember, I was talking with Commander Fraser before this was public. there was a craft under the water too. the tiktok would drop from 60,000 feet is what they're saying, 60,80. but that's the scan volume of the spy 1 radar. so everybody have talked to us that they were coming from above. they were coming from outer space, dropping down within a second. and stopping on a dime, and then making the movements commander-fraver saw. then he said to me in our first talk ever, I'll never forget this, because I'm talking to a fighter pilot, and I got a talk fighter pilot, and he says to me, it noticed me. I go, what do you mean it noticed you? and he says, as I was descending rapidly to engage it, it turned its nose and began to intelligently mirror my movements. came right up by me, and he says faster than you can see, you can't even see a bullet leave a gun. no, it just bam. shot off, he goes, we don't have anything like that. I wish we did. we don't. whatever propels that is not a reactionary propulsion system. meaning it's not pushing something off the back to get it to go full. like everything else, or an explosion. it's a field propulsion. yeah, like anything else, you know, you gotta have something going back to go forward. rockets were still using the same ones for back in the day. this thing instantaneously without effects of an effort, without effects of inertia can move. now, and that distortion, that's exactly how Bob described these things would work. or do work in his opinion. so commander-fraver got to see it. and these incursions by the way, look, there's stuff George reports on. there's a lot he doesn't as a filmmaker myself, people tell me stories all the time. these incursions, it's not a rarity. these are happening to this day. I just heard about one in Guam. incursions over high security airspace over our weapons systems. and in Guam, there was just recently an incursion. the Pan-Tex facility with the igloos where we hold our nuclear weapons and stuff like that. there are incursions over these. so to George's point, the reason why maybe all of this is secret is not because we can't handle it. people flip out. maybe we just want to make sure we fucking get this tech first because it's a game changer. now let's talk about the people that have tried to debunk this and why they're off. because they've made some debunking claims about some of these videos and about the technology that was used to track these things. that's incorrect. they don't really understand what they're debunking. so please explain that because that's one of the things that people are immediately going to go to. they're going to go, well, make west is already debunked. and I've read the stuff that he says. it's mental gymnastics to try to explain it the way he's explaining it without recognition of the fact that these things were actively blocking radar. these things were actively blocking tracking systems. these were physical crafts. this is not like a bird. no. a lot of the wacky theories that he has. I wonder, you know, it's real weird that a smart man can make such really bizarre conclusions. very weird. almost like someone wants him to do those. sure. I mean, it's so exciting that we're seeing something and the government saying, okay, these are UFOs. we have not identified them. they have propulsion techniques that we don't have. and we're just talking about the videos. let's talk about the debunking. and what his claims are in the debunking. okay, so one that I recently like attacked because it was so ridiculous. is he was saying that the go fast video, which is this object that goes along in a straight line. one of the three videos that was released, he said, was probably a bird. that was his first theory. let's pull up the go fast video. yeah. I mean, I recently went deep into talking with Boeing experts who work on the these flare pods. they're telling me how they work, what they can capture. why it's playing what a flare pod is? for looking infrared. so basically on fighter planes, you have a camera. so here's the video we're pulling it up right here. sure that's mounted. and it's essentially recording in thermal imagery. these things are, this is not Instagram. these things are weapons systems that are highly trained to be able to act. to be able to accurately represent spatial awareness and to be able to target. enemy combatants, this is not an iPhone and Instagram. these are weapons for us. so out of the three videos, if we just look at this one, although I like the tick, tack one with commander favor and I like the gimbal one. those are awesome. this one gives us very little information. but the idea that this would be a bird. if you talk to anybody that uses these pods, you don't, you can't pin the pin point on a bird. you can't lock a weapon system on a frickin bird. well look how fast it's going to. here's what's so interesting is everybody can debate speed. so this is where it's locked in on it. so the weapon system is locked in on this thing and it's tracking it now. right and they got real excited when they locked it because they they said box to moving target. right? so here's the deal though. at anything I could say about this video because there's not a lot of information in there. but what I can say is that object you're seeing is colder than the surface of the ocean. now I looked up the surface of the ocean temperature at that location at that time because we had the information. it was like 65 degrees. what propulsion system? okay so a bird. a bird is about 100 and let's say five degrees like a seagull. seagulls can go maybe 15 miles an hour. I don't know how fast they can go. but they wouldn't, they wouldn't be colder than the ocean. they'd be hypothermic and dead. it cannot be a bird because this what we're seeing is a colder object than the surface of the water. that's why you're seeing it white. and how fast is it going? that's under debate. there's different interpretations. yeah so I'll give you one interpretation about you know 240 miles an hour some people say. and then they can argue well the fastest bird in the nose dive could go that fast. it's backup. we have an object that is colder than the surface of the ocean. that immediately gets rid of the bird theory because a bird would be hypothermic and drop like a paperweight into the water. it cannot fly at that so that's the piece of information I would attack that debunking it. but this video when you're watching that if it is going 200 miles an hour that's not outside of what's possible with spacecraft or aircraft or just planes. right but it's cold. I understand that that's pretty cool. but it is it don't it's very interesting but it's not moving anywhere near as fast as the tiktah. no no no this is just something because this is part in george can tell you this was part of a much bigger series of events. so like the gimbal craft itself that's another debunking thing. they said it's a plain banking away and you're seeing it through thermal. first of all talk with the pilot not fucking so. this is the gimbal. yeah the gimbal is pulling it up right now. and how fast is this thing supposed to be going? you know the speed from what I recall wasn't registered on the on the radar. it's not that it's going fast if you talk with the pilots it was rotating. it was spinning like a top end for like 11 hours without refueling. I mean the thing was just sitting out there this was not a this isn't a current that happened over a course of many many weeks. now when it rotates like that the debunking theory is that you're seeing a plane bank. so as if our military doesn't know what another plane is. other planes look very different when you see them through thermal. this thing was self rotating and I just didn't interview. and how fast is this a rather how warm is this thing supposed to be? is this supposed to actually be hot? I am unaware of the specifics of that one when it comes to heat. all I know is that it is self actuating. it is not something that is a glare or flare of a heat signature. making it look like it's turning the actual craft is self actuating. and what is the that halo around it? that's just an artifact of the of the clear thermal. it's not. the premise that the US government would tell you. all right look we're going to release these videos reluctantly. Luell is on those the guy that got him released and then the US government. formally released them a couple of months ago. the idea that the US government would release it. the Pentagon says these are unidentified. the and you know if it was a. if it was a. government formally released them a couple of months ago. The idea that the US government would release it. The Pentagon says these are unidentified. And you know if it was a bird or a jet engine, the pilots would not have the kind of reaction that they had that you can hear on the audio. Our government does not tell Congress, the Pentagon doesn't go to the Senate Intelligence Committee, show them those videos and say yeah it's unidentified if it isn't. And you know the reaction of the pilots, the fact that they would were forced to release it to begin with, suggest there really is unidentified. Why is it even addressed it? Why do you think that they have addressed the fact there's such and these things? Why not just continue denying it? I think they were forced to. And some props who had tamed along, I know you guys had a pretty spirited conversation when he was here, but he created it. Lu Elizondo, who ran that program, came forward and brought with him those videos. I saw them two days after Lu Elizondo stepped on a stage with Tom and said I was in charge of the program. He and Chris Mellon have been sort of the engineers of getting that story into the New York Times. That changed everything. As I said the last two and a half years, everything has turned on its head. The New York Times covers the story. The result is other media covered as well. They've been ignored forever and that allowed people keep these secrets. That pressure meant that people in Congress started asking questions. Two days after the story came out, I interviewed Senator Harry Reid, who was the one who got the money to create that program that became a tip. And he said his phone had been ringing off the hook from other members of Congress who are now suddenly interested. I didn't know those a program. They're telling him, how do we learn more about this? It started a series of closed-door briefings on Capitol Hill that continued to this day. The pilots like Dave Freaver were hauled before Congress first in front of the staff of the Senate Intelligence and then Senate Armed Services and then the elected members. These senators who get briefed on it and they were impressed and they wanted more pilots to come in. So it's been going on for two and a half years and two weeks ago, excuse me, about a month ago now, the culmination of it. Senator Marco Rubio, who is now the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, drops this bill and it's the budget for the intelligence budget for next year and he includes a UFO provision in there. We want Congress wants to have a mechanism set up where we get regular briefings from the Pentagon on UFOs. That's an astonishing change of events. It's because of the media pressure and then congressional interest. It made it more acceptable for everybody to pursue the subject matter. It's kind of out of the shadows and the Pentagon is reacted in fits and starts. So sometimes as they said to the New York Times, that program ended, had nothing to do with UFOs. At first they said it did, then they said it didn't. They've admitted Luelle is on to work on the program, then they said he didn't. They've said that the AWESAP, which is the other program, the mother program, that became a tip that that had nothing to do with UFOs, what it did. So they continued to sort of lie and obfuscate and muddy the waters. But the fact is that there's too much momentum from media and Congress and the public to hide this anymore. You should tell Joe about how the the government program AWESAP was created directly because George wrote this book about a little place called Skinwalker Ranch where the government was studying this property. That happened because of his books from DIA guys. Well you should tell the story of this. I've visited that place. Yeah but you, yeah, right. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. I think you got to, I think you got to a little misled on it. Tell them tell them how the government study started from your work. It's fascinating. So some of it. Some of it stems back to Lazar. So we did that story in the series in 89. One of the first people to call me after that was a guy I'd never heard of before named Robert Bigelow, a billionaire. He calls me up and says I was really interested in that. I've been interested in UFOs for a long time. Can I help you? Meaning can he help fund me? I said I work for a TV station. I don't need any help. But he was not to be deterred. He then reached out the Lazar. They had a little, he started meeting with him and pumping up for information. And that really amplified Bigelow's lifelong interest in it. He created something called NIDS, the National Institute for Discovery Science, which he made a science advisory board of the best and the brightest in the both the UFO field and the field of consciousness. So they're looking at two questions. Is there, is there a life elsewhere in the universe? Is it here? And is, do humans survive after death? And he assembled this board, former CIA guys, two former astronauts, men who had walked on the moon, Dr. Edgar Mitchell, Dr. Hal put off physicist, psychologist, a really a brilliant little think tank to take on these two topics. I was allowed to be a fly on the wall for some of it, not all of it, but some. And I told Harry Reid about it in 1996. And he said, can I go? And so he showed up and sat in on the meetings and he was kind of hooked. Harry Reid was the first person I told about Bob Lazar outside of our newsroom. When I before we aired the stories, he had, I'd known him since he first ran for Congress in 1982. Then he becomes Senate majority leader. So he'd always had an interest in it, but he didn't want it to be known publicly. That does not help your reelection chances. So in 2005, we write the book about skin walker ranch, nids, that team bought the ranch. They were on the property for seven or eight years at that point and had hundreds of different incidents that they investigated. They approached it like scientists would. They looked for prosaic explanations. They look for gravity anomalies. They look for, look for psychoactive plants. Could there be hallucinations caused by magic mushrooms or something? Are the witnesses lying? They investigated the background of the family that lived there. And they found out that they could not be explained that all the range of activity there. So it was not only you have activity we're talking about. Well, it starts with UFOs because that's what got their attention. The Uinta Basin in northeastern Utah has always been a UFO hotspot. Everybody who lives there basically has seen them. Balls of light orbs, structured craft, daylight, nighttime. In 1976, a guy named Dr. Frank Salisbury wrote a book about it. The Utah UFO display and he took hundreds of these cases that have been collected by the locals. There was a local science teacher named junior hex who because he had taught generations of kids science in that area when they people would see UFOs, they'd call up junior hex and he went and go and investigate him and he had at hundreds and hundreds of files. He gave them over this guy Salisbury who wrote a book about it and he said, these are real, you know, they're going on. But junior hex would disregard any high strangeness cases that came along with the UFOs. Anything weird, Bigfoot ghosts, anything like that. He thought it was too incredible and he discarded that. Bigelow buys the ranch. He hears about these stories going on on this one property, flies in, meets with the rancher. And by this time that rancher and his family had lived on the ranch for 20 months and they were so scared that he, his wife and his two kids, were all sleeping at night on the floor in the same room because it had messed with him so badly. Their property had had ghost type activity, poltergeist kind of things, trickster activity. For example, the wife goes shopping to the grocery store. She buys it. All this food comes back, puts it on the table, takes it out, puts it in the shelves, leaves the room, comes back in, all the foods back in the bag. She would take a shower in the morning, locks the door, puts a towel and a hairbrush on the cabinet, gets out of the shower, doors to lock, hairbrush and towel are gone. Dad's out in the field. He is digging a posthole, using a posthole digger, happy piece of equipment. He stops for a second, wipes his brow, looks back and it's gone. And they find it two weeks later up in a tree. They start hearing voices at night in the air, speaking of strange language. They start seeing shapes outside the window at night, big lurking humanoid shapes, hearing heavy footsteps outside, then hearing heavy footsteps inside. Then their animals started being mutilated. Cowls, the tracks will lead out into the snow and then just be gone. Cabs mutilated, cut up with surgical precision. Cats, wiped out, carved up dogs that were vaporized. Hundreds of these incidents, they would see holes in the sky, like a great big hole in the sky and things flying in and out of it. Now this rancher, college educated guy, grounded, religious guy, thinks the government is trying to run off his property. So he's out there at night lurking with a gun trying to catch whatever government agents are doing this stuff. And it's not government agents. It was something else. They start seeing UFOs of all shapes and sizes. The first one they saw was like a, they thought it was a win a bagel. This ranch is a beautiful place and it only has one way in and one way out. They see these two lights that look like headlights down in the third homestead. How did this guy get past the house here and get down there? He must be stuck. Let's go down and help him out. The lights start coming toward he and his son. Then they go up into the sky, up over the trees and then poof gone. These different kinds of orbs, the white ones that were intelligently controlled, not fireflies, not bugs, blue ones that would go, they seem to touch the the fear center in your brain. They'd get near them. They looked like a little bigger than a softball, made out of glass with a swirling blue liquid, scared the hell out of the animals and then it scared the hell out of the people too. This literally drove them to their knees with fear. These red orbs that would stamp he the cattle. They lost so many cattle that they began to think that they were going to go under. They had these four prized bulls and I'm jumping around with a lot of stories. They had these four prized bulls, 2,000 pounds each behemoths. Very expensive animals because they were raising a cement haul cattle. Had them in the in the corral and the husband and wife, they always felt like they're being watched. He says to the wife as they're driving to town, man, if something happens to one of those bulls, we'll go under. We'll be done. They come back a half an hour later. All four of the bulls are gone. They jump out. They're freaking out. Where did they go? Did somebody steal them? Are they rustlers? Looking around all over the place in this corral is a metal trailer where they used to store tools and there's only one door into it and it's it's locked with this heavy piece of wire. The door is still locked. The wire is still on there. The guy just as a last resort, he looks into the grading on top of this trailer and there's the four bulls inside. Door still locked. They're all crammed in there. Now you could take a forklift. You could have a team of 50 people and they couldn't get those bulls in that trailer, but there they were. He yells to his wife, hey honey, they're in here. And when he says that, the bulls wake up as if out of a trance. Kick the the door down and all got out. The Nids team, which had been on the property for a couple of years at that point, fly in. They've been in Las Vegas. They fly back in. They look around. They check out the animals. The whole corral, which is made out of metal, had been magnetized. So whatever technology was used to get those bulls from the corral into that trailer, left a magnetic signature. They were there on the property at the Nids guys for several years. Bigelow owned it for 20 years, but eventually they gave up whatever this thing was, this intelligence. It did not like being stalked and it played tricks on them. And they never made the stuff public because what are you going to do? Write a paper about this. Who's going to print it? You can't make a documentary about it because they weren't there with any evidence. So all this, we're saying those catamutilations, I guess that's some evidence, but that's the only evidence of cows and we can mutilate cows. What about all this other stuff? Like for the first 20 months when the rancher is there, they don't have any evidence because he's not a paranormal investigator. They're not taking photos or something. They want it to go away. So they don't have any evidence of except for what the rancher told them. But then they talk to the larger community and the same thing has been happening to all the neighbors. The guy lives next door had lost all these cattle as well. Seize the craft. Sometimes these craft would float around. They looked like stealth fighters with Christmas lights around them floating around silently. Again, again, you have an else. Not really. I mean, so Bigelow puts up cameras all over the property and you had them focused here, or some activity had happened before. The thing moves over here. You move the cameras and focus there. It goes away. Toward the end of the study, whatever it was that was there, one of these cameras would rip the shreds. They're up on top of a telephone pole, 30, 40 feet in the air. And there's wires that are secured all the way down the telephone pole. And they notice that one of their cameras goes out. They figure, well, there's another camera and another pole that should have a view of whatever it was that tore this up. Some kind of animal, whatever. Well, whatever it was was invisible. And I know it's very frustrating. It certainly was for them and for me to try to write about it in that this thing didn't want to be caught. It wanted to demonstrate that it was there, but it didn't want to have evidence. The calf that was mutilated was in, I know it's a lot the handle. The calf that was mutilated, it was a Sunday morning. It's 10 o'clock in a quiet morning. It's daylight. The rancher and his wife are there by themselves. They're tagging newborn calves, tag their ears. And they tag this one right by the ranch house, 50 yards from their home. And they go off across the property. It's a clear day. It's unobstructed. Their dog is with them and makes a noise that points them back toward that first calf that they had tagged. And the dog indicates it's something's wrong. And they see the mom cow is dragging its leg and going around in a semi circle. It's in distress. They go running back over there. And this calf had been completely stripped of flesh. Nothing left but hide and bone. And one of the femur bones had been ripped out and thrown on the side. Well, they call in the nids, guys. They bring in trackers. There are no tracks. There's no human tracks, no, no vehicle tracks, no animal tracks. The thing had been completely stripped of blood. There's not a drop of blood on the ground. It's gone. 75 pounds of meat gone again. Over time period of 30 minutes. Is there a team of commandos that comes in and does that? Where's the portion? And there's evidence of this? Yeah. It's over the graphs. Yeah. Can we see that? Yeah. Where is it? I made a movie called Humphatiscum Walker. It's in there, right? Is that the only place? Yeah. It's probably it's probably some other places. There's photos on videos. I mean, so that I'm with you, man. What's the speculation about like why why would they do this and why would they do the cattle mutilations? Like what is yeah, is there any speculation? Some. So some of it is a demonstration. I mean, it seemed to be a demonstration to get their attention. This trickster element has been reported in other places around the world. There's no hotspot quite like skinwalker. And I know how weird it sounds. There's no spot like that because it's never, there's no spot that's been studied to that extent. The nids guys were there for, well, big loan the property for 20 years. Nids was active for seven or eight. Then another secret study funded by the government came in under an organization called Bass. That was the money that Reed got. He got $22 million. He went to Bigelow as a contract and they hired all these people and fanned out all over the world to try to find UFO information, but other related phenomena, things that wouldn't seem normally to be connected to UFOs, but which are a guy from the DIA had read the book and became interested and he asked for permission to go to the property. This guy's a double PhD, a brilliant rocket scientist who had seen it and thought there were national security implications. The hole in the sky in particular with things coming in and out. He wondered if someone was using technology to make these things film that hole in the sky? No, again, that's when the rancher is there by himself. He's not a UFO guy. He's not trying to understand. But is there any evidence of anything weird, anything other than mutilated cows? Well, let's see. The video of the camera that was torn up by something invisible. They had something that... So in the video, you can see the camera being torn apart. You can't see anything. You can't see anything. You can see before it happens. It's normal and afterward. I think you're how much time is taking place between before and after. I can't remember. But I mean, could that be hoaxed? Yeah, if Bigelow wanted to. But again, they weren't there in the beginning at least for nids. They weren't there to try to prove that aliens are visiting. They're just trying to figure out why all this weird stuff is happening in one spot. It mixes in a lot of Native American lore that got mixed in the picture. But it's been going on in that you went to basin for 200 years. Why? I don't know. Our government has studied the meta. So what is evidence? It's so frustrating to me too. When I was introduced to the skinwalker thing through George Mann, I'm with you, what's the evidence? What's going on? The way of evidence is when you talk to people in the area and they all have these commonalities, some people died of exotic cancers from burns from above where lights came down and hit them. And that's evidence. Their face is completely irradiated and they fucking died. So there's the cows. So you have a scientist like Dr. Colin Kellerher. Hold on for a second. That's where they found it. Look at that. Just what in the fuck can that that is so cori- you know, did they scan the area to look for another spot where it could have been slaughtered before it was moved to this area? Well, that's what they concluded is it had to have been taken somewhere and slaughtered and then brought back. But how can you do that? Little larger, please? Can just zoom in on that because that doesn't look very surgical to me. That looks like wolves. Yeah, there's no, it's just they actually did an analysis and it was done with two types of metallic tools. But look at all the jagged edges. They said they, so they took samples and they sent them the two pathology labs. Didn't tell the guys what they're looking for. You tell us what you can see. And they, the pathologist said that two instruments had been used. One was a heavy machete type instrument that had been hacked. And then there is a scalpel that had surgically removed a lot of the flesh underneath. It looks like something killed it and then they moved it to that spot. I mean, if I had a guess, the way it's eaten though, I mean, it looks like it was eaten. Well, there's no teeth marks. There are metallic marks. The teeth mark. I mean, they've got sliced. Okay. And so something sharp slides to. So I think the bigger point is this was happening on this ranch with owners prior to owners, prior to owners. I got to talk to a lot of people. So here's the deal. The connection of this. So George does this thing. He reports on this for 20 years that the government is now studying this ranch, right? Because of deployment or because all this weird stuff. Why is the government spending money through all sappet to study this ranch and other things? And that's where it gets really fucking interesting. What happens after with our government programs? And that's what you know. This is before we get to that. This image, like the, the jagged edges around the rib cage that's supposedly sliced. That looks like hacked. Okay. I mean, look, it could, let's say it's people doing this. You know, two farmers to get them out of there. Let's say it's some program. I mean, although the cattle mutilation thing you gave me a stack of documents this big has been studied by the FBI. It was, it's happened all over the country. You know, one has ever been caught. Not a single person. More than 10,000 cases. With all the same types of cuts. I mean, this is not my expertise. I've seen a lot of that. It's really weird. There isn't really weird. And the lack of blood is the weirdest part of it. Because if, see, like what makes sense to me is that something killed that, they, they butchered it, they chopped all the meat off of it. And then they removed the carcass from that area and dropped it off there. Yeah. That's what it looks like if I had a guess. That's what nids thinks. There's no way that it was killed right there because you're seeing fresh clean hay underneath it everywhere. There's no blood, which doesn't make any sense at all. I think the question is, is this a government program? Is this something or is this a scare tactic? It's been happening since the 50s. Like, what is weird scare tactics? It's a click on that one below at Jamie. The brown one with the green. Yeah, that one, please. Thank you. That's, that's a weird one too. Like, there's like a whole cut out. And there's a bunch of these. They found all over the country and weirdness like organs removed. But the weirdest part about it is it's almost always there's no blood. Yeah, I just investigated one, which I never thought I would do, but I got a call from a guy in Texas. You have to see it physically. Yeah. So right before lockdown, I go out and I'm like, this is so wild. I got to check this out. The guy calls me. It's a pretty freshy one at this point. Now I'm no expert, but I went and got samples and took them to labs and this sort of thing to see if there were tools used. So you got, here's my experiences. Do you get pictures of this? Yeah, I feel like you're wrong. I'll show you after I got a microphone. Yeah. So I got great fucking photos. Weird. Well, listen, man. Air job them to me now. We'll send them to Jamie. We'll put it up on one of those screens or other people can see it. Okay. So let me yeah, after the show is not going to help us. Okay. While you're looking, I'll tell him about one of the theories about the calculations that Dr. Keller, Dr. Collin Keller developed was that the somebody is tracking the spread of like mad cow, maryons through the food supply. And that they've been doing it under the guise of UFOs. Since no one would take UFOs and cattle mutilation seriously, they just do it in helicopters and instead of just stealing these cattle, they're tracking how far this these indestructible preons travel through the food supply because it's in cattle, it's in pigs. It gets fed into chickens and things of that in feed. It's in deer. It's called chronic wasting disease in some circles. It's just weird. Well, quite interesting diseases. Isn't that a that's a different preon disease than mad cow? Well, it's a variation. Cruts fell Jacob disease. I think too. So the same kinds of things in different species. It is indestructible again. So you hit a deer that's got this and you grind it up and you feed it to pigs. The pigs get it. Yeah. And then it could be passed under other species and it shows up in different ways. Kellaher was exploring the idea well, whether or not it might be the cause of all timers or a version of mad cow and humans. Do you, um, they're all going to you right now. This is a recent, oh, it says downloading. So I'm downloading them. Oh, right, right, right. Are you on the Wi-Fi? No, but it's coming through here. It's about to go to you. It says well. Okay, got it. I mean, I guess this does highlight because this is my very limited amount of, uh, can you send those to Jamie to Jamie? Yeah. Are you on the air drop? Yeah. Sorry. Should have had to do that right away. It's ready to roll. Is air drop is open. I don't see you, bro. Bro. Hold on. There. Yeah. You're going. You're on Jamie. So this is, um, this is the stuff that you physically encountered. Okay. You physically saw this cow and I'm looking at these images right now and we're going to show sure in a second. And this is, uh, you said Texas. Yeah. So where, where in Texas? Oh, gosh, what was the name of it in the panhandle? And I'm, yeah, I'm blanking. So here's the deal. Oh, yeah. That's it. So I made the, the, the movie based on Georgia's work of the same title, hunt hunt for the skinwalker, right? And that movie was telling this story about how the United States government was studying this property of land because of UFOs and weird stuff that and weird stuff included things like cattle pull up this one. There's a lot of weird images, man. This, uh, the, the skin removed around the face. Right. So this is my, this is my first chance to see this for myself. Cause last time I was on your show, it was the ones in Oregon had just happened up at that ranch. And I thought, well, okay, if I'm ever going to do it, now's the time to do it. So I go, I get this call. Now, remind you, this is a rancher. This is like, this is their livelihood. It's this huge, huge area of land. That right there. Stop right there. There are very religious community. Nobody. We go out to the middle of this land. And in the middle, there's this dead cow. No blood. No blood. And he had seen it prior. And the reason he called me is because in my movie, you could see this special kind of slice, like a jagged slice that is common to these types of things. They think are real, me relations. And he was looking at it. He's like, that's exactly like in the movie. And this is a straight shooter. He's a religious guy. He had to ask his pastor if he could even like go on camera with me. It freaks him out. So he sees this. Now, he sees dead animals all the time. And he saw this cow. He said before, accidental, he was out shooting beacons with his kid. And he's on this big part of land. And he sees this down bull. And he goes over to it. And he's looking at it. And it's unlike anything he has ever seen in all of his years before, it had surgical cuts. There is no doubt somebody killed, cut up this animal with those classic, like the ear gone, two types of tools, like a scissor type. But by the way, I tried to cut it. It is not easy to cut. So they had sharp tools. And then there's like a very thin slice type kind of cut. So I got to take it, get samples, take them to labs and try to see what type of tools did this. How did they do this with no blood on the ground? And all the soil around, it was dead. So I was like, well, why is it all dead? Is that a natural thing? So I took soil samples and took them to a lab. And again, I'm outside of Mike's. This is weird to me. Okay. But I think there it's a real phenomenon. Somebody is killing these animals. Something someone, whatever you want to say it, something someone is killing these animals in a highly specified technical way that has been repeated since the 50s on our FBI has studied it. He has shown me so many reports of these in association with discs, the saucers. Did this guy have any association with discs or saucers or anything? No, he's just a guy that owns the lab. So just found this cattle that's weirdly, weirdly mutilated. Somebody killed it. Yeah. And he's like, is this demonic? Is this some sort of Satanist thing? And I said, I don't think so man. This goes back in history. Like I'm looking at the cuts, specifically, they're very unimpressive. What that does doesn't look like a laser did it or some long ago. It'll be sharp scalpel. No, it was like a it was like a serrated one was a serrated tool. And that's the thing I'm saying. It's like something that we could do. Oh, absolutely. We'd have to somehow do it though on in Texas land where the guy would shoot you in the face if you go and try to touch one of his cows. That's the other thing. No one's ever been caught. Never since. That's what's weird. Yeah, it's weird. It's frustrating too. Yeah, I've been to the ranch, the skinwalker ranch and the basin more than two dozen times. I've never seen anything. I've interviewed the neighbors. I've interviewed the scientists. These are PhD level guys who had seen this stuff. A lot of times they have cameras that fail. I mean, it's, you know, you've heard that story before and this is very convenient that it happens just one of some giant disc shows up. But it does happen that their car batteries would die in the same spot. Whatever it was, messed with them. And maybe it's humans, maybe it is human technology, but no humans were ever found to be doing this stuff. Nids was there for all those years. They didn't want to tell anybody about it. They shared the information with me, but you can't publish it. Well, there's no real physical proof. So they just left it there. And I had tried to do a documentary ended up. I talked to him and it'll let me write a book about it. But, you know, if people, if you're looking for physical evidence and solid proof, they don't have it. What is the, what's the primary theory? Are there any primary theories of why they do this to cows? Why someone's doing this to cows? You know, you need to catch somebody and ask them. I mean, you know, that's, that's really weird that no one's been caught. It's an investigator. It's an investigator. He unexplained, don't explain the underbasket. That's what he always says. And it's like, I wouldn't think I would ever be interested in this. But someone calls you and said they got a fresh cattle moverlation and they, you know, they're associated with the UFO phenomenon. Sure, I'm going to look into it. What I find more interesting is what's happening now with the government study that started here at Skinwalker Ranch, all sapped, the one that was in the New York Times, and, and where the information is going now, these are new times. Things are starting to drop to the public. What is starting to drop? Well, they, so the Skinwalker story, lack of physical evidence, though there may be a come see the tension of the defense intelligence agency. This guy, this scientist who sees it, he goes to Bigelow, they go visit the property, he looks around, he has an experience. He's not there 15 or 20 minutes and something appears inside a house that only he can see. He doesn't say anything about it. He goes back to Washington, meets with Harry Reid in a skiff in the capital and two other US Senate. inside a house that only he can see. He doesn't say anything about it. It goes back to Washington, meets with Harry Reid in a skiff in the Capitol, and two other U.S. senators. He presents them as the proposal for a study of UFOs and related phenomena, not just like A-tip, looking at flying saucers that encounter U.S. military, but something more expensive. They put out a contract, big, low bids on it, creates an organization called Bass. Again, puts together a team of experts 50 or 60 employees, and they start studying it. They go around the world, they interact with other governments, they get their files. They send out teams to hotspots to try to figure it out, looking at whether there are connections between what we call flying saucers, possible aliens, and all these other different phenomena. The program goes on for a couple of years and somebody yanks the funding, and get this. The reason that the DIA suddenly became worried about all this weirdness that was being reported at the skinwalker in elsewhere is because they thought it was demonic, and they thought if this comes out that we're studying this weird phenomena, A, it's going to end up on the front page of the New York Times, which it did, and B, we might be invoking Satan in here. These were fundamentalist Christians in the Pentagon who pulled the money because they thought it was the devil. I'm not making that up. That's hilarious. And the program now continues. They keep reporting that it's stopped. It hasn't stopped. The US military has been studying UFOs since the beginning in every branch of our military. They continue to do so. And now every time they get caught in a lie, so it is continuing to tell them about it. It is continuing. So all staff's money was taken away, but the A-tip program, which was what Luil Azando had it up, that looked just at military UFO encounters continued. Pentagon says it was not. It continued for a couple of years, and after the New York Times story comes out and creates this furer, it got funding. And it now has a structured organization, and it is looking in two cases where the US military sees these things. And off the coast of the Virginia, they've been seeing this stuff. I think favor talked about it when it was here. These beach balls with cubes inside of them. And they were sitting there for hours off the coast right where our warplanes would go out for training exercises as if they wanted to be seen. And it went on. There were 70 or 80 witnesses during 2015, 2016 pilots. Some of them were willing to talk about it some weren't. It continues to this day. Now the program is on more solid footing. Now Congress has been informed, and they want to expand it and get more information. We are told the New York Times is working on another follow-up story to look into reports of what Luzars said, crash retrieval, reverse engineering. The existence of these metamaterials, bits and pieces that grandpods stashed in a barn somewhere, whether it's Roswell or other alleged crashes, they're taking it seriously to figure out if there's something about these materials that we could not have created. So the BAS program, the OSAP program, created a baseline of what we know about the state of our technology right now in different disciplines, lift and propulsion, things of that sort. They commissioned 38 papers that would be the baseline for what the state of human knowledge was in 2009. And those papers were published on an internal Department of Defense website, but they've never been made public. Six of them have now leaked out. And I brought along two more for you that have not been made public. So these are like scientific reports based on the government study of UFOs. So they commissioned these papers. Only a handful have been released to the public. George happens to have a couple more. So you can you're going to be the first person outside of the program, whether they're made a scene. They're called a dirt. This is a defense intelligence reference document. This paper is on metamaterials. So how you could engineer existing earth materials where you could duplicate what you're seeing up there. None of these papers, two of them actually mentioned aliens or UFOs. They're strictly on what the state of our knowledge is or was as of 2009. And they reference aliens and UFOs. Only two of the papers do. And how do they reference them? Well, there's one of the papers that looks at the physical effects of people that come into contact with these unknown craft. And it's sort of like the effects radiation or microwaves. There are physical effects, hundreds of cases that have been investigated. And that's what that paper looks at. And that's already out there. Yeah, the harm that is done to the body, what they call close proximity to a UAP, which is a UFO. There are known effects to the human body that are horrible. And there was a study that focused on the witnesses. They do know how close encounters like military people and then how it negatively impacted their body. So each of of these reports as he obtains them or as people find them, they're very illuminating to what our government knows. There was one that looked at how you would track a hypersonic vehicle traveling through space. How difficult would it be? Now, it doesn't say UFOs, but it's looking at things that really travel fast that are coming in from space in the atmosphere. How would you track that? Now, when that paper was written in 2009, we didn't have hypersonic weapons. Now, the Russians claimed they've got them. Now, it's very timely because we're in a rush to develop those things. So that was one of the papers that I made public last year. And I interviewed the engineering professor who wrote it. He wasn't writing about UFOs. He was writing about the state of knowledge about hypersonic weapon systems back then. It's a similar thing for metamaterials. That's what this this paper is is how would you engineer material so you could travel through space that would have say you shoot it with the microwaves and it could develop certain special properties. Just to put in a context maybe because here's the deal. Our government has now admitted there are UFOs. That's the world we're living in. They're unidentified objects or craft that seem to outpace outmaneuver actively jam our radar systems, even go over our military installations of high sensitivity. There are incursions. All of this is now said. It's a different world we're living in. However, the next thing that people are talking about now is well, we also have materials. We'll call them metamaterials. Materials associated with UFO craft. They might even go as far as to say we have whole materials craft from somewhere else. So when they're saying we have materials associated from crafts, are they saying that they have a crash? Yes. Yeah. Help put off who was a a physicist who worked with Bigelow on both knids and bass. Made a presentation in Las Vegas in June of 2018 where he says, yeah, we've got these materials and we're trying to figure out where they came from and how they went engineered because some of them appear to be multi-layered that are beyond what is known engineering capabilities of humans. It looks like they would have had to been made in say zero gravity of space and we don't have any manufacturing plants up there. He implied that they came from crashes. Doesn't mean it's a UFO from Zay to reticulae. It's crashed from somewhere and we don't know who is it is. So they're trying to figure out whether we can duplicate it or not. And they got a bunch of samples. Have you seen any of this? No, I haven't seen Bigelow and Hal have you seen. I've seen what people claim. So the army now has these metamaterials that were famously put in through actually the coast to coast show, right? It was called Arts Parts. I told you this last time I did, I was able to obtain them briefly and have five scientists from New Mexico that I knew. Material scientists physicists interrogate as they say the samples for numerous days. I don't believe that I had access to the best equipment. We didn't find anything extraordinary. Other people have so right now the army. So when you say you didn't find anything extraordinary, did you find anything ordinary? No, they weren't ordinary. These are the materials here? That's the exact one of the exact pieces that I had in my hands and worked on with my team. And I filmed it all. But right now because of TTSA, they've made a deal with the army. And I think the army has these parts. But I feel like we're missing the big note here. The big note is a few years ago, UFOs are still laughable. Military doesn't look after that. Turns out we have programs that do. I'm suspecting and maybe you can talk more about it that the next piece of information is that there are reverse engineering programs, which will then make everybody have to look at Lazar's story a little bit differently once again. If we admit that we are trying to reverse engineer either materials or actual craft from somewhere else, intelligently designed metals or craft from somewhere else. If there are crash retrieval programs for vehicles we don't know where they're from, that's going to make me look at Bob's story even more differently. But it is not a big if. I mean if they've, it's an interesting time. It is. But I mean there's no indication that they're willing to discuss some retrieved craft, right? Yeah, I think that's a heavy lift. So supposedly the New York Times are working on that story. I think it'd be pretty hard for them to possibly. Yeah, they are. They've been asking people about this stuff. But I mean to get that into print, to get a pastor or editors, it's a hard deal. Our last extraterrestrial material from the bottom of a wedge shaped craft in the late 1940s made of 26 alternating layers, one to four microns, dark bismuth. Is that how you say that? Bismuth. Bismuth. And 100 to 200 microns of silver magnesium zinc alloy, each of the six pieces received from the US Army source were formed with a curvature that tapered. So basically they're saying for there's no process that we know of that would create this alloy layered in that type of layer system. I actually have a piece out about this. It's not kind of how they did samurai swords. Oh that's cool. Yeah, I'm not sure that this is alien of any kind. But it is a unknown origin. And well, Jacques Vellie has like 20, as I said, last Jacques fucked him down like he's got like 27 samples of things associated with crash retrieval. So if anybody has an archive of this stuff that's being scientifically interrogated right now and his studies do show isotopic ratios that are not from this earth. So he's confident with his research. My big point, he's confident with his research of what? Well, you'd have to talk, you should talk with Jacques, but what is he confident of that you can say that he has that he has alloys that came from UFO crashes or runoff. Has anybody independently analyzed those things? Yeah, he's got a presentation. He's got a whole team's of people. Well, how come this isn't like public knowledge? Why is this in the New York Times? You got to get you got to talk with Jacques whether you have him as a guest or not. You got to talk with him. How old is Jacques now? It's getting up there because he's in his 80s. Yeah, here's I would probably have to go to him right with a house. He's strong dude. He's strong dude. Where is he? San Francisco specifically. No, but what's the address? Here's the thing, this program is ongoing. It doesn't have to find aliens. There are legitimate national security reasons to be looking at who these who's flying these craft. These things are still being seen over our military installations and our Pentagon wants to know who's flying them. And that's a perfectly legitimate inquiry regardless a little green men. No one wants to say there at the Pentagon that we're investigating UFOs and aliens. They're just investigating where did these things come from? Are they a threat? Can we duplicate that technology? If the Russians or the Chinese get this stuff before we do, if they can do what the tic-tac did, it's a game changer. So they want to know how who's it is and how we could duplicate it. And that is a perfectly legitimate inquiry whether there are aliens or not. What is the most compelling piece of physical evidence to you? I don't know. I mean, I don't know that we have physical evidence other than if Bob Lazar's story is true. We've got craft out there that we didn't make. I mean, the idea that we have stuff that were a version engineering to figure out how it was made, that would be the clincher. I remember reading about Jane Allen Heineck when he was running Project Blue Book. Now he initially started it with the intent to debunk all of these stories and come up with some sort of rational explanation that he could pass off the general public. And as time went on, he became a believer. And I thought that was really fascinating. And then after Project Blue Book closed, he was very open in public about it. I'll give you one of his cases from Project Blue Book. It's April 18th, 1962. The original explanation is a meteor. It comes into a atmosphere over Cuba. It goes all the way up the east coast of the US when it gets to New York, it turns left. It takes a left turn. It goes all the way across the United States. At a couple of places, it slows down. It's picked up on radar. Jets are chased after it. They can't catch it. It keeps on going. It gets to Utah. There's a little town called Yurika and it lands. Lands in Utah knocks out the power to the whole town. Then it takes off again. That's a heck of a meteor. It gets over near Mesquite, Nevada, and explodes. And this thing, the explosion was seen for hundreds of miles. They saw it in Las Vegas and Reno. I had interviewed a team that went out there to look for pieces. They thought it might have been an airplane that exploded. Supposedly never found it. A meteor that travels takes a left turn, slows down, lands takes off again. That's like no meteor I ever heard of. But Jale and Heinex team from Blue Book in their files. That's how they explained it away. The best evidence for me because look, I'm just curious about this. This is just one of those places where all the answers aren't there. I want to know, man. So the best evidence for me, because I asked that same question to everybody, it's the fact that we're being lied to. That alone, we can prove that. We can prove that our government intelligence agencies have actively partaked in lying to us about the UFO subject. There are a craft unknown origin that fly with impunity in our airspace globally and throughout history. And so the fact that they are lying and have been lying, that makes me, I'm like, why you lying to me then? I want to find out. So for me, that's the greatest evidence that there's scientific studies on this stuff. And everybody's hush the fuck hush about it. Why? Is it like North Korea had leapfrog us 50 years ago? So all of a sudden, you know, that's our enemy. I mean, who is operating this craft that comes in from outer space, drops down to sea level, docks like the TikTok was docking with a USO and underwater craft, and it outpaces our military jets, you got to be dead to not be curious about this. So that's the greatest evidence to me is the fact we've been lied to as an American population. And we're just starting to peel back layers that this shit is real and our military is worried about it. Well, if we haven't been lied to at the very least, they haven't felt it. Well, if they don't have real evidence other than this stuff that we're discussing, if this is all they have, I don't know what they would tell the general public. That's also part of the problem. Yes. What do you say? You know, you know, as I said, this is an amazing time. We're getting closer to knowing what the government knows, but that doesn't mean we'd have an answer. I don't think they know either. That was always my take on it was like, why would they talk to the government? Like, if you came from another planet and you were looking at us as weird territorial chimps with nuclear weapons, why would you pick one group and then talk to them as opposed to just the general public? Why would you elected leaders? Would they really be important to you? Like, it doesn't make any sense at all. Yeah, I never really bought into the stories that there'd been a formal meetings or anything. I think the government is as clueless as the rest of us. They have more information because they have the sensors to collect it. They have a giant apparatus. Sensors that detect things coming in and out of space and radar. Somewhere there's a giant pile of information that we have been able to see. But it doesn't mean that it answers the question. This thing has been with human, humans throughout history and it's always just tantalizingly out of reach. You know, used to be golden shields and that it be swords and flaming chariots and now it's flying saucers and it looks like technology that maybe we could someday achieve. But it's always out of reach and I think it will remain out of reach. Well, there's one thing that Bob talked about from some of the documents that he had been given when he was working at S4 was that they had actually taken apart in engineering human beings. And that is to me. Like, if you wanted to say, what's the things going to get people to roll their eyes the most? Well, you would say, well, the aliens came down here and they got a hold of the lower hominids and they accelerated the evolutionary process and they created human beings. People, a lot of people go get the fuck out of here. That's crazy. But if you look at people, one of the weird things about people is how much we vary. We're so different. Like, not like any other animal, like other than dogs. And dogs are the way they are because we've fucked with them because we've manipulated them. We are the dogs of the rest of the world. If you really think about it, we're so different than every other primate. There's not even anything close to us. And I know there were some other human species. How do you say it to denovians? There's Neanderthals, homofluoriensis, which was those little hobbit people. They did a bunch of other humanoids. But nothing that came close to what we are. And if you look at ancient, ancient primates and us, the leap between them and us is so quick, the doubling of the human brain size over a period of two million years is just bonkers. Like, they don't know why. They don't know what happened. They have no idea. But if that really is what happened, if they said, listen, they're going to get there. But we can help. Like, would you let's just jump in because these things, like, look, chimps are still chimps, right? They're still murder in each other. They're still tearing monkeys apart and eating them alive. They're still doing the same things they've been doing for thousands and thousands of years, whereas we're living in condominiums and watching cable. You know, it's like whatever has happened to humans has happened. So that the advancement is so unique. It's so different than any other animal. If we really have been visited since the beginning of time, since history, if all those biblical stories and all those stories from the Bhagavad Gita and all these ancient texts that do talk about vymanas and flying crafts and beings that come down from upon high, if all that really is aliens intervening with the biological evolution of human beings, how fucking weird are we? Yeah. I mean, if you think about how weird we are, period, I mean, maybe that would kind of explain that that we're some stupid science experiment. Well, you know, people say, I want disclosure, I want to know, we're ready. We can handle it. Are you sure? You can't handle the truth. I mean, are you sure you can handle it because we don't know exactly what it is that can be disclosed. But what if it turns out that we're an agricultural product, you know, we are being harvested for something or we're being allowed to to breed and kind of a science experiment. Let's see where this goes. And then when it's time to end the experiment. I mean, I'm not sure people can handle it. Look at how they've handled COVID. Well, if you would think about if aliens coming down and interfering with weapon systems and interfering with nuclear launch codes and things along lines, like if you think about the uptick in alien sightings and activity posts, he regime and not going to saki, that would kind of make sense. Like all right, these fucking dickheads, they've gotten to a point where they can do some really crazy shit and they literally might ruin this whole thing. They figured out how they liked the match. Like if you if you take this uh, primate this animal and you embed it with the superior or at least more evolutionary advanced genetics, then you manipulate it to a point where you make it weaker but smarter, far more curious and obsessed with innovation. Let me just leave it there. Well, it's just a matter of time. Like how much is that time? Is it a thousand years? Is it 10,000 years? Over time, they're going to figure out some crazy shit because they're just going to keep working together like they do. And then boom, bombs go off and they're like, all right, we got a signal. These crazy fox and they figured out how to split the atom. We got to get down there and keep a closer on these people. I'm open to that possibility of that being the case. I mean, it's just weird. The craziest idea. No, there's crazy ones being put up today. Just look, the big thing is the craziest idea. We've all agree on that. That's the craziest thing. The whole universe came out of nothing. Smaller than the head of a pen instantaneously creates everything you see in the night sky. Okay. The technology that shows up that maybe reverse engineered or cry after bits and pieces, you know, I sometimes equate it with let's throw us, we're aliens. Let's throw us a cell phone into a chimpanzee cage here. Have at it. See how you do it for a while. I don't know that we're ever going to figure this stuff out. Well, more than that, it would be like, let's take a chimpanzee and let's manipulate its brain and leave them with a bunch of tools, give it some things and see what it comes up with and then come back and try again. I mean, maybe Neanderthal was like, well, you know, they're not going to get me further past this. Like this project, we need to scrap it, start with something new. I don't think that's not, look, we do weird shit to animals. I mean, we studied them. We, you know, I was just talking to a friend of mine about zoos, about how bummed out I was when I went to this wolf sanctuary because everyone's like, oh, it's amazing. You get to see these wolves that they've rescued. I got there. I saw a bunch of castrated wolves that were living in prison. I didn't think it was cool at all. It freaked me out. I got really depressed. I think what you look at what we are willing to do to champs. I mean, I remember going to, I forget, maybe it was Denver. I forget where it was the zoo. But there was a zoo where there was this monkey that was in a cage that was screaming. Just scream like he was going crazy. It was a small cage. And people were walking around. He's like, ah, just, and I was like, he's probably going mad. This is not how a monkey's supposed to live. They're supposed to be in the jungle in the wild. You know, harvesting food and living with other monkeys. And not supposed to be alone in a cage where these other weird primates walk by and stare at it. Just overwhelms all of its defense systems and survival systems. We're willing to do that to things that we know or at least slightly intelligent. Like what would be willing to do weirder, more advanced experiments to primates to create us? And how do you tell a population? If you do study UFOs as the government and you find out, okay, shit, they're after they're coming in. They're probably studying us. Like how do you fucking tell people that? Like how are people going to react? And the way that it's so compartmentalized, that's been the best proof to me as well. If I've talked to somebody who's worked on a project and they're like, all I saw was a super capacitor in 1974. And I know this was not something we made. He was told nothing else. He just saw a technology that was more efficient than anything he had ever seen. So the idea that people are funneling this information, whoever is funneling it and protecting this information as we see how awesome and A-tip didn't get special access permission. That's a special type of program. They knew about crash retrieval programs. So they said we want to compare notes and information with other UFO projects. They were denied access. Yeah, the door was slammed in their face when they tried to ask that Senator Reed, who was Senate Majority Leader, had asked for permission to create it as an SAP special access program so they could get access to other goodies. And they said no. Like other retrieval programs, material programs, stuff that Bob has talked about. So just the fact that it's so hidden even within its own mechanism that they won't allow this scientific team to work on this project, it tells me as Robbie says something's up. I mean, something's up. Well, that was one of the weirder things about Bob's description of areas four about how compartmentalized everything was about, you know, one group worked on metallurgy, the other group worked on propulsion and they didn't share information. It pissed him off so bad, man. Well, it was what the way he described best is that scientific research, the way you progress is they, everybody works together. And it doesn't happen in a vacuum. So they were literally trying to do scientific research without the scientific method. They were trying to withhold information from them and only get them to concentrate on one aspect of this project without the whole group coming together and getting some sort of a comprehensive understanding of what these things are. Bob said he wasn't the most qualified person to do the job either. Not a freaked amount. And he didn't have the right materials even. Well, I think they probably, if look, let's assume they are alien they probably knew that no one was qualified. They probably knew that we just really have no idea, especially if they had been working on these things for decades like Bob assumed they had been. They probably had gone through the best scientists that they could and they realized like no one has any idea. Let's get this out of the box. Weirder puts jet engines and Honda's. Let's get some some straight look, there's a lot of very strange people out there that are incredibly intelligent that might not fit into your standard educational bundle or category of research scientists or whatever. It might just be a weirdo, it likes to shoot guns and make hydrogen powered corvettes. Maybe that's the kind of guy that's going to see something that maybe other folks haven't seen yet. I think that's entirely possible. It's also possible that they used him to discredit the idea of crash retrievals forever. Let's bring this guy in, show him some stuff, let him spout it out. We'll cut his legs off. The problem is the reason why he spouted it out was, you know, it was so clear that they had nothing to do with that. It was his wife having an affair and he had top secret clearance because he has top secret clearance. They're monitoring all his phone calls. They find out that the wife is banging her flight instructor and so they say, this guy's going to be unstable. We can't have him work there anymore. They suspend his working privileges and he freaks out. Then he takes people to see the crash, the launch sites, he takes the look. They do this at a certain time period every week. I'm going to take you down. There he takes his friends down there. They get busted. They get arrested. It's just too, the actual verifiable facts of his being caught, the whole phone call thing. The fact that his wife was having the affair, there's no way they're playing that kind of 4D chess. This is the fucking government. They're too goofy. If I found out that Bob Bazaar was lying to the world, I would be the first person to tell you. There's no reason I wouldn't. That was the whole reason I got interest. That's why I contacted George back in the day. I wanted to know if he was fucking making it up with Bob. I'll test you for whatever you value my opinion at. I have been with Bob in his life, met everybody, his family, the closer you get to his inner circle, the more you understand that he's telling the truth and never once have I found something where I'm like, you're fucking liar. Never once. Yeah, it's a weird thing. The only thing that people kept pointing to in the podcast is that he was getting migraines. But dude, he had migraines. He had migraines earlier the day. I mean, it wasn't any you could tell he would stop and he would win. He just didn't like the idea that he was going to do this thing, that he knew that millions and millions of people going to see him talk about this for hours and hours. And he knew it was all going to come back up again. All the investigation, all the people fucking with him, all the attention that he had avoided. Another important point is this is not a guy who profited off of this story. No, this guy told this story for 31 years and didn't profit off of it. The migraine might have been the McDonald's his wife was furious at me because when I brought him over I was like, just get some in your stomach man. I think it was bad food. He could have been that in the pressure, but the pressure was not. The pressure was devious. He didn't know you just started asking him about his wife cheating on him. It's stressful, man. Oh, listen, I get it, man. That was one of the good reasons why we had dinner the night before with my buddy Andrew Schultz. And I brought Andrew along too because he's a really smart guy. I said, just please just pay attention to this motherfucker. Tell me what you see. Just if you see some bullshit, if you see some weirdness, let me know. What do you say? Nothing. He said, I don't know. He goes with that guy's telling the truth. That is fucking crazy. You know, because Andrew's a comic, but a really good one and a really smart guy. So his I just wanted, you know, again, outside the box have some guys not obsessed with UFOs at all. Have him come and you know, and Andrew asked a bunch of questions. Andrew is at the bar before when Bob and I arrived, we go up to the bar. I didn't know who Andrew was, right? And then Joe walks in, hey, Andrew, and he had been sitting right next to us. Joe was putting spies out. That was a good move. Four when Bob and I arrived we go up to the bar. I didn't know who Andrew was right and then Joe walks in Hey Andrew and he had been sitting right next to us. It was always putting spies out. That was a good move But you know that it's so frustrating. It's it's fun And I think I would have stopped at George been doing this 30 years. It's like you always get one step forward and Look we all want to know if this stuff is true But the weight of the evidence is so heavy now with the government programs and everything that you've been involved with It's just an exciting time and I think I learned more in In this last year then all the time before and I think that that's gonna continue I don't think we're all of a sudden gonna say okay. This doesn't matter anymore. Mm-hmm. If this is real. Yeah I'm not counting on any answers anytime soon We may know more about what the government knows, but that's not the ultimate answer I mean what if it turns out These are not aliens they live here. There's some other intelligence that we can't see they can reach in like rats in a In a cage and pug plus out once in a while or do experiments do us and it's their planet and We're living in this tiny slice of reality and don't realize what's going on around this. There's a UFO UFO there's a UFC fighter a woman named Angela Hill She's a badass and her grandfather is Barney Hill. Oh Shit, oh shit. I didn't know until after the podcast her and I did a podcast together Just talking about her fighting career and then at the end of it she goes Oh, there's one thing I forgot to bring up this is like after the show What how did you forget to bring that up? That is so crazy? Her grandfather is one of the most important characters in the history of UFO abduction Betty and Barney Hill who were a couple in New Hampshire Yes, I mean New Hampshire New Hampshire and they get abducted and Through hypnotic regression tell this crazy story of The lost time their car stops these this UFO shows up and then they have this classic abduction story that we have heard time and time again and I had this conversation with someone where they were saying Do you believe in these UFO abductions and I said I don't I don't believe in them But I don't not believe in them either. I don't I just keep a blank slate with this because He and their take was like wouldn't you think more people would talk about it more thing? I go why would they do it that often? I go how many unique occurrences would have to take place before it become a knowledge? How many times would people have to be abducted before you would believe and what would they get out of these abductions and Look we we know what we're willing to do with chimpanzees or gorillas or any other prime at rangutans We find the wild they run experiments on them. They capture them. They do things to them all the time Why wouldn't something that's infinitely more intelligent than us? abductors to Folks that are driving somewhere Betty and Barney Hill why wouldn't they you know why wouldn't they experiment on them? They're they are right there. These are people that don't want attention. I mean it's a interracial couple back in the 50s or It was probably in a lot of part I mean it wasn't until I found out until 1967 or 68 like while I was alive that Interracial couples will allow to marry in the entire country So Betty and Barney Hill it's kind of funny when I'm looking at Barney. He does kind of look like Angela Genetic I don't know maybe I'm just looking at new unsolved mysteries one on abductions the new unsolved mysteries reboot. No. Oh dude Great case the other case that fascinates me besides this one But that one surely fascinates me because it's the original but Travis Walter. Yes. Yeah, that's a weird one man It's a it's a Solid one too. I mean I met Travis a few times and his story like Lazar's does not change their additional witnesses What he went through is comparable to Bob. I mean he was called a liar and basically I think his friends were accused of murdering him and that's a solid case. I mean it's a it's a really weird one too Another great case. I met two of the girls psalma and lissel and you remember that School were like 80 kids or something. I get some parts wrong 80 kids saw these craft come down in the BBC came the next day with Dr John Mac head of Harvard psychiatry and he's the one who wrote that book of doctrine. Yeah, this is what got him So these kids see this craft come down South Africa and at the aerial school And I actually got to spend a weekend with two of the primary witnesses one there was three feet away from she's telling me There was a being there when you hear what happened to them now the BBC did film that it next day You did have dr John Mac going and and testing all the kids and trying to see consensus what they saw But when I met these two women later in life I Can't dismiss what they're telling me. It's like you telling me you went to the grocery store Why am I gonna doubt you man? That's how matter of fact they are about it. They don't know what they saw But they know they know exactly what they saw they just don't know the implications of it. Well John Mac experienced a lot of blowback from that book. Oh, yeah, you're talking about a guy who's Was he employed at Harvard? Yeah, it's a ton of hard psychiatry. Yeah, and so he writes this book about UFO abductions and I actually found out about it from my friend Mora who worked with me on news radio with day Folid she actually was reading the book. She's like this is right up your alley She goes it's so crazy like I didn't know what to think somebody recommended it But along the way she's like these stories are so similar. It's crazy like these all these different people that don't know each other from all over the world That have really similar stories like if this thing is happening again How would anyone know and how many times would they have to do it and why would it be common knowledge? Like if if they have the ability to come here from another galaxy or another solar system and they can penetrate our defenses and hover over a place and abduct someone and run experiments on them and put them back there with some sort of Distorted memory which it seems to be part of the story and many of them that their memory is at least partially wiped and they come back Very confused like how many of those would take place before we would all know about it? I mean you they wouldn't have to do it that often this 300 million people and they do it once a week Who the fuck is gonna know? Again, how are you gonna hear about it? What's the what's proof? Right? What is a level of proof? Right for those cases this Phenomena is elusive right it wants to show us glimpses of itself and glimpses of other realities But it doesn't want us to be able to prove it. It's as if it's trying to tell us It's like a learning curve You know that reality isn't what it used to be that it's way more complicated that you might think it is That's sort of like what we got out of the ranch is that it's putting all these different weird phenomena together When you can't really prove any of them it's it's trying to tell you something So what can you learn from it? What's your take on Whitley's driver? It's a mix. I think he's a brilliant guy and I think he did have some experiences I don't know that the experiences continued you know you get mixed signals from him The fact that he is a great novelist a horror novelist complicates it complicates it He thinks about this stuff on a different level. You know it used to be We all thought it saw that alien on the cover of his book communion and and Figured it was a space alien from some other planet and he's on a whole different level about what they might be now What does he think there? I think? In essence in essence gods I mean Jock Well, I had said if you can manipulate space time if you can create your own gravity like the craft that Bob was talking about You could be from other planets other solar systems other times you could be time travelers You could be from other dimensions or all of the above Not Dr. John Mack had suggested that abductions and these strange experiences in connection with them suggest that we're part of a galactic neighborhood a cosmic neighborhood Multidimensional reality that we haven't got our heads around yet and then it's important for our ultimate survival that we figure it out George I just you know George has been remember he is a journalist it broke mob stories corruption stories political corruption I mean just last year I mean this guy's been doing this for 30 something years UFOs has defined him because the world at large has defined him by the UFOs That's because of the stigma. Now of course. He's made lots of headway and that all he does the coast show like our fell But what he's doing now is kind of cool after 30 years of studying this and filming with people on news You get to drop 12 seconds one minute in a news report He has an acacheic record of everybody ever involved with claims about this stuff throughout the last 30 years and he's been dumping it all online So all of his collective wisdom over the years of what could this fucking be? He is now starting to release those archives and so this is for me It's a very exciting time because like the liz are in abuse. There's so much more out there now that he had under his station What do you keep that George it's called mystery wire? Dot com which it's a I work for KLA us I'm still part of the I team but since the beginning of the year I'm focusing most of our attention on that producing new content but all this stuff that I've stashed and Home and elsewhere is going up on there. Dr. John McElby on there eventually because I got the interview him too while he's still alive Um, and he was hit by a car right? What is this Jamie? What is that new area 51 photographs taken by private pile? Oh, that was pretty cool. Yeah, they flew over Papus like you know, it's like you allowed to do that now You can you can get clearance to get by it and have a really good camera But here's what's so funny. It's like people that aren't convinced will never be convinced they said oh there's new photos of Papus Lake and we don't see an installation and I'm like oh you don't see an installation that was built to not be seen from the air Okay, I mean it's it people don't want to you know follow this shit or understand it They're always gonna see whatever they want to see Are you following me? Yeah, okay I was like when you happen in argument with someone who's not in there. Oh, okay You're like arguing with how you saw you're not seeing it. Yeah It's just just I'm I can't bang my head against the wall because I don't know what the real truth is George Is it was it a struggle to talk about? UFOs and yet maintain a serious career as an investigative journalist very much so You know, I thought I had the support of my news director and the station at the time and you know They were encouraged by the reaction from our audience It was it was big and then the it expanded and went all over the world But I think they worried that I was going too far down the rabbit hole. So I had to be careful I mean for me it is not my religion I'm not chasing this because I've got a hole in my heart where God should be it's a story It's always been a story and so I try to be careful and not commit to a position It's space aliens its inter-dimensionals. I'm following what evidence there is I'm listening to the witness testimony and trying to figure it out and and over the years You know, I have been all over the world to chase this down in the end A lot of the answers of the best information was right in Las Vegas because of big a low and the organizations that he founded All that expertise came right into my backyard and then Harry Reid being the sponsor to the program that became a tip I mean I've been fortunate to be a fly on the wall and and again their trust in it It's tricky, you know, it's tricky because so many people find this to be crazy and ridiculous And whenever I do a story un not related to UFOs It's about some crooked politician or cops or something like that and people are mad at me which happens often They bring up UFOs. Oh, that's the UFO guy. How seriously can it get to? Yeah, but but I've had the support of my employer and I'm thankful for that and You know, I get to be a little more creative on coast to coast because it's a four-hour show and and you can let people go I don't have to be judgmental about it when I'm reporting as a regular news story I have to be more careful about what I include in it But yeah, we're putting all that stuff up and it's been a fun ride and there's a lot of times I just want to walk away from it like you I get disgusted by it Yeah, have you have you noticed in your world the world of investigative journalism that Attitudes and opinions have changed about UFOs very much so I think you know I go back to the New York Times story that changed so much so I had no known that stuff and When I found out they were gonna do it I had known about the the program that was underway I said hey, why don't I get to do this because I've known about all this time I've kept quiet about it because that was my agreement I'm gonna do this story. They said no. This is big a low Send a read and Tom DeLong had asked me don't do that if you do it the New York Times said they'll back out and so I sort of I don't want to say took one for the team, but I realized I'm not the New York Times They were gently letting me know I'm the UFO reporter if I do it nobody's gonna pay attention to it If the New York Times does it then everybody does pay attention to it and they did they did that story then the Washington Post and political all in new networks did stories of press all over the world It is now acceptable for reporters dig into it. You have to be careful There are still liars and scammers out there who will mislead you but there is information that can be pursued by reporters And and I think that's made all the difference it made Congress more comfortable with exploring it and our world is different from That it was two and a half years ago Yeah, I think the the people that were in control of this stuff also in the 60s and 70s They're not around anymore So you're dealing with now people that are in government involved in the military that grew up in the age of the internet and they have a different perspective about these subjects The free flow of information they see everything is there. Why is this why is anything? Why I think younger people just have a different perception about UFOs in general I mean, I I think that you're you're not dealing with the post 1947 people that were You know talking about it back in the day where they and also the attitude of the way the military and the government interface with the public I mean they they could come up with the most ridiculous deception like the Rosalind case is one of my favorite ones I mean it's to have a bit about it But I'll crazy it is that they say and they print it in the paper We've recovered a down saucer and then the next day's eyes of weather Like you don't know the difference between a spacecraft from another dimension or another planet or a weather balloon That was made in Ohio. Well the same question now Dave favor doesn't know the difference if you're in a tick tack of this weird Craft on a seagull or something, you know, he won't engage those you know same, you know arguments He just won't do it. He's a fighter pipe doesn't give a fuck Well, it's the other thing that he was talking about that we didn't really get to is that that thing Not only was recognizing that he was there, but it was jamming it was doing some sort of active jamming an active war This is the other paper. I wanted to tell you about it. It does mention aliens. So it's a It is a recalculation of you trouble for having no no, they're not classified it says unclassified Just hasn't been released It just recalculates how likely it is there are alien civilizations in our solar system or how likely so it's about the fermi paradox It's sort of the it's the Drake equation so they've done this years ago about they tried to figure out how many planets are there How many are in an inhabited this is a reworking of the calculations and again? I can't read it Intelligence reference document introduction to this statistical Drake equation So this is something that they they created for the defense department. Yeah, so they could get an understanding Yeah, what the baseline of our information is about all those different topics I told you about and then this one is how likely is it that we have Galactic neighbors and how close might they be? Yeah, the key question how far are they it comes to an answer? It's like 30 pages into that but you're the first person outside the program Wow to see it You better dress shows is okay. Yeah, it's like I'm gonna get visited That's yeah, well how far did they think they are? I hope they they get it for you And again, I'm one of the reasons I become a journalist is so I don't have to do math so That's one of the cool things now that's happening is because of the New York Times article and really because you know you had Bob on and come out of favor People are talking about this in the zeitgeist. I've had more people Serious people come forward to me in the last year of my life than ever before and it includes soccer moms and just people that just I want to post the documentary Yes, ever since the Lazar documentary You know and and people found out that I kept my word to favor and didn't tell his story New York Times told it. I kept all that you know people started to trust me with hey We can keep his mouth should if he needs to hmm people have come forward to me and drove sense the Lazar movie and of course It's like soccer moms and people that just say I don't want to be known I just want somebody to hear this because my husband would think I'm crazy Let me just tell you what happened me and I'm out of your life. What are they telling you? I mean Joe. It's um Everything you can imagine from seeing craft that are right there right in front of him to You know abduction stories, which I don't get into because it's too crazy for me But they're reporting sightings Encounters all you have all stuff. That's why they call me. They don't call me for other stuff, right? But also very serious people People that have worked or do work within our military and say I had an encounter I There was an incursion. I know George is dealt with this for 30 years It's just it's just new for me that the the amount of people coming forward to me and telling me their stories and giving me Documents and stuff like that. I gotta be careful because a lot of it's gotta be bullshit. Right. Yeah, but a good handful of it is power a lot of it is You know, it's like bait to really discredit it credit. Yeah You think is that what you think or you think it's just crazy people? It's crazy people and some of it might be more organized than that The you rate your show Joe sent it when Bob was on there I know what what happened to Jeremy as a result of it I get a little bit of the blowback because people are interested in the topic But it's amazing how much of an impact it's had to to kindle people's interest not only in that story But in others on the general topic by way this paper says with a 75% probability the nearest extra terrestrial civilization is located in between 1361 and 3979 light years from us. So there there you go. Wow And the way they travel that ain't shit. No, that's and that's that's one time And that's such the important part of it. Remember talking about non reactionary Propulsion systems everybody like 10 years ago everybody's like okay The universe is vast is probably an intelligent life forms out in the soul in the solar systems in the universe But they ain't coming here right, but then you look at what Bob said and how grab it away of amplification would and then you look At the testimony of like commander-fraver and how those craft moves you see how the gimbal moves and then you start thinking well Distance doesn't matter anymore. That's just us saying physicists. We're right. Well hold on physics has changed as our understanding has changed So now we're looking at a propulsion system where distance doesn't matter man That brings us all a much fucking closer together if any of this is true. Yeah, if any of this is true this I mean there was a lot of naysayers back in the day that were quote-unquote UFO experts had had more traditional ideas of how they traveled to like Stanton Friedman he had his hot potato theory that they just did it in short bursts like very fast travel and short bursts You could tolerate But if they and he didn't believe in Bob was R2, but I always felt like there was some weirdness there like UFO guys and researchers are so used to people being full of shit That everyone but them's full of shit, right? And that's what I felt like with Stanton Stanton with discredit Bob's Education past and all these different things. I'd be like yeah, but I don't know. I don't think you know them I don't think you talk to him. I don't think you get in the room other like if we just just empty out empty out all your Predisposed notions of who the guy is and look at it. What if he's telling the truth? Like what if he's telling the truth? Does that place actually exist area as for yes? Does he have some weird knowledge of it? Yes Did he really work at Los Alamos lab? Yes Did people who work there remember him? Yes Does he know how to navigate the building from the inside? Yes Was there a fucking article in the newspaper where he built a fucking jet car and it said he was a physicist at Los Alamos lab Yes, these things are piling up Stanton. I wish you were alive I wish you were alive because he was a really smart guy who was also obsessed with UFOs But again these UFO experts all believe that everyone else is full of shit I had a 20-year dialogue with Stan Friedman And I respect the hell out of him because he really plotted away and really plowed the ground on the topic in general and tried to make it respectable But he had a blind spot about Bob and we had multiple face-to-face conversations and exchange letters over the years Did you ever say one if he was telling the truth? Yeah, I have said that to him and he can't get be het beyond the college degree stuff That's at the stopping point for him and did you bring up like I'm sure Bob told you the same story told me About working at Los Alamos lab and his education and I did not tell him that story But it would not have mattered because Stan didn't hear any of that stuff all the things about How does he go out and know it's gonna fly on Wednesday night and take friends out there three weeks in a row and then record it on video Right doesn't want to hear that why not just didn't hear it why not you'd already made up his mind That's not good. That's not scientific and I can understand like I might emails and correspondences and texts are dumb truck for conspiracy Like every everybody thinks I'm some fucking believer and they can just hit me with like fucking 5G COVID stuff And I'm like Jesus Christ and I try to push it so it's what people they actually know me my friends and in George too We're like the person that's hardest to convince that your story has validity We ask for documents for military background. We we bet people right he vetted lizor I vetted lizor. It's not like we're sitting here. Oh, we want this to be true. Tell us your story But do you understand? That's why the skinwalker ranch thing does nothing from me. I understand Yeah, I don't I don't I'll see anything there. Yeah, I see a dead cow. Yeah, there were PhD scientists on that ranch for 20 years Some part of the time working for the US government trying to figure it out They would have experiences they can't document them They realized that nobody's gonna believe it. It was very frustrating But they tried to look for a bigger picture of what it was trying to teach them Why why is these performances and that's how they could consider them like performances? They're not just UFO is popping in here just because it's a portal or something They were showing glimpses themselves for a reason because if they didn't want us to see them We wouldn't see them. It's like the tiktik there's the tiktik sitting around. It's it's been there for a couple of weeks Zipin in and out. We can't quite get a radar Baring on it and it's sitting there waiting for a favor to come along and then it kind of reacts. Oh is there somebody else here and it Zips away, you know it knew that we were there Given its capabilities. It wanted to be seen But why that's the difficult thing is is can you accept? So if this UFO thing is real in there are these intelligent craft stuff can we accept that it is aware of us? That it is aware that we have cell phones that it is aware that we Want to monitor it and if it's highly advanced wherever it's from. I don't care if it's fucking aliens or Again North Korea. I don't care who it is But if they're that advanced if this technology if there's any way to it which there is Then we have to know that they are aware of us looking at them and that they can Work from a technologically more advanced standpoint, right? I mean I have to accept that skin walker all that it was hard for me when I when I started doing the film and working with George on it It's hard for me. Where's the concrete evidence? I see command of favor. That's concrete evidence the documents That's where he first showed me his documents documents great That's hard evidence. So I know and it's hard to accept some of that But I'm not gonna exclude it like I didn't exclude Bob. I want to find out the truth. I'm not gonna exclude it investigate the unknown don't You know so the you know there might be some scary explanations ultimately that that they live here that they can see us and Read our thoughts and we're in the shower and we're sleeping and they're watching and they manipulate us On a micro and macro scale that it's their planet not ours that we're an agricultural product That's scary the other thing that scary is what if we are totally alone You know that they're we're the only life in them in anywhere that this the only inhabited planet Some people believe that I don't but that's pretty scary too because you look at how we take care of ourselves and it's not very well You know Yeah It's the whole subject is such a weird one because you spend a lot of time on it and you start thinking to my just wasting My precious energy here on nonsense like But then you hear like one of the things that Bob told me that was so strange Was when we were doing the podcast he was saying that they think that one of them was really old It was from an archaeological dig and I was like well why they leave in spacecrafts around are they leaving spacecrafts around? Like good, let them figure this shit out. Yes. Yes. Yes. You think that I think so Like I said throw in the cell phone into the monkey cage here help yourself knock yourself out and we see these displays You know if they didn't want us to see him we wouldn't they have stealth capability we can see them right there and Not see him on radar we can see him on radar, but they're invisible You know, they you can only see him sometimes through through thermals. So as our military Devices get better at detection UFO sightings are going up and it's because we now can look at them purely through thermal heat signature compared to just you know Fine some of them don't display a thermal heat signature. Absolutely Some of them do and some of them don't do they they display different forms of propulsion. I don't know We'd have to it seems extremely Very, you know is that there's anything you can imagine and more this cop just called me a month ago And he's not a UFO guy anything and he had an encounter he claims that was so extraordinarily strange like non-arodynamic Something impossible. He saw something impossible They come in all shapes and forms It's just that as we look more We're seeing more I think because our technologies increasing and maybe because our awareness also we're starting to be more curious Or our government and our scientists. I think the scientific community should engage this topic You have stuff to study now meet your cock who famously recently said the burden of evidence about these not being extraterrestrial craft is now on the scientific community because there's such a weight of evidence now Did there are craft our governments working on it the Russians are working on it and the Chinese are working on it those that we know up for sure That's been told to me directly send it a read and said that was one of the reasons He started the program because he's had indications that those other governments are trying to figure out the same stuff that we're figuring out And if some of us can master that technology the Russians get it a Chinese get it before we do it's it's we're in trouble or the aliens come down and smack everybody around So what do you what do you think man after kind of you know doing three rounds on the UFO stuff? You know What do you think that man? I don't that's the problem. I don't I don't I don't I just sit back and I wait You know, I'm I'm I think when you look at favors favors what would favor saw clearly There there's evidence there's there's not just evidence that it was jamming tracking There's them trying to figure out what it is There's the incredible rate of travel where it can go from 60,000 feet to above the service in like literally a second And they don't even know how fast it really went because it takes a second for the radar to register That's that alone is just bonkers like what is that like what is that and how do you dismiss that and know Sonic booms as an example so that would a trans medium crap is one that goes through space Air or sea and it doesn't have the same displacement as you normally have that would be a gravity propelled craft no sonic booms No slashes of water Yeah, so it's I'm just curious what where you know Before you were you've been back and forth on the topic. Yeah, so has George So I get so fed up with it sometimes You're never gonna learn anything it was fucking crazy Well, there's just so many people out there that have an interest in discussing it too Will they do these lectures? They tour and they do these UFO conferences and they just get together with other bullshit artists and they make a living Does happen that's a part of the problem. It's part of the problem is that there's there's money to be made in this and you realize that when you interview These so-called experts. Yeah, we sit down and talked to them a lot of them are just their knuckleheads and they don't respond money to be made in this and you realize that when you interview these so-called experts, when you sit down and talk to them, a lot of them are just their knuckleheads and they don't respond very well to scrutiny. Luckily, he's a journalist with a day job and I'm just a filmmaker not just a UFO researcher, but you're kind of obsessed with me honest. I'm going to be completely honest. I am. How do you not be? How do you not be? It's one of the most compelling subjects that the human race has ever known. Are we alone? And if we're not alone, is something as advanced to us as we are to ants? And that is obviously there's, if you follow the string of evolution, things become more and more complex and in the case of primates, it become more and more intelligent, more and more capable of manipulating their environment. So if we extrapolate and we go a thousand years from now or we take ourselves to a totally different environment where you don't have the same sort of two-thin claw competition as you have here on earth. I mean, maybe they exist in some sort of a planet with a completely different eco sphere, a completely different series of metals and different pulsing systems get invented first long before fire. I mean, maybe they're just messing with some stuff that's just very different than us. Maybe they live in a more stable environment where they don't have to worry about asteroid impacts and they've had a steady chain of evolution that's gone on for millions of years. I mean, we don't we really don't know. You just think about a civilization that's so much as 100 years older than us. Right. Especially now. I think how far we've come in 50 years. I mean, the stuff that 50 years ago, a cell phone might be considered witchcraft. You know? And the rate of change is exponential. Something 100 years or a thousand years older than us could have technology that's basically magic. And a million years in terms of biological life on earth is really nothing. It's nothing. We haven't even built a life for a million years. Humans haven't been human for a million years. So just think what goes on a million years from now. The other thing that always trips me out is the archetypal alien. When you look at it, it's like if you took cavemen or you go back to chimps and cavemen and then humans, you're seeing this pattern of the heads are getting bigger. The muscles are getting smaller. The body's getting less hairy. Well, if you keep going, what do you get? You get an even bigger head and muscles that are almost non existent. These like like stick bodies. But they still maintain that sort of iconic, primate shape. They're kind of primate like where they walk on two legs. They have two arms. They vary the amount of digits they have on their fingers. They have heads that have predators eyes because the eyes face forward like ours. Like are we looking at what always happens to life? I mean, if life exists, the way it exists here and that it always gets to some point where some really intelligent species starts to to manipulate its environment and then it starts to look like that, where they develop technology, where they don't need brute force anymore. So their bodies slowly but surely shrink and become something that's just not reliant on a muscle strength, but rather on telekinetic ability, the ability to express themselves without words and thoughts. And that's one of the things that when he was talking about his neural link, which is, you know, if you want, if there's a fucking alien on earth, it's that guy, right? And he's talking about putting some sort of a device into people's skulls where wires will go to different parts of your brain and you'll be able to greatly improve your ability to access information. It will increase your bandwidth of information substantially and in his words, you'll be able to talk without using words. Now, when you look at aliens, the iconic alien has this slit from mouth, very little nose, giant eyes, and an enormous head. Well, if we allow ourselves to become some hybrid or some symbiotic computer cyborg type thing, isn't that what we're going to look like? Aren't we going to look maybe those things have weird skin because we realize like, you know, regular skin kind of sucks. It gets zits, you get cancer, you know, it's penetrable. They've already figured out how to wait to make some sort of a hybrid of spider silk and human skin that would be bulletproof. I mean, this is something that they've done research on in a lab. I mean, whether or not it actually gets to a human body, you know, who knows? But when you look at those things, when you think of that iconic alien shape, it does remind us in or it reminds us of the process of evolution. It looks like what we could be. Like, it causes a lot of people to wonder if they are time travelers. Yeah, that's us in the future coming back to see when we screwed up planet Earth or something like that. Well, you could be or it just could be their life that's gone further than where we are and they know the process. And that's how they were able to confidently manipulate our genetics. They're like, well, they're going to get there anyway. We'll just step in and jack up the process. Maybe we don't have a million years. Maybe because of where we live in terms of our galaxy. I mean, this is a legitimate shooting gallery. There's like some stupid number like 900,000 near Earth objects that could end us. You know, they're injecting miracle growing. Maybe they're looking at this and like, hey, we got to give these people steroids. Like, they're not growing quick enough. Like, let's get in there and get it so that they can legitimately get to a point before they get hit. And we've been hit many times while we're, you know, going through this process. But get to a point where we can accelerate their their evolution. I mean, I don't know. I mean, it sounds crazy. But so do we. Bullet sound crazy. You know, car sound crazy. Electric car sound crazier. And it's okay to talk about crazy things, right? And we can. A couple of months ago NASA made an announcement that they thought they had found evidence of or indications of a parallel universe. And I don't know if you saw that article or not, but they thought that I don't know if they're theorizing that time operated in the opposite direction in that parallel universe. Now get your head around that one. Benjamin buttons. Back in time, you've been watching. It's dark. That's a great show in Netflix. Oh, is it a saw the image for it when I was scrolling? You know, straight up, it's like in a different language, but they translate to the lips move a little differently. But man, it is deep. You have to have like take notes as you watch. It's about the mobius loop of time with alternate dimensions. Blue me the fuck away. It's great. It's great. Yeah, it is the ultimate who knows question. But goddamn, I wish more people from S4 would come forth. If Bob really did work with all those people and they really were briefed the same way he was, if we could get more of those people to talk, that would be utterly fascinating. Well, your show has a big reach. So maybe this time somebody will hear it. Anybody ever reach out to you that claim to also have work with Bob and S4? A bunch. Yeah. And do you verify any? No. They could not be verified. And in fact, I think they were lying to me. And Bob treats people down all the time. So they guys fucking standing on UFO stage line bullshit. I mean, you know, you know, he hasn't even, he was hoping one other employee would, um, however, I have had people that work at Area 51 confirmed parts of Bob's story. One in particular saw him coming off the jet where he says he saw him coming off the Janet flights. I said, will you go on record with me that you met Bob there on the tarmac? No. Why? Everything we did there was confidential. We couldn't even tell our wives. Why would I go on record with you? And if he did go on record, he'd probably get harassed or arrested yet he can't even tell you what he ate for lunch out there. You know, that so and one of the guys as real excited to talk with just recently passed away, he actually started the bar. There was that error 51. So everybody told the bar tender stuff. He started as a flower fund because no one would send flowers to wives when people died out there. But my point is people have come forward to George to me. A lot of people are lying, but it adds up over time. I got more than two dozen people who have come to me with bits and pieces of the story who had worked out at Area 51 that I confirmed were out there. Security people who had seen a disc under a tarp in a hangar. Different people had worked there at different times. 50, 60, 70s and 80s who had little pieces of the story, not to confirm Bob. And then there was one that I pursued. I don't know if you want to keep going on this. But I pursued this guy. I was trying to find in the early 90s people who were in a position to know about what goes on out there. And I found one. And he had been active in the nuclear weapons program. He had worked for E.G. and G. He had the contract to manage Area 51 from the beginning, all the way through the first 30 or 40 years of it. And so I started basically stalking the guy. One of his sons was a state senator. And he had told me, he confided to me that you got to ask my dad about UFOs and aliens. And another son had been FBI agents. So I stalked the guy, introduced myself. There were a couple of public events where I would just show up. And he finally got competent enough and made him invite me to his home. And he started to get out these scrapbooks and he's showing me these stories and clippings and photos from the nuclear weapons program. And I'm watching and taking notes and stuff. And suddenly he closes the book and he goes, you're not here to talk about this nuclear weapons. Are you? I said, no, not really. And his wife walks in and she says, oh, you're not going to tell him that stuff. Are you? And then he started telling me. And then over the course of two years, I would meet with him, have a cup of coffee somewhere. I couldn't take notes. I couldn't record anything. But he told me the story. Now this guy actually is someone that you've had reference to on your show. Remember, any Jacobson or book about Area 51? Yeah. Well, it's the same guy. But the story that he told me was different than what he told her. He said that they eventually told me that they had a live alien out there. That I could not go public with this until after he died, that they that they had craft, that it was in a special spot. Originally was it Indian Springs, which is now a creature Air Force Base. And then it was moved Area 51 when 51 became active. And then it was a very small group that tried to analyze this stuff. They didn't know where it was from. They didn't know how we obtained it. He said this thing was alive. And that they eventually were able to communicate with us and told me that he was going to make a videotape and he was going to make it available so that after he died, I could have it. Well, suddenly two or three years later, he totally changes his story. What had happened was there was a congressional investigator. His name was Richard Domato and he worked for Senator Robert Byrd. And he oversaw black budget projects. And he got onto this UFO story from Whitley Streeber. And so he was assigned find out what the deal is. So he went around the country, talked to different researchers and came to me and wanted to know about Area 51 and Lazar. So I told him a story. And I told him about this guy. And he got permission for this guy to violate his security oaths and talk to him about it. And they had multiple conversations and they went to the founders of E.G. and G. the company. And and it became a dead end. But after that congressional inquiry, this guy completely changed his tune. So he made up this story, which is the one that you heard from Andy Jacobson that what crashed in Roswell was a Russian technology, Nazi technology flown by the Russians containing little concentration victims who'd been experimented on by Dr. Mengele, completely ridiculous story. But I think he got scared. He was a real guy in a real position to know and had cheered with his family some of this information. I think the story that he told me was legit. But if they made the tape, which I think he did, I didn't get it. How much time has been wasted talking about bullshit in this subject on centuries? That's part of the problem, isn't it? People just make shit up. And the more fanciful and ridiculous, the better, unfortunately, people pay more to hear that and consume it. I had an operation one time after the Lazar thing. Somebody who was targeting me and he had other people helping him that convinced me that he had worked out there with live aliens. And I'm getting letters from his supposedly written by his neighbors. Hey, you got to check this guy out. Dr. I'll just say X. He was taken away by armed security in the middle of the night. I think he has something to do with aliens. And from out of the blue, then suddenly I am at a planetarium event. And I'm going to speak about UFOs at some event at this community college. And the guy shows up in a men's room. Hey, my name is Dr. X standing there at the urinal. You're not doing a story about me. Are you? So no, who are you? What? This was a concerted effort to get me to believe that he had worked out there and went on for a couple of years. And of course, it was a complete bullshit. When I finally did dig into his background, I was able to document where he had worked and what he'd had been doing through most of his life. And it was just like a fantasy role playing thing, at least I hope it was. So it's really hard to find incredible people. I'm super lucky to have Jordan's and mentor because when I go left and I should be going right, he's like, I've already gone, you know, left a decade ago, idiot, you know, check this out. So but I don't think a lot of people have somebody like George who can tell you what the bullshit is and prove it to you before you go down the wrong path. So you're right, this field of research or whatever. It's filled with curiosity, that's the good thing. Human desire. Everybody, everybody in the world has a UFO story and knows somebody else who does. So it's a common link between us all. But it is filled with charlatans, cooks, freaks and schizophrenia. Sure, you could say that. Mainly it's filled with good, intended people who are curious to. But having people like George over 35 years, you know, not make a major mistake, report the news, break stories open. I'm grateful for that because it makes my job a lot easier. I can filter the bullshit much faster. So I'd say, yes, it sucks. There's a lot of cooks and crazy people in this field. But mainly there's a lot of curious people who are good intended. I'm encouraged by what's happened in the last couple of years. I mean, not only the information coming out of the government because it's a little more solid than what you typically get from UFO people, but also by the new wave of people who are now interested because of your show, because of what's happened since the New York Times story. There's a whole new generation of people who are suddenly waking up and paying attention to it and are reading all the books and trying to figure this stuff out for themselves and also going through the process of separating wheat from chaff. I'm glad to see that. There's a new energy in it. And ultimately I hope that those folks, if not me, will be able to get some answers on this someday. Well, as preposterous as we would like, if we want to sleep well at night, we'd like to pretend that it's impossible. It doesn't make any sense. Just when you look up, you look up, you see infinity. You see hundreds of billions of stars just in this galaxy. And this is one of hundreds of billions of galaxies. Of course, there's something out there. It's really just of course. It's not if it's not do you think it's of course, of course. There's no fucking way there's not. Whatever happened here that created us is likely to have happened in an infinite number of different forms all throughout the cosmos. The real question is can they come here? And the real question is if they have come here, where, where from and how? And how much interest do they have in us? And how long have they been paying attention to us? And how much of the ancient scriptures were really about that? Like, you know, I mean, everybody shed all over Zechariah Citz in interpretations of the Sumerian text. But what if he's right? Like, what if he's right? What if the Anunnaki really were creatures from another planet that came here and manipulated primate DNA to create people? And when you see those those ancient Sumerian, those clay tablets that were created where you see like a large godlike creature with a humanoid monkey creature with a tail sitting on its lap and this tiny thing. And the image of the solar system with the correct amount of planets and the sun and the center and all, you realize this was made 6,000 years ago? Like, what is that? Like as much as people love to mock, you know, his books, what is that? Like, what are what are these things? What is this? I mean, obviously, we lost some technologies because I mean, I'm not an architect, but the stones that are pressed together almost like they're molded all around the world in these like pyramid structures and monsters. You know, it's my understanding that we cannot create that now today with as such perfection. That's incredible if that's true. Is there a technology that we have figured out and then lost? And we're just in a cycle of that? Or was there an invention? Well, this most likely there's been some catastrophes that set humanity back. There's a lot of evidence that points to that. There's a lot of evidence that points to this period. I mean, in Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson have done an amazing job of illuminating that on this podcast. If you go back to the ones into those episodes, there's real physical evidence of asteroid impacts, of meteor meteors hitting earth somewhere in the neighborhood of 12,000 years ago. And that is also when you go to this period of construction. There's things that look like they could be older that are built differently, particularly in Egypt and a lot of other parts of the world. And then you find this layer of trit, what's it called? Trite night, trinonite, what is it? Trinite, trinite, trinite, trinite, this nuclear glass. You find that stuff all over when they do core samples and it's always around 12,000 years. And then the almost instant changing of the ice age, the floods that followed. I mean, all the stuff that's detailed in the Bible, like the floods and NOAA, that coincides, they believe, with these impacts and that these impacts happened and it radically changed the climate, killed enormous amount of people, probably set technology back thousands of years. And then we are the product of this sort of slow reboot. Could there have been survivors that a small group of them that survive and now are more advanced than us? It's a breakaway civilization. Also an interesting question, a lot of people have explored. I don't know. Yeah, who knows. It's one of those, again, time-wasting motherfuckers. We could go down the rabbit hole at the end of time. It's central human kind of questions. Where are we on the food chain? Why are we here? What's the reason for this? And what is our reaction going to be if something visits? I mean, if something does really hover over the... We've Trump wins the re-election and they're like, enough. Some gigantic city-sized UFO hovers over the White House and we realize like, oh, okay. I know. People say we're ready. We want to know. We're ready. We can handle it. Look at what the other handling COVID. You know, freaked out people are over this. We're not ready for anything. Maybe if I saw that and what you're describing, I would love to see it. I'm on the ship. You know, if I ever saw something like that, like Val Kilmer in that movie with a roller rink, if I ever saw that, I'd probably just be like, cool. Job done. That was fun. That's fun. You would. Oh man. You'd be like, we gotta get a camera crew out there with me. You're like, you're on Netflix. I got something. You'd be driving there with your window rolled down. I just thought to see it, man. I just, I think it would freak me out more than anything. It's like, oh shit. It's probably different seeing it than hearing all these stories from people, which I'm open to. Everybody's contacting. That's fine. But seeing it yourself. Yeah, I don't know how I would react, but maybe I'd just be like, it would be like your own drugs, I think. I think it would be like your own psychedelic drugs. I think seeing it would shift your perceptions so radically. I bet your brain would overload. I bet it would be really hard to wrap your head around just seeing it. Qualified reporters, you know, like, policeman, this is one I keep bringing up this guy. Man, his mind when he saw this impossible thing, and I believe him, he did see what he said. He tries to describe it in terms that make sense to him, but he struggles because it was so odd. The crowd was just so odd. So I don't know. If you ever see one, let me know, I'll let everybody know. Believe me, you would. Yeah, I would. Yeah. Yeah. I ain't seeing shit. I might be in spectra Chris. I'll in my back for a little time. He'll probably see it before us. But maybe well, it would be really interesting. They're like, George, you've been looking for a long time. We'd like to talk to you. I've wondered, you know, what would happen if even less than aliens or whoever they are, if somebody were to say, all right, we're going to show you, we're going to open the hangar doors. You can go in and see the sport model that was our touch. Right. You can't never report on it again. Would you take that offer? Probably. Yeah. I think I would too. I'd shut my mouth. I just wouldn't want to see it. I mean, selfishly, and I'm admitting this because you ain't going to find out if I say no, fuckers. All right. If I say no, I have to tell everybody, well, then they're not going to show me anyway. And if I do show it, and I tell them, then I tell people they're not going to show me anything else. Yeah, it's, um, it's a hard one. Do you have family members that you trust? You know, somebody that you trust that has reported something like that to you? No. No. Nothing I could think of. Not like a good friend. Trying to remember. No one, nothing, nothing where, you know, there's, there's things that people could get wrong. You know, there's experimental aircrafts. Like I remember when the first time I saw a stealth bomber was after September 11th, we were working out in Palmdale doing fear factor, and that's near Edward's Air Force Base. And I saw one of those things fly by. I was like, holy shit. It's the fucking, it's the jetties or something. I mean, it just looked like, looked like stormtroopers. Like it didn't look like something from this world. When you see that, have you seen a stealth flight? It's crazy, man. You look at one of those things like, that's a UFO. Like I felt like we were in some sort of strange movie, a Star Wars movie. It was wild seeing that thing fly across the sky. I was like, wow. But I knew what it was, you know, I think if I really saw an actual UFO, I bet, I bet your brain would play all kinds of tricks on you in terms of perception and trying to interpret it, especially if it was a very quick thing. It was like, shh. You would roll that through your memory. You remember would fuck with you all kinds of different ways. You would have all kinds of weird distorted ideas of what you saw and how you saw what it exactly looked like. It would be so hard to get a super accurate, like, recallable memory of what that thing is. Some of the most interesting UFO cases were high strangeness is mixed in. So it's not only seeing the craft, but then a lot of really weird, peripheral stuff like you're on mushrooms or something. Goblins like in a shooting gallery, the Hopkinsville case or, you know, other kinds of strange creatures in phenomena, maybe it comes with a territory. Here's what I noticed. Someone will call me and they say, I don't want to be known. I just want to tell somebody, you're seem accessible. Let me tell you my story. Don't report on it. Okay, cool. Got it. They'll tell me they saw a UFO, like a disk or something big, not like a ball of light, something big. And I'll be like, oh, quick cool. Is that it? Is that where your story ends? And almost every time there's something much more personal, much more strange that occurred almost every time. So you have to imagine people are okay with reporting UFOs to you or whatever. They can say, I saw what I think you have to, but a lot of people aren't telling the full story until you really dig and find out because it makes them uncomfortable. Time distortions, creatures, beings. So I don't know, man, if any of that's true, you know, if these experiences go beyond the hardware of the saucers, this sort of thing, then it gets more complicated. And on that note, gentlemen, we pass a three hour mark, believe it or not. Yeah. Thanks for having me, Joe. My pleasure. Thank you for everything you've done over all the years. You've made a gigantic impact on me and my perceptions of this whole phenomenon. And I think in the UFO community at large and thank you also, Jeremy, for your documentaries have brought me around. Thanks, Joe. That's awesome, man. Thank you. All right. Well, thank you everybody. Bye.