It's so nice to see you, Dick. It's nice to see you, Dick. How have you been? Pleasure. This young man is having a baby first. I'm very happy for him. His lovely wife. And he are expecting any day now. Any day now. She just went to the doctor today and they found out she's one centimeter dilated. Whatever that means. That means it's closer. And it was yesterday. So how you been? Well, I can answer any questions about real estate or anything else also. Without the insults to Danny and the verbiage of ridiculousness. People think they're going to miss Ben or he can ask me anything about any subject. And if I know something, I'll tell you. If I don't, I don't be asked and say, Oh, I know about that. I'm a breath of fresh air to not have him sitting here. Fucking breathing down my neck. Don't you agree? Well, I don't do this. So yeah, I would have left a long time ago. So what the fuck have you been up to? You've been, you live a crazy life. It's got to like... I saw you on the beach on the 4th of July. And you're basically like wrangling cattle with all those kids. You're like running around with jack-in-all his friends, and they were lighting off fireworks. And you were just in the middle of like a tornado. Is that every day? I mean, it's kind of like living the Truman show. Oh, a fixture mic. Get your mic a little bit closer. So like see how like, it's about like two inches from my mouth. There you go. You had that short fat man here. So yeah. Yeah. This guy was big. No, actually the last one this Jimmy Hart was sitting there a couple days ago. Sorry interrupted. No, it's simple. You have a kid streaming all the time, all night. And I have a, you should have it here on air light. So it's on air. Should get one of those. A blue on air light. Did you get that for him? Yeah. So that people wouldn't just walk in this room. A little bit closer with the mic. Sorry. More. You can just hot. You can just frickin' force it up. Yeah, I don't. There you go. Didn't hear me now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We got to get that, that good ASMR. Oh my God. So Turner's in there streaming and I hear him. He plays horns. He's got like ox horns and all these weird things and yelling. But you, you know, unless you're watching on Twitch, it's a bizarre things. I'm in there working and I'm hearing this screaming and I don't know what he's talking about. I'm gonna, and then Jack is shooting videos and editing. All the time. But we live on the beach. So we have all, it always have a lot of activities there. Yeah. And it's actually quite an it used to be when they were smaller in their teams. We'd have 30, 40 kids a night walking around driving me nuts. So this has been like the vacation time. So what is it? Did they kick you out of the house? Where do you, where do you stay? Four bedrooms and we have a, we have a bedroom outside. So they get you outside. Are you living in the shed? No, but I have. Turner's bought a new house. So you'll be ditty. Yeah. Where at? I can't say. Well, it gave me like a general idea. Don't give me the address. Come on. He's on the, the main land side of the intercoastal. Okay. You got to place the park with the new jets keys? Yeah. I mean, it's a beautiful house. And he got a great buy on it guys. He knocked them down quite a bit of money to make the difference. I love my clothes. They want my clothes. Wow. So he bought a new house. Yeah. Did you help him? Did you help him negotiate that deal? Yeah. Or did he do that? Yeah. He doesn't do nothing. He doesn't. He does not have time. I mean, we got New York Times wants to do an interview. The guy's like, I can't, I can't get him. Right. He gets up, eats, might go and get something. He comes back, does some stuff. He's back online. Isn't leave the house. Rarely. Rarely. I mean, to eat. Right. I mean, he's a people that tell me, well, I wish I could do this and I wish I could do that. Here's the point. If you're going to do something, then do it all the time. Right. He does it seven days a week. He did it for probably two years and he was making $3 a minute or $2 an hour. And he never complained. Right. You know, I hear people, I hate my job. Well, no. You hate what you picked. You picked it. Nobody, nobody in America is made to take a job. You choose it, whether it's McDonald's or Burger King or Publix or whatever. But to go back to real estate to all those people watching, Turner is in real estate. Right. Well, he's a big real estate. He bought a giant warehouse in a nice house. But I met a guy about 15 years ago was working at the Kentucky Fried Chicken and I would come through and he'd always talk to me. And then one day he said, I'm retiring. He said, how can you retire? He said, I've worked three minimum wage jobs for the last 20 years. And he owned eight duplexes. He bought a mall from, he never went to management. He was a minimum wage, but he took his money and built an empire. Really? And it was able to retire. So don't tell me, I can't do it. It's a matter of giving up your playing and your free time to work. This guy had given up all his free time so he could work and three minimum wage jobs and he was able to buy eight duplexes. So it's possible for anyone. How long did he have to work at KFC to afford eight duplexes? I worked there 25, 30 years. But he worked there. He worked like Taco Bell and Burger King. It had three different low wage jobs. And in those days, it was probably $4.55 an hour. Now, I went somewhere yesterday and it was $19 an hour. Well, you can make money if you work. Now, do you think that the whole time he worked that he planned to, this is what his plan was the whole time to buy real estate and retire? Are you saying that? That's what I would say that somewhere along the line, he made the decision to buy his first duplex and then he just added to it. Right, right, right. But I mean, that is one of the most incredible stories I've ever heard of a low income person. So it is possible. Now, if you got three kids, it's me art. Yeah. Right. I had four. So maybe you can give some good parenting advice to people out there who are having kids. Well, you raised a couple of phenoms. So none of them went to school. Ever. Four kids, no school. Why? What four? That's what everyone does. That's just what you're supposed to do, right? Well, your kids grow up and they go to school. Well, that's if you want them to be the cookie cutter kids. And in today's world, I don't want, I wouldn't want kids in school because they're getting, probably through the third or fourth grade to get educated. And then after that, it's all about who you know, what you know, what you wear, what drugs are available. I mean, I talk to kids all the time. There's drug dealers in every school. They know who they are. And I'm like, and then you go by the schools and there's fences and guards. This girl said to me something yesterday. She was, she, the housekeeper that I have once a week. Don't think I'm rich guys. She cost me $50 for two hours. And her daughter was there and she, and she was talking about school and said, have you ever heard of kids going in and shooting up restaurants or grocery stores? I said, why do kids go and shoot at schools? Because they hate school. Hello. Right. So that's where the problem is. And the system says, well, the way we're going to deal with it, we're going to put more people in there with guns. Like, that's probably not a good idea. Right. Maybe they need to look at the way they deal with children and education as the problem. See, here's what I thought all along. So is this the main motivation for you not putting your kids through traditional public schools? Is that the main reason that you didn't do that? The main reason was I wanted to raise the best fortnight player in the world. Of course. Yes, we all know that. And it worked like a fucking charm. And he, you know, he was not allowed to play video games. They didn't have computers. They didn't have phones. Yeah. I would say go outside and go play on the beach. No, I would keep an eye on them when they were younger. But it was because I worked out of the house. I was able to do that. That everyone can do it. I think that the main motivation was is when I went to school after the sixth grade, I never learned the thing. The IRA was testing at high school level. And what they do is they dumb it down. The dumbest kid in the room is taught. And you got to sit there and listen to it over and over and over. Right. And I think the other problem is schools is that it's all age, grades. So kids that are like when you get into high school? Well, he's a freshman. I'm a junior. Yeah. I'm a senior in Eurolaw's. And what it does is it gets this system ingrained in kids that younger is worse. If you're younger, you're not as good. No. And they and fraternization with the younger people. Well, that's not just in school though. But just working order and a lot of it. But just working order and a lot of it. My kids have, you know, they can go out with somebody that's 25 or 18. And they don't look at it the same way that other people do. Don't you worry about social skills? And do you think about like maybe like that's the one thing you think of when kids are homeschooled. Like they're not going to have proper social skills. They're not going to be able to interact with kids. And I have to deal with bullies. And I'm going to be able to be nervous to talk to a girl in the hallway. There's like all those different little things that people get when they're in a public school. You ever think about that? And I got those that. My friends all said that. Yeah, right. And the other one was they'll never have a job and make money. Well, Turner's got 25 million people on social media. Jack's got 12 million. So I would assume their social skills are pretty good now. But they went, you know, we went to parks every day. We went to live down the beach. So it was a public beach. Right. It dealt with thousands of people. They weren't we weren't Amish hiding in the hills. You know what I mean? I mean, that's really the difference is if you actually are around people. I mean, they got people where when I sent them to tumbling when they were younger. Right. Like three, four and five. It's like gymnastics. Yeah. And my friends go, that's not for boys. And I go, okay, Turner's jumping off 80 and 90 foot bridges now doing flips on YouTube. So, you know, all the building blocks came to fruition. Jack and Turner would not be able to work for the two biggest companies in the world. And Amazon, because neither has a high school education. But they make a lot of money from both. Right. Right. And my daughter and my daughter's running a marketing for a company called Skinny Mixers. And their growth is so phenomenal. I told the boys, I think she might outdo you guys. So the proof's in the pudding. What do you need school for? Yeah. You go through it. Well, you're one taste, though. I mean, how many Zuckerberg quit college? Bill Gates quit college. Steven Jobs went to one semester. That case closed? In college, though. They all went to high school and middle school. Yeah, but I guarantee you those guys after about six or seven grade, they didn't even hear what the teacher was talking about. Is it too smart? Right. See? It's so online and educate yourself. There are people all in the world now doing that. They can go on this. What's that? Khan Academy. You're having trouble at school or you want to learn anything. You want to learn math. You want to learn history. Go to Khan Academy. Yeah, you can learn anything on YouTube. Yeah. But Khan Academy takes you from the start. Because I had one kid, the youngest, who was a little behind. Yeah. So we started over. We started at first level and I got him up to high school level on about six weeks. Okay. On Khan Academy. And then when I got into algebra, I did not take it in high school. So I didn't know it. But history is all pretty simple. It's reading and learning. Right. Yeah. I remember how the school system is set up. Here's how it's set up. Now it's like a prison to me. They got locked areas. You can't leave. They lock the doors in your room. And then someone comes in and goes through the roll call, I assume. And then most of the kids, this is what I hear from kids. Yeah. The kids are all on their phone. In class. So what does it mean to go to school? Right. Right. No, yeah. It's a baby sitter. Especially college. Especially college. Especially college. How expensive it is. And that's that's so people can go into debt. They can go into debt. And oh money. Oh my God. To work. It doesn't make any sense. It doesn't see. Thirty years ago, you were told to go to college because you needed it. Now because the economies and opportunities are there, you don't need it. That's why the four guys, three guys I mentioned they didn't finish school because there there was no sense in it. Right. If you're going to start your own company, then you definitely don't need education. Yeah. I know at 90% of the people I know who went to college and got a degree are either A. not working in that field right now or B. is still trying to find a job. And across the board, I mean you can pretty much say by and large people who are like Ben or like you know Ben Dean. You're just right. No, he's been dropped out of middle school. I know. People who like that they always have stories of how they dropped out of school. They didn't finish school. They just they found their own path. There was a song done in the sixties and they talked about how it was just cookie cutter. What they and this is the biggest problem in America. They don't allow you to think they want to tell you how to think. Wade the way you should think and they don't allow thinking anymore. So if you're going to go out and run a business on your own and start something, it's the worst place to be because they're stifling. How so? They're telling you how to think. In business you have to you have to you have to create something if you're told just to do it this way and you got to do it that way. You can't think outside the box. You can't create stifling innovation. And you know the way people are talking is we want free college and free medical care and all this stuff and I'm like well why are you complaining about Russia? You just bring the Russian President over and or Chinese President. That's what they do in those countries. You do what they say and there's no innovation. There's no business except the state and I don't see that as an advantage. Right. We wouldn't have rap music then. They don't have rap music in China. Do they don't? No. Absolutely. How do you know? Have you been there? I'm 100% because I watch streaming. Do yah and who yah? Are the twitches of China. You can put it right under. Do yah and who yah? Do you? Do you YA? Okay. I watch uyah. H u yah is on the New York Stock Exchange. And these are where are these two kids? A stream? No. They're companies. Ten cent gave each of them 450 million. Both companies and said which are you which of you are going to become the biggest streaming company? That's what they do in China. They gave they made the competitors the same company gave both money to both competitors. And then even those companies what? Who yah? H u yah. The company that gave both of them money. Ten cent. Ten cent. Ten cent is one of the biggest companies in the world. Okay. They own 40% of epic. Really? Jones Fortnite. What the fuck? But what they're doing over there, I'll ask you a question. On Twitch, what do you think the percentage of Twitch streamers audience doesn't know? Twitch is on his own by Amazon. Right. Where people play games and in the corner there's a little TV screen with a streamer which is the guy playing the game and then people like donate money or subscribe, subscribe for $4 a month. And your son Tifu is the most viewed streamer on Twitch, right? Correct. At the current time being. I mean he could have been bigger if he'd have played Apex Legends in January. He chose not to. Maybe everybody went to that and shroud who never competes shroud as a streamer which brings me back to my point, Nanny. What percentage do you think on Twitch are gamers that stream? 99%. About in 90. 90s, right? I don't know if anybody who's trying to. I know Bubba the Love Sponges on Twitch. That's only, that's his only audience. What percentage do you think in China or in gaming? What percentage of what of the billion people, of all the people? Right. They're not a billion streamer. I have no idea. What percentage is the US stream like 99% are gamers? Oh, okay. What percentage? Okay. I see what you're saying. Chinese streamers are gaming. Yeah. 110%. What does everyone else do? 90% does blow your mind. This is why we're going to be... I see where this is going. We're building a streaming center for this. 90% of China streaming on who Yenduya are women. And they're not gaming. They're just talking, entertaining. They're entertainers. And what I saw is a huge opening because everyone in the US wants to do gaming. But here's the point. They've got... So they want to just like lonely dudes to have conversations with chicks. I, you know, you can put it in that. Oh, yeah. I don't really care. Right. Anybody. We're going to build a streaming center with women streamers. And then we're going to put Turner gaming in China on who Yenduya. You're saying, no, not send me. You're going to sit right here. We're going to have him get... There's another Chinese gamer that's on like optic. An optic got a deal with who Yenduya last week. And I wake up. Turner and him can play. And this guy speaks Mandarin so he can talk to Turner. Interpreting. So Turner will be the first and this guy. So Turner's streaming from the US into China. See, the bigger picture. The bigger picture is they've got hundreds of millions. Maybe I think they're at 800 million people watching who Yenduya. What do you got with Twitch? Probably 15, 20 million. So the audience is dwarfs. And when you scale it out, I'd rather have 200 million changes. And Turner will be one of the first guys that stream over there. Then we're going to bring Chinese women here and teach them streaming here. And then they'll stream back into China from here. Wow. That seems like quite the plan. That's a great plan. It sounds like a great one. Wow, you make hundreds of millions. Is what people think is that China is backwards. They're behind us. But the truth is they're ahead of us. For the simple reason is Apple sends the phones over there. They know how a phone works before the public here gets it. Their engineers are a reverse engineer. That's why they're eating Apple's lunch over there. We send the phone technology. They're building the next ex phone for Apple. Well, there guys, they steal everything and build it in their phones already. So they're further advanced in this country because we're giving them the technology or they're stealing it and they're building out. And because the system is socialist and not capitalist, they can take all of it and train it on one segment like computers or technology or missiles. But they're way far advanced than people think. They think they're a backward country and they're walking around with a rickshaw. They're sadly mistaken. Interesting. So you're going to take Chinese girls and put them. Women were not taking anybody under 18 minutes. Well, when I say girls, I mean, right? You know what I mean? Well, I just want to make sure of clarification. Chinese women and you want to stream them all from one location and this is where is this going to happen in the warehouse? In the studio. In the studio. OK. And it'll be a separate portion. It'll be a separate company run by a woman. All the women will work with women. There will be no men. I don't want to get into all that crap. Right. I don't want to. Oh, he said this. That's not going to happen. This would be a straight up straight business string, run it like a business. Women runs it. Nobody will say we're taking advantage. Yeah, we were funding it. OK. But we're going to empower and make millionaires of women. OK. I bet you we'll have in five years, we'll have 100 women over worth over $10 million. And so everybody in the gaming will be fighting over. But wait, pee nuts. Wait, who is going to watch that? So who are these women? What are they going to do on this live stream? Well, a lot of them like Pokemon. She does play video games. She put, well, they can play video games. It doesn't matter. They can talk. A lot of them Pokemon, who's the bit-wide users, she's got over $3 million on Twitch. And she knows how to do it. There's a lot of others. But most of it is chat that they do. You ever see that just chat? It's called, and they'll just talk. It's communication. But why wouldn't they just do that? I'm just going to be the devil's advocate. Why wouldn't these girls just do it on their own? Why would they need to go to your studio to do it? Well, they're not going to learn how to be on Instagram, how to integrate the content into Facebook, how to make YouTube videos, how to be on podcasts what we have. And we have the big enchilada. Turner's got an audience every night of $3,000, $5,000. So when he stops, one of them goes on and takes his audience, and then we piggyback like three or four people. So kids get new people they'd never seen. So we're going to create huge audiences. And then when the girls get bigger, we're going to take the other girls in piggyback. We're going to teach them business, how to make money, how to monetize and not take 80% and ridiculous contracts. A lot of them will actually employ them, give them insurance, we'll do it like a business, not like a clown show. I don't know if Turner's going to agree to this. You might be on your own dick. That's all right. No, I don't know. All right. You know, that's, I don't know if it is a sign. It's a big building. I think he'd be in today. It's a big building. Yeah, it's a big building. I've talked to him about it. You know, it's, we have companies. He doesn't want to do anything but play it. But yeah, that's one of any extreme. That's fine. We're, you know, it's a big building. Yeah. We have a big building. I'm going to hit our part. I'm going to rent it from him. He's going to make money. He may never even know what's going on. Right. See, what does he do? So what do you guys, what's the status on that building? What are you doing with it? What's like the current state? Are you guys renovating it right now? Are you just, you know, painted and cleaned it up? I saw you all the spongebob things that Jack built and outside of them. Well, we're just, it's, it's a slow process. Yeah. We got to get it up to code and all that stuff. And there's a couple of companies who want to put money in the studio, which is separate from Turner. See, if they put it in the studio, it goes in a corporation and that operates. He'll have a piece of it. I'm sure. You'll cut him into, you'll cut him into the business. I don't even want it. I'll give it to him. Yeah. If I run it for two years, I'll say here. We go back to enjoying my life. I mean, I have, it looks like it looks like you are enjoying your life. Yeah. Pretty well, right now. But see, I'm trying to change streaming in America. That's a big task. But it's so simple because it's, if 90% of streaming in China is women streaming, it obviously works. Right. It works. Nobody does it here because it all, it was, it's all around gaming and making that 450 a month. But somebody can get 450 a month. Is it here? Yeah. Because it all, it was, it's all around gaming and making that 450 a month. But somebody can get 450 a month from, you know, because she's attractive and they may not be attractive. I don't care. Yeah. I don't care what race. I don't care what background. I don't care about any of that. I want to see, I want to empower people to make money. Yeah. That's what I'm good at, you know, on social media. And I know all of them. I know all the platforms. I know you learn because a Turner and Jack, right? I don't know if I learned I didn't have anything choice. You didn't have any choice because they were doing it. Because I, you know, and I know all the people on YouTube. I know the people on Instagram. I know Snapchat. Yeah. I know I do. I do Snapchat. I don't know. What the hell are you doing on Snapchat? People are what a what? Oh my goodness. What do you want to be doing on Snapchat? I'm G rated. Yeah. Yeah. I'm G rated. What is up? So you find, I saw on your Instagram, you have like random people you run into and then you like shout them out and say they're going to be like, well, because I thought, here's the point. Instagram models, right? Yeah. Because I, it's a gag. You're just goo. No, I do. Yeah. But I thought I could do it once or twice a week. And it would be interesting if someone found it to because I don't do anything else with them. I do it once. Right. And I go, I'll walk up and I'll say, you're the next Instagram model. They start laughing and I'll just click the camera on and film them. Yeah. And then post it because it's, it's genuine. See, very little do I do with the boys when the camera's on where you're not, not in character, but you know the camera's on. Yeah. So I like to catch people the camera and catch them in their unassuming mode and maybe one or two of them does well. I love that. You know, yeah. Because everyone has that, I want to be famous and it's like some kid came up to the on the beach and said, you're famous. And I go, it's not worth a warm bucket of spit because I don't get a discount at the restaurant. Nobody pay, I make nothing from it. I make zero. Okay. Oh, you got 107,000 on Instagram. Well, yeah, but you have 107,000 followers on Instagram. I think it's 106. They didn't like my party. Why would happen at the party? I don't know. I lost followers. I lost, uh, desperate. You know, all I'll turn her has to do is spit my way and they come. So what does that mean? Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, what didn't they like about you? I don't know. I don't care. It means nothing. It's like, it's like losing my hair. I don't have hair. Who cares? Yeah. It's silly. My it's it doesn't matter. I'm not making a living from it. If if I was making a living that I'd be concerned, it's all your sons making a living from it. Well, yeah, I'm glad they are. You know, I get a lot of grief because I used to be Jug Squad, dad. Do you know what? What? Instagram? And you change it to Tifu's dad. Why? Why? It's not fair to Jack. Why? He never he put me in his video and I said, you don't even tag me. You know what? It's I was Jack and you changed your name from T from Jug Squad, dad to Tifu's dad. I'd be pissed. Why? He doesn't he? He doesn't call me out. I don't know. You just follow you just change it because he's got more followers. No, that wasn't that was your favorite. Your favorite. You're favoriteing the other kid. No, Jack had that for years. Jack has never. Yeah, I said to him, you made this video of Fourth of July and you tag everyone with me. You know what he says to me? Well, you have more followers than any of them put together. And I said, that's because I'm more interesting. They like me and your guys have no appeal. That's my fault. I didn't do that. So that's why you changed it. No, I changed it. Here's why I changed it. Is Turner got banned and had people to know where he was. He wasn't on YouTube. He wasn't on and so I didn't get banned again. I remember that. Yeah, like Twitch has super strict. Yeah, it's anyway, wait for some more reasons. So no one knew he was alive or dead. So I put Tifu's dad and media was quoting me. And so I just left it on. I tried three times to give it to the, I, to two of my kids. I said, take my, I don't even want it. Take the 100 and whatever. Take all these idiots and get them off my, and they wouldn't take them. So I'm stuck with it. You're stuck with Tifu's dad. No, I'll change it. It's just not what do you change it to? I don't know. It'll make something up. I was my concho. Yeah. I was Dick Savage and I was Duke squad dad. I don't stay with the thing. You're just never evolving because they personally, they change when we do different things Yeah. On that, you know, then people like if I go out, people, you'll, hey Mike, I, or Dick or Richard, they don't, you know, I get called a lot of things. Let's go to driving around and Tifu's car, right? No, you won't be driving. You won't let you drive it? No, Pearson, I drove up late on down to Jack was out there in the ocean. So we went up to, you know, bring him some towels and Pierce put the seat all the way up and left the towels in there. So he thought I had a party in this car. You know, that's the new thing now. They put it on autopilot and fool around. Right. And of course, I told him. I said, be fooling around. Who would never happen in a thousand years? So you don't have to worry about that. I'm like a monk. Yeah, you are. Yeah. Monkey in the round. So going, let's go back. I want to, I find it interesting what you were saying about the KFC guy who invested all that money and in the duplexes, the eight duplexes. Is that sort of the same thing that Turner did? Did he know or did you know when he was spending all this time in his room playing video games for hours on end every day, where you concerned at all that he like, like this kid needs to figure out what he's going to do with his life and figure out the career? No. Or did you guys know that? Yeah, he's going to eventually turn this into a career? No. He just was working 10, 12 hours from six to six. Six and a morning. Well, it's work. If you put me in front of a computer terminal, I don't care what if I'm playing online poker or 12 hours, buddy, that's work. Right. I understand. It's I understand now. It's definitely the time back then. It may, you may not have thought it was what I'm trying to say is in the beginning, you may not have perceived it that way. You may have thought, oh, this kid's just obsessed with video games. That's what anyone would have done. I don't even think about that. It's all these different things. There's no different than if Turner and Jack could have been easily pro-surfers easily. They'd be the top two pros in the world or in the top five. Guaranteed. But that's not the path they took. And Jack, you know, and the other thing that torques me lately is some group said they made Turner's career. Well, that's the biggest crock I've ever heard in my life. Turner made Turner's career. He's been on YouTube for 12 years, which predates the guys that think they know YouTube and all this who are trying to claim they helped him. Jack helped him. They were on YouTube. It was famous all over the world for at least six or seven years. And the gaming was just a different, he gravitated to it. He wanted to game. So he I didn't need his money. Did you know he was making money in the beginning though? Well, he showed me though. He came to me at a contract with his like 18. Okay, they paid peanuts. I'd read it over. I'd say sure. I didn't matter. I find it interesting. There's a couple videos on YouTube talking about how they they offered. And I'm probably completely saying this the wrong way. But they said that they offered a transfer or something they were going to transfer him. Transfer his like he's a like he's an NFL player or an NBA player. Like what the kind of do that is that even a real thing that's just oh, we're going to transfer you to this other company. That's grasping. What is that? I mean, that's like saying if they're like that I mean, well, the NBA and NFL, there's players unions, right? Right. So right. There's it's all regulated. This is not regulated. These are just private businesses. Yeah. And this is not athletics. There's you know that NCAA about a month to go, right, said it absolutely is not sports. 100%. We are not all the colleges started doing these sports. The word E is electronic. Yes. The word sports is sports. And then CAA said we will not make it a sport no matter what you say. No matter what you say. So it's already pretty much people know it's ridiculous. Sitting in a chair pressing your fingers is not a sport playing with a little and to try and portray that is it's ludicrous. If it's not a sport, what is it? It's entertainment. It's okay. Is card playing world poker tours that a sport? That's a good question. It's not it's entertainment. But I can see how it could be defined loosely as a sport. I think I mean, you could what else would you call game? It's a game. Sports are game but they're trying to say baseball and football and playing a game on a computer is not it's the word e-sports makes sense. But to make it broader and say it's a sport is it's here's why they trying to do that. The big old companies NBA NFL Major League Baseball hockey. Those owners want to own sports teams. So they are now buying e-sports teams and folding them in and saying we're in this and it's e-sports because they're losing all the audiences. I talked to you know young people all the time that come over looking for Turner and Jack and I said do you play sports? No. What do you do? A game. I'm on the computer. So what does that tell you? Down the line baseball football basketball are going to be history because when all these kids grow up they're not going to watch it. They don't play it. See that's the big problem. They don't participate in the school. So they're not going to play the if you don't play baseball you're going to watch baseball. You don't play football you're not going to watch it. And it's going away and all owners know it. So they're trying to buy e-sports teams so they can make the model the same as football and put their money in that. And that's why there's all this money rushing into the thing. Okay. So that's how that's how one of the big ways that these e-sports companies like phase are raising money from guys like that. Well as well as advertisers. But see what Turner did and he was not the guy that I mean it just evolved. Up to this point the gamers were Dr. Disrespecto, Dr. Lupo, Tim the Tatman. These guys have been doing it for seven, eight, nine years on Twitch and they had like a million and a half, two million. That's all they had. Then Fortnite came in and Ninja was brilliant. He said, yeah, here's what he came up with when when you get Amazon Prime. You get you get one free Twitch subscription. So if I want to watch Ninja, I go to mommy and daddy and he was telling kids go to mom and dad and say can I have the free subscription then they can chat with him directly. They're allowed to write on there. Right. So he figured this out and got this huge following and he was making a million a month last year, you know a year ago who was Ninja? Ninja because he figured it out quicker than anyone else. And the real gamers were not real happy with this guy because he's blue hair, he's mainstream. And he had brilliant marketing. They blew him up. Yeah. And Turner, as you know, because you came in early on, you were in and wanted to do that. And I knew that he was going to blow up because I got a video that I watched YouTube all the time. And I saw it was like 70 or 80,000. Turner is the best Fortnite player in the world. So I watched the video and I understood enough to know this guy was, I mean, it's subjective to say you're the best out at 250 million is a little. I don't turn over the first to say there's probably many people better. That's absurd. But when that guy said it, that's when he blew up. That's when he just and then people started watching it. That was before he signed. Who was it to said that? I don't know the videos on there. Okay. Like six million or eight million to blew up and blew him up. And that's when the guys thought, oh, we'll just sign him to a contract to make a lot of money off him. Yeah. I mean, the kid was living in my house since he was born. Yep. He went out to Hollywood maybe last year, 80, 90 days, 80, 90 days. And the guys that were there, drunk all the time, go, well, we made this guy who he is. I'm like, and they came to my house and I said, he didn't do anything for him. You think you did and people can listen to your lies. But the truth is the kid did it on his own from his incredible skills. He won tournaments. It's like saying Michael Jordan started with the Chicago Bulls. A team sucked. Okay. He sucked for years. Did the Bulls come out when he won the first we made him right if he hadn't been here. Do you think if Michael Jordan had gone to the Lakers or the Knicks, they would have been the winners. Right. Turner could have gone to Joe's bar and grill and played in Poughkeepsie, New York, and he's still been the best. See, so to take somebody's credit. Have you heard me say, I made Turner if it wasn't for me? I, you know, that's crap. Yeah. That's that's such a bull. You do not take credit for anyone. Now, if you're married to them, then I think it's a different story. I think the partner has the right to say I help them be successful. See, but anything where you say I made them, the only guys that make anyone were the old mafia when they made a lieutenant, the made man. Yeah. That wasn't a good thing because you didn't have a long career after that. Yeah. How much money is this kid making right now? I don't know. Can you guess? Yeah. I don't care. No clue. I don't care. He doesn't care. There's nothing to do with life. That's to do with money has nothing to do with life. Not in this instance, when he was making $200 a week doing 80 hours, I say to him, kiddingly, and Jack Oiesberg's, you know, I'd say, you know, you could make $7 an hour washing dishes, and you'd be making three times about the money. And I would say it kiddingly to him. Oh, and tell him, you need to quit that gaming crap and go get a job. I never said that. Never. I told Jack when he was 18, I said, I got a free paid college plan. Do you going to go to school? He goes, no. Well, that's the building you're going to have to go down and get a job in public. And he said, is there another way? And I said, yeah, the fame game, the fame game, yeah, the fame game. You can make it on YouTube, but you can't make it making skimboarding videos. You have to become an entertainer. You have to. And that's when he went out. He got a couple of YouTubers, and he blew up with that, the blender man on the beach. That was his first break. And that drinking prank too, right? Well, that was, that was with Turner. That's the big, that's why when people say, we made this guy a big star. Turner's got 18 million on YouTube from eight years ago. So don't tell me you did something. He knew how he could stop gaming today. We were laughing about this. He said to me, I can make a vlog every day and never game and to have, he can have more than Mr. Beast. Yeah. If he wanted to do that, he can do anything he wants. He'd be the best hamburger flipper if he was flipping hamburgers, and he'd just be the same person he'd be just as happy. Same with Jack. Jack goes out and digs in the dirt and finds find shark speed. And shark speed for fun. He's not doing it for money. He's cataloging and showing, because what they try and do is they do things and share it with their audience to motivate and get kids to go, wow, I'm just sitting here playing games. I can jump off a bridge. I can do whatever. I mean, we don't tell you to jump off a bridge. You'll probably break your neck. It's probably a bad idea. Yeah. 30 feet is probably the max I did. Is it true that he made people are claiming out there that he made over like 15 million bucks last year? It's absurd. If he's making he did not even close. He didn't make the difference. I don't even think he made a mill. What? Come on. Not after taxes. He did. I can't get into it, but it's I mean, they made well. Let's put a baby 70 million dollars. Let's put it into perspective for the people that are listening. Yeah. How successful. How much money someone like Turner can make? Now this year's different, but I'm not going to talk about that. He's doing much better. Can we put it in a ballpark? No, I'm not going to. I don't speculate on people's income. Whether it's yours, mine, or a guy I meet. I don't know what it is. So I'm not going to talk about why would I? I know. I know he's done. I know he's done better, but he's in the litigation. So he can't sign contracts. You know, we had passed on a lot of big contracts because of because the control that, but I'm not worried because of what's going on with that. I'll put it this way. He's in he's in he's fine, but he's not just so you know. And he's the craziest thing is he's still living in your house. That's that's I mean, well, that was our deal. What he said to me six, seven months ago is and and I don't tell him what to do. Right. We talk. I have an opinion. He does exactly because I trust him from the time he was probably 16. He makes good decision. But he said to me, I want to go buy that contract. He didn't. I never thought when he came back with it. I said it was worse. But that, you know, you have to live and learn. Of course, we'll say, well, he shouldn't assign it. Okay. I don't I'll take any 20 year old kid. Okay. I'll put him in my Lamborghini if I have one. I'm a young guy. I'll take him out. I'll show him a good time. I'll throw him some girls. And I'll get him drunk when he doesn't drink. And then tell him, sign right here. You don't I'll tear it up. It doesn't mean the thing. And the kid will sign it. So for people to say, I would decide that everybody signs right there. They're naive. Right. Okay. I've been in many situations where people as an adult try and get me to sign contracts. And I go, not doing it. I've gotten up and walked out of when I'm sitting there with 30 people. You've got to sign this. We're going to I go, I'm out. What are you into arguing? And I just leave. It's hard when you're pressured and you're doing a business deal because people that aren't in business, don't know. They don't know. And when you're told, ah, doesn't mean it will throw it away. You think you trust them. Right. And then and then and then all of a sudden, it's all attorneys going, I mean, anyone that doesn't believe me on contracts just watch the social network when they brought the guy in. They were buddies. They were best buddies. Zuckerberg who started Facebook. If you don't know, go watch the social network. He brought in his best friend. They said, Hey, we got some papers for you to sign. And he looked at everybody and he said, you read this and they said, yeah, he signed it. And he diluted his own stock and wrote himself out of the company because Zuckerberg stuck him in the back with a knife. So if you want to get to who stuck who and with a knife, it's the guy that tells you, sign the contract. I won't screw you. That's the guy sticking the knife. It's already in your back. Not after the fact when you go, why am I not making any money? Watch this. Listen to these words. A person I know never got any money at all from their contract. And then you know a person I know never got a dime. No 1099. So who is this person? I just a nice person. I know. Okay. Are you supposed to assume something here? No. I am. Okay. See, when you work for someone, you've worked for people that I have. You get a 1099. Right. Oh, yeah. When you're when you're a contractor, when you're an independent contractor, and when you don't get a 1099, that means you didn't make any money. Right. Right. Imagine that. Maybe this haven't sent the 1099 yet. Well, they got to send something with it. Well, money. Right. You don't get any money. You don't need a 1090. Yeah, I guess you're right. See, the truth is always different than to BS in life. Everyone wants to BS. I don't want to be as soon as you tell the truth. Yeah. Well, you're doing well. Raise a couple of really successful kids who are doing what they love. Making a shitload of money. All four of them are. I mean, Pierce has just starting to stream. Is it? Pierce is your youngest son. Yeah. How old is he? 19. 19. Okay. And I told him. I said, what do you want to do? And he was gaming. And I said, your un-fortnight, yeah, God, you know, you got to get in the family business. The family. Well, I made Street. I'll play poker. You're streaming right now. I met. I'm in it. Well, I'm going to do podcast. You should. You're really good at talking. I want to bring you in as and we'll do a comment. We'll do, no, we'll do duels. duels. Yeah. Okay. Do dual podcast. You're going to do it on your channel. I'm going to do it on my book. Okay. But we're going to be there that way. Everyone don't see because here's what happens with money. Everybody gets greedy. I want it. You know, and I believe that empowered like Jack's running his own business. He has his own LLC. Turner has like five of them. And and I have my own company. It's just the way it's easier. You don't have any fights over money or arguing. I want my audience. And what I love is people say, you're doing it for the clout. I'm like, what? I don't care about clout. What am I going to do with it? What does it get me? You know, a long time ago, what the kids were doing. Wow. What does clout get you? That's a good question. I don't know. People. Well, no, people are very interested. We define clout real quick. We would be subscribers that you get people's attention based on my son. Like based on your. So if I say teeth is dad, I'm using him. And you know that my only interest is to pro out him. If you look on my Instagram, it's all about him or Jack or my daughter, right? Because I don't. What am I going to do with the clout? Wow. I got a bunch of subscribers that no one cares about. And people basically judge how important you are based on how many followers you have. Yeah, but that's seven year olds, seven year olds. And and everybody at the phase clan because they call it the clout house. Well, yeah, but they lost the city. Did you know that? It's called the the Lout House now? It's just now that well, it's just the L. I mean, Turner left. That was it. Yeah. And now the guy's girlfriend left. The main guy. I mean, I'd look in the mirror and go, I must be really screwing up here when my main guy and my girlfriend split. Right? That's and and I'm hiring 12 year olds having them do videos. That's pretty embarrassing in my opinion, but I don't care. You know, I wish them well. I hope they do very well. Maybe he's just doing it for clout. Maybe it's just a big scheme just to get more clout. I guess I don't know what we're going to do with it. Like a long time ago, somebody asked me, isn't when Jack was big with Doug squad and we had hundreds. I mean, he's bigger now than he was. But there were hundreds of kids coming. But somebody goes, wow, this is that great. Don't you love being involved in all this? And I go, if it doesn't get me laid and it doesn't get me paid, I don't care. But you do love it. You can tell that you love it. I love what they do. Yeah. No, I can tell that you love. I can tell it's very obvious that you that you enjoy. It's like you've almost like found a whole new life by there by everything that they've created. It's like you know, it seems like that for my perspective. Well, because it's just the family unit. Right. No, yeah. Just as exciting. Right. As when Jack was four years old, we went to Myrtle Beach and he was surfing on a boogie board in seven foot waves and people were standing a crowd watching it. You see, it's the dynamic of my family. Right. I love watching them successful. And it's rare to see someone's parent being involved in so much of what they do, even at this stage in their life. Like no matter what they're doing, I mean, obviously 99% of it takes place at your home. So you can't help but not be there. But it seems like you're always there involved and you're always a big part of what they're trying to help whatever I can do. Yeah. But you're a great dad. You look how you you look at, you look at, you know, the Kardashian woman. I mean, she runs off. Whatever I can do. Yeah. Well, you're a great dad. You look how you saw it. You look at the Kardashian woman. I mean, she runs in business. No, but I admire her business acumen. Yeah. I mean, she's got the one girl a billionaire and that girl's got 15 employees. Which one, Kylie? Yeah. Kind of. Kind of. The one doing the makeup. Kylie. Yeah. And then, well, they're all a million. But she's a billionaire. She youngest billionaire in the world. Kylie Jenner. Yeah. And it's mom business acumen. I mean, that's, you know, they listen. Yeah. And you look at Taylor Swift. Her dad has been running her career from day one. Yeah. And I'm just talking about Taylor Swift. Business. Yeah. I'm not interested in aging. I don't want to go out, you know, book them. And I don't care about that. All I look at is the contracts that with the attorney, they send it to the attorney. I'll read it. I might make a notation. And if Turner wants to do a deal, he does it. If he doesn't want to do a deal, he doesn't do it. I don't rail. I'm not in on it. I'm not getting a percentage. So I'm not like an agent. You have to do this. Or I'm not going to be your agent. That's what they do. That's what the problem Taylor Swift had was scooter. Braun is scooter. Braun. I talked to Guy went through Taylor's dad. And he said, you can't get these agents. Because they would scream at her. You have to go here. You have to do this. I'm your agent. And she was like 16, 15. And he was, you know, and he did it all through her career. And that's why she got rid of him. Is the agents become the enemy. Because they're just chasing a commission, right? Yeah, they're chasing a commission. They don't care what you do. You're like a show pony. Take him to every circus in town. Work him to death. And my thing is, Turner, he works 12 hours a day. When are you going to get him to work more? He doesn't need to work more. He already works. Jack, Jack out works almost every human I've ever met in hours put in. He does. Doing what he does the YouTube and, you know, preparing and editing videos. Yeah. I mean, he's always working. Always. Going back to Taylor Swift and agents and stuff. There's a weird, one of the weirdest, creepiest fucking things is the Hollywood parents that want their children to be stars, like actors. And these parents will, I forget, there's like a name for them. I can't remember what it is right now. But their goal in life is to get their kids to be famous somehow. So they mail in their headshots to random addresses, but they'll find casting agencies or talent agencies or whatever. And they take their kids and they just ship their headshots to these random places to these agencies with the address attached. Like there's parents that are just trying to feed off getting their kids success to stage parents. Yeah. Well, here's a weird fucking thing. Well, when I lived there, I lived in Hollywood. My, my, I had a duplex and my neighbor was working for the biggest talent agency in Hollywood. When I had a baby, I said to him, you know, I was thinking I'm going to send my wife and they'll do like commercials, like baby. And he goes, and this is a guy in the business, he had the top talent, top guys, you know, like Tom Cruise. I mean, he had the top guys. And he said over my dead body. And I said, why? And he said, there are all a bunch of perverts and weirdos and scum. I'm not going to let your daughter around them. I said, it's a baby. He said, doesn't matter. No. And I learned from him. He stood in front of me. And I respected the guy. He was the top agent in Hollywood for talent. And he said, it's not a business for children. So when my daughter wanted to do YouTube at 15, I said, no way. Because I learned from him. And that's why when I see people signing kids up 12, 14 years old and dragging them to Hollywood, I'm like, there's nothing good going to happen. Especially if your name is high in your name, you're going to be high all the time. So it's really a bad thing to bring children in that environment. And because, and another thing, I was in a nightclub with a very, very, one of the top actors in Hollywood. And I look over and there's a girl. She's 12 and she's drinking. And I go, what's going on? He goes, it's Drew Barrymore. She's a movie star. Her parents were the biggest stars in Hollywood going back 40 years. Holy shit. And they allowed her to drink because in Hollywood, if you're a kid and you're making money, if you're in Hollywood and you're a kid and you're making a lot of money, you can do whatever the heck you want to this day. You want drugs, they'll get you drugs. As long as you make that system money, they'll protect you. So I learned those lessons a long time ago. And they stayed out of it. You know, we did YouTube here, but I was pretty much around the whole time. And Jack did it. And, you know, it was Jack when he started doing YouTube. It was probably 14, but it was all... I can't believe he didn't let your daughter do it. She could have been just as big as T-Fear right now. She'll probably make more money in them and the company she's with. Why did she need to? What's the rush? Here's the point. There's no rush. There's no rush when you're having a child soon. I am. You should be a kid as long as you can. So you should have fun, no worries about money, go out and play, learn, figure out what you want to do, and do it later. Because if we go back to Drew Barrymore and I can go 100 different examples in the last five years, kid stars don't have a childhood. So they lost their childhood. They then get into drugs and alcohol. They don't know how to handle it. And they screw their entire lives up. That's why you don't want them to rush into it. Yeah, kid stars turn out fucked up for the first part. So I don't see any advantage of being a big star as a child on YouTube. You're going to have a screwed up life. Yeah. Okay. People are sticking kids in with older men so that they can become famous and gaming. I do not know a parent. I don't know a one parent that would let a 12 or 14 year old boy hang around 28, 30 year old men that are drinking. It never would happen. But the kid will be successful. And I'll tell you this, I'll make this clear. If you tell me he's living his dream, that's what a parent does is keeps a kid from becoming an adult. Because why don't we just put kids at Walmart at eight? He wants to work at Walmart. He's eight. That's his dream. Why don't you let him do it? Well, because the government says you got to be 13. And even when you're 13, you can only work 20 hours and you have to go to school. That's why they make the rules. But see Hollywood perverts the rules. Right. They say, okay, you can be on a TV show and you're famous. It doesn't mean anything. What about going to school with your friends or being schooled at home and being a kid? Let kids be kids. That's my mantra. Let them be kids. Then there's time. Jack and Turner done very well. So the proof is in the motherfucking pudding. Right. When you're a baby's born, you're going to say, my baby's born. I'm not going to put her on the podcast and try and make her famous. It's a bit of boy. Oh, it is a boy. Congratulations. Oh, that's a big thing in a podcast. He's got a boy. He's got his name will live on. His name will be LeBron. LeBron Jones. Does that mean you have to get in a regular name? Be wrong. Yeah, they'll just screw him up. I was just going to name him LeBron and send him to Hollywood. Good. No. Don't do that. Don't do that. Okay. I'll name him an old name. Hollywood is just a, it's like my friend who's lived out there his whole life. I was just going to let him build with crooks, liars and thieves. But when he turns one, I was just going to send him to the face clan. There you go. And we'll write up a crayon thing that says I'm 10. I am. Yes. Yes. Yes. I love it. Hey, do we have anyone that wants to call and talk to Dick? Any phone numbers? Got one? Not one. Nobody wants to shit. We covered all the subjects. They don't need us. There's nobody. They're all asleep. I put them to sleep. And the problem is everybody that they're just, they're all obsessed with Ben. Let's see. They only want to hear from Ben and hear him talk about real estate because they're fascinated by his, his net worth and his outgoing personality. Yeah. I think he's the smartest person on earth. That baby true, but he has no friends. When he says that himself, that he has no friends. Oh, he doesn't care. No, he doesn't care. He doesn't care. And you know, that's fine. It works for him. Before you met him on the, when you came on the first podcast at his house, you had been watching like a couple of life for sale episodes. And then when you met him on the podcast, and we did like a, whatever it was, a 45 minute two-hour long podcast, there were, you had an epiphany about Ben. And what was it? You said to me that he didn't translate or something like that. No. What, when I first saw your videos, yeah, I thought Ben was getting dull-faced. Gandalfi from Soprano. Soprano. Soprano. Because I thought, he has guys a great actor. Then when I met him, I thought he's just a putt. And you're the great videoographer. You're the great director and producer. You were using a guy to showcase your incredible storytelling. And you made Ben bigger than life. And that's hard to do because he can't even look down and see his penis for the last 15 years. That's true. So I mean, you're the, the reason that he is, who he is on the, on the, on the internet, on the internet, but not, if it had been someone else, he wouldn't have been anything because you wouldn't, they wouldn't have gotten audience. Yeah. You took, it's an interesting insight coming from you. A pig's ear and made a silk purse. Yeah. Well, it's, it's, it's, he's not that complex. He's a really simple. Yeah. And, and, and his, his real estate acumen is, is so basic that you could, you could buy a book. He's just because he's bombastic overbearing and looks larger in life because you've made him look larger in life. And he's, he's not going to give him a feeling because the whole interest of society now is to be famous and rich. Right. And neither make any difference to your wife or your children. And that's the only thing that matters in life is your wife and children. What they think of you matters. And sometimes that doesn't matter. I mean, because you can't always make people happy. They can say, well, I don't like my dad. Well, that's tough. You only get one. My dad, my dad, when I was 12, when you don't have, and I think that, you know, Ben's root cause is you didn't have a father. So we acts out. That's his whole thing is he's that way. Well, he's exactly like his mother. It was a psychopath. Really? Yeah. He literally is like the male version of his mother. So he's just working on being a psychopath. He's just a sociopath. Yeah. Working his way up. Right. Exactly. He's climbing the ladder. Yeah. No, but that's the biggest revelation I had with Ben was that when I met his mom, I realized he is so much fucking like his mom. But she had no father to backhand. Well, he had a father, but he in his own words, he says his father had no backbone. His father was, you know, was cheap. He was like a, I don't know what you would call it. He was spineless or he didn't have balls. He said that was it. So that how long did he know him when he was five? Yeah, I don't know. I guess they split up at one point, but he said my dad had no balls. Where is it? Trying to pinch every day. He died a couple of years ago when he was like 93 or something like that. Well, he did pretty good. Yeah. I hope to get shot in the back at 98 by a jealous husband. You what? What do you get? That's how I want to go. That's how you want to go. That's how you want to go. That's how you want to go. I'm going to get shot in the back by a jealous husband. That's a good way to go. Got to go with some, do it. Yeah. Yeah. You got to help people. You got to do things. You know, Jack goes and works with kids on the beach for free. Like tonight and Thursdays, hundreds of kids come up and he spends time with him. And he doesn't need to do that. Turner, he's given out hundreds of thousands of charity. My daughter worked with kids for years in teaching them drama and that type of thing. And Pierce is nice to everyone. Everyone loves Pierce. And that's what matters is what you give back. Now what you take, how much your house is. The only reason Ben bought that big house is when I went to his house, he goes, where do you live? And I go, I live on the front row. I'm on the beach and you're in the back row here in the back water. And I think that burned his butt. And he said, I got to get to the front row. But he didn't walk down the beach. I never seen him walk down the beach. I bet he'll never walk down the beach. He don't leave the patio. Yeah. You don't touch the sand. Tell him I'll come over and blow up his house for a while. He's not that far from you. He literally live walk past his house a billion time. I mean, all he did is, you know, he took it from a broke baseball player. Yeah. Nobody else would step up to the plate and he'll flip it. He won't even care. People like the baseball player that he took the house that he bought the house from Reinhauer who make shit load. He was like one of the highest paid if I'm not mistaken. He got one of the highest contracts in Major League Baseball. One of the highest paying contracts. If you don't have it invested and you're just spending it. But now, now I think he's an analyst for ESPN. Yeah, he makes a couple of mils. And he had to get rid of the house. So it's saying that, you know, maybe he didn't invest it wisely. So it's a good... Well, he invested in the house in the house. Right. I mean, to his credit, he was building it when the crash came and he literally held up hundreds of guys, livelihoods. All the trucks would be there all the time working when there was no work in construction. So I mean, he actually helped the economy out for a lot of guys. Yeah. You know, in a very tough time. And he built a beautiful house. It is. But he, you know, a beautiful McMansion. I mean, Turner's going to have investments and he is investing and he has very smart money managers and he's not going to go down that route. Because like Turner's money came so, you know, this year came so quick. It was like a lottery. You know, it's a lottery. You don't... It wasn't like... What's his tax bracket? Was he going to pay back 40%? Soon. I don't talk to you. I don't... Honestly, I put him with... I bring in the right people. The money managers, top money managers at Merrill Lynch Bank of America. We're not dealing with Joe Blow out of Hollywood who says I'm good with money or Bernie Madoff. We're dealing with, you know, straight line and people that have lots of money recommended them. You know what I mean? It's these... And he's not... And then he risk, you know, he owns... Like they bought him... I saw this come by. They bought him farm shares. Farm shares. Yeah, it's a... I don't... I'm using farm. What's going to happen next year when the election is all the farm states will get a huge amount of money from the government. And then... Why? Well, because he needs those states. Okay. So these guys... And I called the guy and said, why'd you buy that? I said, is this the reason? And he goes, it's real quiet. Well, that could be the reason. I said, I guess I hit that on the head. Wow. See, when you're up way up, you look at things a different way. Yeah. And you know that money's going to flow a different way. It's kind of like the wizard of Omaha, whatever that guy... Burkeshire Hathaway, the richest man in the world. Yep. What people don't understand, all these environmentalists were out there screaming, we don't want the Keystone Pipeline! Well, this is terrible. And they made Obama say, oh, we're not going to bring oil down from Canada to the refineries. We don't want the Keystone Pipeline. Right. Well, guess why? Why? Obama's best friend was Burkeshire Hathaway, this guy who owns the railroads. And he was shipping all the oil the most dangerous way in the possible 100 freight cars full of crude down to the refineries. And he didn't want the pipeline because that cut out his railroads, but they made it out like their environmental sensitive. So you just... all you need is the information. It's all there. And you've connect the dots. Right. But they made it out as a fair mental. We got a couple phone numbers. You want to do like two calls? Are they single? We'll find out. Okay. Not men. I'm sorry. It's nothing personal. Dude, I'm... They're going to call people. You know, I was in the pay phone. Make sure it's connected to Bluetooth. People don't even know what a pay phone is. I wasn't a pay phone. I was in the pay phone. I was... Here's where I was... Here's where I put in pay phones. My white self. Yeah. South Central way. In Compton. In England. Compton. The worst areas in the Middle 80s. Late 80s. Killing people, everything. I was dealing with gangbangers all the time. I can still do this day read graffiti. I was physically walking. You were physically installing them on the streets. I was pulling them on the streets. I just put them with... And they'd come up and they'd go... You know, and what I learned is I was a minority there. Oh yeah, for sure. You know, and... But, you know, I went to integrated schools from time I was in the eighth grade. I get along with everybody. And they'd come up and they'd start in on me. They tried to see. And I'd go, I'm putting a phone in. It's got the phone number on it. It rings in because nobody allowed the phone to ring in because they didn't want it. And I'd say, here's your office, guys. Everyone loved my phones. And also charged 20 cents. Everyone charged a quarter and they said, why? I said the perception of value. They're putting a quarter in but it says 20 cents. You know what I mean? And a nickel today doesn't mean anything, but in those days it meant a little bit. Yeah. You want to call Ben? Why? Of course they want Ben. Who cares? Yeah, I call him. I'll put a blimp suit on and some family. Daddy. Daddy. Why don't you work with me? You're a fucking idiot. You're a fucking idiot. You got me on here all the time. What else? Dustin, I don't know why I'm on here. I've got this dumbass. Always ask me dumbass questions. I don't know why I'm doing it. Why do I do this for you? I don't see why I do it for you. Not gone cool. Who is this? Adam Woolak from New Jersey. Adam Woolak from New Jersey. Adam Woolak from New Jersey. I like Snapun tools. Love Good. Are you calling to talk to Tifu's dad? Well, you know, kind of, but I kind of missed the Ben and Jimmy and your shows are amazing. The Ben is just hilarious. But I'm into video games a little bit. Okay. That's who he is, right? His father? Yeah, his father. Tifu is the video game guy. Yes. This is his father. So do you want to play video games or make a play? You want to make money playing video games? No, no. I just watch people that do it. I'm just so amazed like how people can actually do that. And you know, make money doing that. It's just amazing. It is amazing. Especially that quick. You have any information about that quick, like how it works. Yeah. And you do make money doing that. Yeah. You go on Twitch and you create a discount. So you can game. And then when you get like, I don't know, 500, then you can monetize it. That's this how it works. You have a Amazon Prime. I do. I do. Okay. You have within Amazon Prime, you can go on a Twitch channel like my sons. And you can watch him. But if you want to talk to him, you have to be subscribed. Well, Amazon Prime gives you one free subscription. So you could go on my son's channel while you're watching him. And then you could subscribe. He makes $4.50 from Amazon. And you're able to check. How long is this subscription last per month? Like, yeah, I have to read it every month. Yeah. But you can buy multiple. But it's free for all the, and so what the kids do is they get their parents to say, oh, I don't care. It's free. It's within the 110 or whatever, $120. And Ninja became the expert because he saw this. And because they opened it up, they said they'd give free to, you know, they could increase Twitch viewership. So he saw this as a great opening and got kids to talk their parents. And he was making a million a month last year. Well, yeah, I saw my friends kids. They're just sitting in front of the computer and I'm wondering, why are you watching someone play video games and just watching them? You know, you can be playing it yourself. Yeah. I mean, to us as adults, I'd rather watch paint dry. Yeah. Like maybe to learn. I don't know why these kids are doing it. Well, in my kids, he's an entertainer. So they go there to listen and be entertained. Yeah. And talk to and they to the, because I don't know how it's hard. If he's playing the video game, right? And how can he communicate back on the street? Well, he's all a chat room. It's like a chat type thing, but he's so good. He'll look over at the chat and he'll make a remarkable incident. But a lot of the kids, they're talking to each other too. Somebody will make a comment and know the kid will make a comment back to him. So there's a lot of interaction between the comments. And then they can, this is the nuttiest thing because I walked in his room a couple of years ago. And I saw on the screen, donation $400. And after he's done, I said, yeah, I said, wait a minute. What did that mean? He says this guy gave me $400. Someone who gave him $400. So I said, are you meeting him in a park later? No, it's serious. I was like, I was concerned. And he said, no, they don't. I said, this is high tech begging. That's why I look at it. And what does the guy that gave me $400 get out of that? Not going to be there. Whatever his name is, let's say it's because they all have suited him is Joe's bar and grill or Sam, the killer, goes on the screen. It stays on the screen. So the approbation is seeing their name on his channel. I mean, it's kind of a thin thing we live in these days. I mean, that's the most bizarre. I mean, the other day he jumped out the window of the house occasionally. And we're on the first floor. But it's still concrete. So I was standing outside and he came flying out the window. I'm like, what? And he heard himself. And I go, what'd you do that for? He says somebody gave me $2,500. I was the monkey, he's a $2,500 to do that. I'm a town. Yeah. I'm a town. And I said, can they give me that? I'll jump out of the window all day. I'll do it all night. And I never got $400 given to me. You know, it's crazy. So again, they do over here, but do you over here the delving miss this or Jason Genova? No. Who is that? They do a youth. They do like a fitness, youth, youth and this guy, Jason Genova, makes these youth videos for like 10 years. And he's kind of like slow and has autism. But he has a big following. He uses that twist. And people like make fun of them on there, but they donate. And they try to get them, you know, to get your golf, to get naked. Jerk off. Exactly. Embarrassed. Yeah. I've heard about that. Yeah. But he's obviously a great guy because he's figuring, you can say whatever the hell you want as long as I get paid. I mean, I should on Twitch though. Right. You want that five bucks coming in. Five bucks coming in. But he's very, he's not good at the game. You know, he's just doing it because he wants to make money. Because he's the money and people. People just be rating it. He's got a handicap like that. God love him. I find that the people offensive, but the kids found a way to make a living from his own handicap. Yeah. And he's willing to take it. You know, that's cool. I hope he's well grounded because you know about Amazon. You were talking about Amazon. I mean, I have a national school. Yeah, I have a snap on tool franchise. So I sell snap on tools, but I'll sell anything else. You know, if a customer wants a different brand, it's gotten so bad that I bought stuff on Amazon, you know, for the customer and just sold, you know, raise the price a little bit just to compete with the other market's out there. That's how bad it's getting. That has to go on Amazon by different brands and sell that. You can also look into reselling on Amazon where you don't even touch the equipment. There's a bunch of companies and guys will buy from Amazon. Yeah, I saw that and they're going to like to selling it. the equipment. There's a bunch of companies and guys will buy from Amazon. Yeah, I saw that. And they're really selling it. The work. No, they're not getting actual stuff. They're using the stock from Amazon changing the name of description and they don't do anything. They don't, the, the Amazon sends it out, ships it and you're making a five bucks on the trash. Yeah. Wow. And you're smart enough that you've been in the game. You could probably make a living. Yeah. Yeah, I see you could buy those mystery packages too or you can buy return to products. And then they're not like a whole bunch of, like a hundred bucks. You can get a whole bunch of products or options that they do or something like that. Or maybe that's the day where you buy all this stuff that's been returned and then you can resell it or maybe just keep it for yourself. And it could be worth a lot more. They just don't want to send the back or throw it out. It's amazing. Yeah. What's up. Cool. Thanks for the call. Hey, Danny. I was just in Clearwater because they said that you guys just got rated number one beaches in the US. So I had to go check it out on Fourth of July weekend. And it was amazing. I stayed at the, what was that? Same for not the Sheridan. Shepard in or something like that. Oh, yeah. Shepard. That's a, yeah. And I was a big friend. And I walked all the way down by the product find Ben's house. But I think it was the too far I turned around to walk on water. You had to walk on water because he's across the bay. He's over the bridge. Yeah. He's on Bel Air Beach. Oh, that's close to neck right next to Indian Rocks Beach. You were about a mile and a half. Yeah. A mile. A mile. Well, good luck with their son. The any people. Good work. Thank you. That can definitely turn into a series. Right. I understand that they don't want to spend because of the lady's walk. That can't put it definitely been a series. Well, it was a series. It was a YouTube series. And I think it's, it may, you know, it couldn't live anywhere, but YouTube maybe HBO, but we're making a T-FU movie next. So just to tune that would be awesome. I just built the media deck in. It will have better. You can do something. I'll bring Ben. We're going to have Ben go over to T-FU's house and then Ben and Mike Hunter, Ben and Dick are going to wrestle. They're going to wrestle. Yeah. You should get it all on a trampoline. Give me heart on the podcast. Can you heart Ben and people? That's a good idea. That'll be great. And that guy from deck can. That's the only thing. Yeah. Shane Lee. All right. Thanks a lot. Thank you. Well, thanks for coming on the podcast. We talked about some great things. Thanks for sharing your wisdom and your knowledge with us. It was a pleasure. Thank you. Hopefully we'll have you on again soon. Thanks, everybody.