Don't do one boom. Ho-tap Jesus. How are you, sir? I always wanted to say that. You wanted to call somebody that. I need that drop. I didn't fuck to get a name like Ho-tap Jesus. How'd that come about? It wasn't my idea. You know, I always had just went through my spiritual awakening. I just had this hip hop industry. And I went through like that masting. You know, you go to church. What are you doing with the headgear? We got a lot going on up there. I had to tie my hand down. This is the black thing, man. I got squeaking. So you had spiritual awakening. Yeah, I had this spiritual awakening. And I'm tweeting onto it like I do. Right. And somebody said, what do you think you are some kind of Ho-tap Jesus? Ooh, that was good. Ooh. That's sexy. Yes, I do think I'm Ho-tap Jesus. That's perfect. Then now you own it. Now, that person is probably. Fuck. God damn it, that was a great name I gave that to. Yeah. I don't know who that person is or was or where they are now. Shout out to whoever you are. Exactly. And vibe high, your Twitter, why didn't you switch it to Ho-tap Jesus? Can you switch it? Does anybody own Ho-tap Jesus? I do. So you have Ho-tap Jesus on Twitter too? Yeah, I reserved it. Oh, dude, I think they probably do have a little, with them cute little blue check marks yet. No. Don't put the fuck, is that? How do you get one of those? I don't know. There's some people that have those that have like a thousand followers. Are you getting it? Like if you work for the New York Times or something? I thought you had those though. No, I'll do Joe and then I give verify. I don't know how Twitter feels about me. I mean, I think Jack likes me. He's been in a couple of times, but I think they're weird, man. They want, I mean, I think all social media, all tech companies want you to tow a line right now. And if you're not towing that line and you're bringing on forbidden guests and you have people that have controversial ideas, you know, they have that finger on the button, getting ready, they don't know what to do. It's just like radio, you know? Like radio, a lot of people don't know, but radio has to play happy songs because happy people buy things. Really? Yeah. That's what that's what the studies say. Allegedly, the marketing studies and advertising studies say people aren't a good mood to tend to buy things, right? So the radio is supposed to play happy songs all day long. And the radio works for the advertisers, kind of like media songs, so forth. So social media is no different. They have advertisers. So if there's people on the platform who are creating disgruntled crowds could be hurting about a line. Yeah, but Facebook's algorithm actually favors that. The way Facebook has it set up like say, if you get into debates with people on a board channel or something like very controversial, they will start sending that shit to your feet. They will prop, they will sort of steer it in your direction because the more you engage, the more clicks they get, the more money they get, the more advertising dollars they get. Absolutely. Absolutely. The Facebook algorithm is quite unique and the way that things can go viral there. Twitter, I feel like the Twitter safety and council board. Yeah, what do they call it? Trust and safety? Yeah, that's what it's called. Something like that. Yeah, so when I go and look at the entities that contribute to that board, I kind of start saying, oh, okay, I see why certain topics are taboo. You know, there's, when there's a board, those people in the board are the voice. They're the ones that have the opinion. You know, so if your group isn't represented, maybe you need to figure out how to get on that board. You know what I mean? Right. I don't know anybody's getting on that board. It's not going to happen. And you better be left wing if you're going to get on that board. Yeah, I don't think there's any right one on the board. But do you think, like, is I think Jack's more like in the middle? Yes. I think he's closer to the middle. I don't think it's Jack. I think it's, you know, Jack's working on a bunch of different projects. But I think it's probably, you know, whoever else is in the office making the day to day decisions. Yeah, I like Jack a lot. But I think Jack is in the middle of a gigantic corporation. And there's so many people with so many ideas. Essentially, the founding fathers of our country had a great idea when it comes to freedom of expression. They felt like it was very important that you have free speech. And you can't be silenced. You can't be, you can't be undermined by people who disagree with you because it's dangerous. It's dangerous when someone can just decide that you can't have a voice anymore and only if their voice could be heard. And we're kind of seeing that with Twitter. And we're kind of seeing that with Facebook and with Google and they're they're deciding what could be heard and what not could be heard. They think they're doing it for good reasons. They think they're doing it to preserve our culture and our civilization and they want to protect people from the election. Do you read it shut down the Donald Trump support Reddit page? Yeah, that's not a good idea. Right before the Democratic debate. And that was like where all the funny memes come from. And look man, you can't do that. I mean, just because if you have some people that are saying some shit that's bad on there, get rid of those people, get rid of that. But you can't just shut down a whole forum. Like it seems that seems insane. Is there a reason for it? That's not shut down. It says it's quarantine. Yeah, what the fuck does that mean? Is it have a disease? Uh, sort of like temporary. It's got Ebola. It's happens to people. They got to do something. I don't know. It says there's violent threats. I'm looking to see what repeated misbehavior. Violent threats. Skeptical. Very seems weird, right? I feel like all this stuff is like we're seeing what the first amendment is really all about why it exists. We're seeing it play out with all these social media sites. A really thing. But you know, my thing is with like the Reddit thing, right? It's very easy to create an actor, right? The left can create a right wing actor online to pretend like it's something about sure. It's something else. They can go in and read it. Do something malicious to get the whole Reddit band, right? Or an agent provocateur. Yeah, exactly. And I never leave that off the table when I look at instances like this. We're saying, oh, somebody was, it's the internet. Everybody's anonymous. You know, right? You tracking this back to who it is. You know what I mean? Do you know what's conservative? Do you know what's Republican? Are you sure? So, you know, I take these things, these pieces of information, what are Greena. So yeah, you should. But is this election meddling? It kind of is, right? Is it feels like if you're killing a whole sub, what does it depend on? I mean, so if there really, that would be really interesting if it turns out that it was someone from the left that was posing as someone from the right in order to shut down a forum and pretend there's death threats. I mean, you look at YouTube, right? What's been happening with YouTube? Even just the algorithm, you know, I'm pretty good with keywords. I do SEO and marketing. So when I type in certain keywords or find certain things, I know what's going to come up or what type of content comes up. Now when I type in those keywords, it's like ABC, ABC and then I'm like, that's not what I want. They don't even talk about these keywords or talking about. So when you start seeing that, you start thinking about inksak and Orwell, a 1984 in socialism and communism and fascism and the degradation of society and a lot of control coming down. You know, people, you know, in some ways it's like, was the internet created for freedom or was it created for control? Right? So there's two different pathways. We could probably look at that. But it seems like in many ways they set us up to be controlled and they're doing it through monopolies. Google controls search through YouTube and Google. And by what you search, you can think it's a truth. But what did Kanye say? Kanye say Google lied to you. You know, so he says a lot of crazy shit though. You don't really think about that. He does. And I like crazy. Big fan of crazy. I'm a little crazy. A lot of crazy sometimes. So I appreciate his crazy side more than his comm side. Well, great things come from wild thoughts. Right. Exactly. I think the internet was initially created to exchange information and then when it got loose to the general public, they realized what a crazy idea that was. What I think we're seeing right now with the algorithms is that these corporations are influencing these companies to say, hey, when someone's looking for these things, how about you send them over to ABC? How about you send them over to NBC? How about you, you know, like we want to be able to get the first views on these things. So if someone's searching for that, I don't know how they do it. I don't know what they, whether they have agreements with them. Maybe, I mean, there's also a lot of copyright and shit that's on there that could get YouTube and some significant trouble if they ever really decided to pursue it. Right. And how many videos are on YouTube that people have on their channel that are just straight off of Fox News or NBC News or there's a lot of copyright protected content that YouTube is essentially profiting off of. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they make a ton of money off of that stuff. Yeah. So they might have deals with this. I look, we'll send these people to, you know, this first. Yeah. And that's why I say, you know, that's where the control comes in. You know, the advertisers, advertisers are the ones paying, you know, for the platform to think it's not us to users that are paying for it. That YouTube's free. So who's paying? Right. Yeah. They're they're monetizing us, they're monetizing us to users and the viewers. Yeah. That's where it gets tricky, right? Because as soon as the advertisers get on board, they say, look, we, you know, we want to give you money, but this content is not advertiser friendly. Right. Yeah. And then they start moving stuff around and demonetizing things. And, and with demonetization, the real thing that they're doing in a lot of ways, whether it's intentional or not, is you're influencing what people post. You're kind of, you're asking them to self-sensor because if you say, hey, you guys want to discuss abortion rights or, you know, like, there's, there's some things that you start discussing them and they will automatically don't demonetize you. Yeah. Well, who is the girl that put out the abortion documentary? Right. And then each girl that snatched that down, I forget what it's called. I'm bad at memorizing these things, but there was a, basically an anti-abortion thing that exposed some things about abortion as a documentary. And I believe the day it went up, it got shut down. She had to reupload it. Was it Lauren Southern? Might have been like that. Yeah, there's those two cute white chicks. The only thing for super racist Lauren Southern and Tammy, it's the other way. Tammy Lauren. Tammy Lauren. Tommy Lauren. Tommy Lauren. So she did a documentary, but then you have like, uh, the James O'Keefe thing where, you know, he put up the exposing, uh, YouTube and then that got, you know, obviously they're going to take it. The most recent one to expose Google, right? Right. Yeah. I've been asking people about that. I'm like, OK, break this down for me. Is there any way that this could have been deceptively avatar or deceptively edited? Like it seems to me, like they're saying that they're going to manipulate search results and they're going to manipulate the way people see things because of the 2016 election. They don't want that happening again in 2020. That's what it seems. Well, I'm looking at it. Absolutely. That exactly looks like could it be docked? Of course. Good. You know, that's, that's, yeah, that's always possible. But, um, when you go and experience it for yourself, like what I was talking about with, you know, doing a keyword search, you start, yeah, saying the parallels. Um, and then, you know, Uncle Hotel, you know, he has, his channel was, you know, doing great. And then the algorithm flipped and they seem to know, like he wasn't making the same money anymore. So it's like, I don't have to go to some doctor video or whatever video to understand this problem. The people around me are being affected by it. You know, this is a primary source. I don't have to look at somebody on the internet. Um, but I don't know. It's, it's in a way I don't like playing victim with the topic. Right? Stay platform. Don't you want with it? We choose to be there. We don't have to be there. There's not another game in town, though. It's not weird, right? When you think about how big the internet is, there's only one YouTube. Right. I mean, Vimeo and all those other ones, they're great. But well, they're not always related to the black community. You know, the black community always say, Oh, you know, why people this, why people that, why people this, why people that that's not giving us opportunity. And it's always like, well, is that the only opportunity? Can you not create your own opportunity? You know what I mean? So I never want to take a victim mentality and say, Oh, you know, let's take Google to court. Mm. You know, all this stuff is like, if you want to do that, that's fine. That's not how I'm looking at this. I'm looking at it long term like hooking up with Andrew Torbo over a gap. You know what I mean? And building tools. So, you know, we do the coin bits app.com and creators can actually, uh, it's, it's based upon approval right now. But creators can go on there and receive big coins. The donation, you know, so we're circumventing the things that happen like with the D platforming at Patreon, right? And the other payment platforms for creators. So we're creating tools to circumvent these things. So that's how I look at it. I'm like, Oh, Google's doing this. Great. This is a great opportunity here. Let me seize it and let me build it and be, you know, the alternative. You know, I love to see that. Um, is the alternative going to be YouTube and as popular? Of course not. It's just not. But it's still a viable option. You can still communicate with your people. The number one communication tool for an influencer with their, with their, uh, community is email, build your email list. Right? People still subscribe to your email list. Right? That's not YouTube. That's not Google. That's your email list. That's your contact list. So it's like you can complain about YouTube or Google, but you can build your audience almost anywhere. It depends on how powerful you are. Are you powerful enough to convince people to come to this other platform? Or to wherever you are? A lot of people are powerful enough to pack a room at $2,000 ticket. You tell me you can't get somebody to go to another platform for free? Who charges $2,000 a ticket? Uh, I mean, a lot of these speakers, you know, like the Tony Robbins type cats. These are really, he charges $2,000. I think Charles like 10. Yes. I think, I think some of his stuff is like 10. But he's doing like these week long events where everybody gets together. I'm going to turn your Lord doing karate kicks. Well, right. Well, that's how you get the bigger check. You got to create a bigger experience. So it's like, all right. So we'll do a one day 2K, right? It's like, well, how do I get 10K? It's like, well, it's just extended for the week and, you know, add like, you know, the kickboxing class and, you know, we'll check in the sauna. You just, you know, create that's part of marketing, you know. Um, but yeah, I'm not complaining about these tech company. These tech companies, man, I'm not scared of these dudes, man. He's did the content is us. The content is certainly us. And like I get what I got from talking to Jack and Vidja was it's almost impossible to manage a site like that. The, just the influx of no, like I used to have a message board on my website. One of the things that I noticed before we shut it down was I was getting thousands and thousands of Russian emails that were signing up for my website. You remember that Jamie? This is years ago. This is like three years ago. Okay. I mean, fucking like tens of thousands of Russian email addresses were signing up. Like similar addresses. It was something like the IRA, something like the internet research agency, which does that, which is responsible for all those fake pages on Facebook and Google and Instagram and all that shit. And they were signing up for websites and that had message boards. And then they would jump on and pretend that they were whatever the fuck they were. Right. Pretend that they were a social justice warrior. Pretend that they were with black lives matter. And they just start fights, start arguments. Yeah. And I was like, wow, this is fascinating. And then when it also happened and then it happened with Facebook, and it became a big part of the election, you realize like this is like concerted effort to use these platforms to wiggle. So when you're Jack or you're whoever runs good, you have to look at that and go, okay, how the fuck do we manage that? I mean, if we're in a free speech, we should just let these people manipulate everybody. Right. Yeah. Let it be while I was like, how can, I mean, it's when you have these people that are working for the Russians or even people that are working on the left that are trying, I mean, if there really really is someone that's doing that to the Donald subreddit on Reddit, what do you, if you're in a free speech, you're supposed to allow that, right? You could just create a metric, you know, or some sort of mechanism that red flag can account publicly. Right. But I think this is where it gets slippery, right? Cause then you're talking about an algorithm. You're talking about manipulating search results. You're talking about not that route. What I'm saying is not that route, but this is where it goes. Right. If you just keep managing the content and stuff, like someone like, like GAB, where they just let the content flow free. Yeah. But obviously you go there. There's a lot of dumpster fires man. It's like a chaos. Oh, do that. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. Nothing's going to be perfect. Right. You know, I think whenever you see a bad, that's good. Right. Oh, yeah. Bad is a, a portal to good. It is an opportunity to fix something because at some point that problem was going to emerge, right? It just emerged now. So it's like, Oh, wow. Okay. Here's this problem. The solutionary problem lies within a problem. So technically there is no problem. So let's just go ahead and solve this problem and move on to the next one. You know, but I love problems. I love solving problems. I think it's really fun. So when I see a problem, I go, hmm, got let's let's think about this. And sometimes it's not a one person job. You know, it's a whole committee and a whole bunch of minds have to get together. So when I look at the conservative community, I think about like, you know, aren't you have all these minds? But are your minds working to complain or your minds working to solve the problem? And it seems like the minds aren't working to solve the problem. They're working to complain. Right. So for example, um, during the early 20th century or early 1900s, do with this newspaper, super popular New York. And he put some inflammatory things about a certain family in New York city and all the department stores boycott the newspaper. So he has no advertisers. So they did that to put them out of business. And this gentleman takes the space and gives it to the proletariat or the, you know, small business guys in the area. And he gives them full front page ads, right? Stuff that the department stores couldn't buy. And then what happened was after the newspaper got a circulating like that, the department starts department stores came back and they said, yo, all right, all right, fine. Fine. We'll, we'll pay, we'll come back and he said, no, I don't need you anymore. You know, I have people that can do this. I can do this with the people. And his newspaper was successful until the day he died. So when I look at that example that was able to thrive in 19, uh, you know, 20 something new in 1910 and whenever it was, I look at it. And I'm like, if this guy just stood on his laurels and didn't bow, you know, then why can't we do it as a nation or as a team? You know, um, I think it's very possible to, uh, so for example, like when we look at gap, right, there's a new competitor. I'm not going to mention a name, but it's like, they, whoever it was, the establishment created this alternative platform to compete with gap. There's another purpose. Yeah. You don't want to mention the name? No, screw them. Really? Yeah. Puck them. Um, what's bad about them? They're a establishment, right? Oh, so, so when I look at it, so establishments created another free speech platform allegedly, allegedly, they're just going to collect the data on these people and then, you know, sell it off. Well, they see think that intuition, you know, whole tips have been told you, you know, you should make a shirt. That should be a shirt. Oh, we got a shirt. Whole tips been told you. That's our show. Oh, yeah. Me, I'll go to the show every Thursday, eight PM each in time. Um, so yeah, um, you know, uh, I can, I can kind of, I've been calling a lot of these shots and a lot of these things and, you know, there's certain things that, you know, I'm a tech startup founder, right? So it's certain things I can see within a business that the average person can't see and I'm like, God, it doesn't make sense. That doesn't look right. And then when you see a, you know, as a tech startup, it's really hard to get going, right? At first. But when you see like MSNBC, and just like, how'd you get all these coverage that fast? Who do you know? You know what I mean? And then you start seeing the influencers that had gone over and pushing it like, oh, these are all the stabs. I see what's going on. What you didn't want, you didn't want an alternative platform that you didn't control. Hmm. Okay. So they're creating an alternative platform that they can control. That they can control air quotes alternative. Correct. Yeah. Well, I think the writing is on the wall, right? And if they look at the, there's only one Twitter, there's only one Instagram. There's only one YouTube. And those are giant. And Facebook is basically the only thing like that. Right? I mean, there's really no competitor to Facebook and in that space. I mean, this is four of them. They're all trash. Let's be honest. Oh my goodness. This all trash. Hooked app is going off. Facebook trash. I've been saying that for like the past decade. Facebook's trash. I stopped using Facebook a decade ago. Right? If I used it, it was just like forced. You know, I use it as a publishing outlet. I want to put this tour dates or something like that. I put it on Facebook. I don't engage. Right. Exactly. Yeah. So, you know, I can, I can respect that. I don't use Instagram. I left it months ago. One Farakon got kicked off to a platform and a bunch of conservators got kicked off to a platform and they got out on the guy. I don't need to shit neither. So I left. And also if you keep your account just in case. Yeah. Absolutely. It's bookmarked. Um, you know, I got to automate a bot. I'm going to set up and over. Okay. All that's there. Yeah. So, you know, F these platforms, we don't need them. They're not that great. If you look at the story on Instagram, Instagram was a, uh, uh, uh, a lucky project. It was serendipitous. Right. Basically what happened was some kids built the project. It was called Instagram. They were working on a whole bunch of other things. Some popular kids started using a platform. It blew up and then they passed it on the Facebook from the very inception. I said, this is a very trash product product. It's just horrible. Horribly curated, right? It's so horribly curated that Facebook can't even monetize a platform properly. Right? But that's a whole nother story. But the platform itself and its functionality is stupid. It's just popular. Well, you know, it's weird. It's like replying to people and reading replies like in the comments. Like you can't even keep up with anything. No. And you can't get all your notifications. The notifications aren't curated properly. It's just, it's like as if they don't care. Right. They don't care. Is that you don't care or is it that it got so big so quick? And it's stuck in this format. You'd have to kind of reformat the way it's they don't care. No, thanks. They don't care. They don't care. If you, if you want to build a product for your user, you can do that. If you want to build a product for advertisers, you can do that. They built the product for advertisers and not for users. If they build it for users, you want to be able to have a conversation on there. Well, isn't it originally, wasn't it text America? Was that the same thing? Was text America the original one? That's the one where I have the picture of the prostitute in the bathroom. I mean, like, were you a text something to you send a photo? You send a photo and a text. Yeah, but it wasn't like it would go off to an internet website. It would be like on a site like a major or something like a feed where people would follow you like that. No, there was a thing that you'd follow. Okay. That's where that picture came from. I know that, but I didn't remember it being like a website or anything. That was back when there was no applications, man. Because I took that from a flip phone. Oh, that's the big deal. That's the difference. Yeah. You have a phone or like a smartphone. Yeah, there was no smart phones back then. And then you would have to go to a website to see all your photos. So like you have a young Jamie page on text America and all the pictures that you had taken. The first photos on Instagram, a lot of people were you'd be like, as a photographer, you'd be kind of like shit on if you weren't taking it with your iPhone only. Like, and you were uploading DSLR photos, you'd be like, wow, you're fucking cheating. Look at your, like, kind of shit. Right. But now it filters like some of these girls, you look like cartoons. They didn't look like humans. You know, it comes down to is like, you know, what's your co-host? Right. So, you know, a lot of people told me and he was like, yo, you missed not a lot of money on Facebook. You missed not a lot of Instagram, money on Instagram. My homies a million off of Instagram and Facebook advertising. Ain't talking about it. I'm like, I'm not an ins for money, bro. I got a message to get across and I can't get it across on these platforms. They suck. Right. But are you going to have the co-host to come and say, I'm choosing my laurels over, I'm choosing my morals over the money? Because there's a lot of people out here that on the Facebook platform, just for money, I spoke to a conservative influencer and brother basically said, I'm trying to feed my daughter, but the stuff he's putting out on Facebook, he doesn't believe that. So he's just doing it for profits, doing it for profit. Oh, that's where it gets weird, right? Because then people are not going to believe you. What's it say, well, I was doing that for money, but now I'm telling you the truth. But these, I'm talking about this. These are the people that everybody believes. These are the ones that have captured a large audience. I mean, talking about, you know, type of money you can pull in on Facebook. But you know, he literally says, you know, I'll go on Twitter, I'll make one tweet. And then they get like 2000 re-tweets and then, you know, you know, it's his brand just blows up like that. But it's because he knows the buzzwords, right? You know, what to say to get the people going, I don't go that route. You know what I mean? If I don't like Facebook, I'm not going to use it. If I don't like Facebook, I'm not going to use Instagram. You know, I'm just going to, you know, stick with what I like. I like Twitter and I told people in 2000, I don't know. I'm going to, I'm Twitter, you know, I deal in marketing. So I always say focus on one channel when it comes to social media. Just one channel, unless you have the staff to. Well, Twitter's how I found out about you. And that's all I found out about your videos and I found out about you. You're going to watch your videos. And if that didn't exist and the portal for the video, you're putting your videos on YouTube, right? What, how else would someone get their message out? If you, if you think that these platforms are all trash, if they didn't exist, I wouldn't find out about you. Twitter is great. Twitter is great. Remember, I've never mentioned Twitter. We think you said all of them are trash, but all of them except Twitter. Twitter is my baby. Man, I love Twitter. That's my brother. It's like so much about Twitter. It's, it's, it's a perfect platform to crossroads information number one. Right? Um, like you said, without Twitter, I wouldn't be sitting here right now. I couldn't have a guy to you on Facebook or Instagram. That would never happen. Maybe Instagram. Some of the, for friend, most of it is like, hey, one of my friends says, check out this guy. This guy's cool. This guy's interesting. Maybe you should talk to this guy. Okay. That's how it usually happens. And then I'll go to your page and I checked it out and I saw a lot of interesting conversations you were having and saw some videos. Well, the thing is Instagram doesn't allow you to see in my heart. They don't allow you to see in the soul. Twitter, I can really connect with people. How come you can't do that in Instagram? The algorithm, man. You know, you, you mean because it hides stuff and stuff. Yeah. But once you develop a good following, it doesn't really matter. People would go to your page, but how well for you? But how often can you post on Instagram? You're often can you post with like, well, you can't do it like Twitter, or you could just do it every couple of minutes. You see what I'm saying? So if I wanted to, I could go from deep to where my middle age white women are. Right. And 15 minutes time. Right. You know, I can take you deep and then I can make you laugh. Yeah. You know what I mean? And I can share, you know, something else. Like I share my video and you get that photos on Twitter just like you could have on Instagram. But I wanted to. I can go live and so Twitter is great at how they curate the live feature. It lands at the top of your phone or mobile. Right. It's beautiful. Like they like they get product. You know, I don't feel like Instagram gets product. Um, but Twitter is is, you know, my fact, this is a great time. I brought you my book. I thought those McDonald's were perfect. Now what is eating that garbage? There's my book right here. Twitter marketing. I brought that for you. It retails on how to build a cult like following. Yeah. And that's basically all my secrets on how I got on the Joe Rokin experience. I want to try and remember who told me about you. I want to give someone to your credit. I, uh, well, you know, they people said to me, you know, you should go on Joe Rokin. So I retweeted it and then it started as fire storming. I mentioned it and then you followed me. Yeah. And then I retweeted it again. I followed you because someone told me, though, right. I've been trying to remember who the fuck it is. Oh, it's somebody you know. Yeah. Somebody I knew. Oh, okay. I think I was like, uh, serendipitous thing. Like, I don't even know if they had seen you post that you're trying to get on the podcast. Oh, I think someone just contacted me and said, Hey, check out this guy. Shit. I watched some of the YouTube conversations. It just looked like you were having a good time, but you were talking about serious shit. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, you know, so I got kids. So, um, when I, when I teach my kids, it's always through entertainment. You know, if I can't make my kids laugh while I'm doing my lecture every day when they come home from school or I try to do every day there's a lecture waiting for them. I'm going to talk about something real in life. How many kids are three? I'm my daughter, 16 and my boys are, uh, 10. I have twin boys, uh, Dallas Phoenix and Sydney. Um, they're on the same time to cities. Um, so every day they come home, I have a lecture waiting for them. But when I prepare my lectures for them, I always figure out how am I going to make them laugh. So every day they come home, I have a lecture waiting for them, but when I prepare my lectures for them, I always figure out how am I going to make them laugh? Because my son Dallas, he's a very linear in thinking. I could lecture and he'll sit there and listen to every single word. The other two will like me, though, just like zone out. So your twins not, are there identical twins? Returnal, for turn. Yeah. So his brother and his sister are just like me with all two now and going to La La Land and start to be weird when you have two kids that were born at the exact same time, there are twins, but yet they're totally different. Yeah, and he looked different. That's so weird. Once browns came, once lascam. Whoa. Yeah, so both come out of the box at the same time too. Yeah, you know, it's a crazy dynamic. The person at XM, not man. Yeah, the person now is a very different. That is one of the things that tripped me out the most about having kids. Mm-hmm. It's how just they are their own little person out of the fucking box. Yeah. A few influences them a little. You teach them. You can give them morals and ethics and you can set a good example, but boy, they come with their own unique set of ingredients. Yeah, they do. Yeah, they do. And, you know, I don't try to change that. All I try to do is push them in that direction. Like whichever way you're going, I'm just going to try and assist that. You know, I don't try to like bring you back this way. So my son Dallas, he likes to draw it. You know, and I'm like, all right, well, here's some YouTube videos, tutorials, do it every day. You know, my son, Phoenix is like, I want to have my own comic book. I'm like, we'll start writing it and he starts writing his comic book. And then he comes and he asks me questions and I help him. We share in the Google Doc and we just, we just do the damn thing. You know what I mean? That's cool. Yeah. They're little startups. So you kind of just got it. You just got to feed them, you know. That's a good way of looking at it. Yeah. You know, you just got to water them and then just let them grow. I think sometimes we try to prune them too much. Mm-hmm. Well, you definitely see that a lot with people that are too, they're just way too heavy-handed with their kids. And the kids just always resisting. Oh, yeah. They're just constantly to get the fuck away from me, man. That shit's unnecessary. It's unnecessary. It's unproductive and you're going to develop a rift between you and your kids. Yeah. So, so this story always tell is, um, you know, when you black and you go in a supermarket, you get that talk. Like, but not going here. You've been not touching and don't ask for nothing, right? So, um, you know, that's how I grew up a lot of us grew up. So when I go into the supermarket or I went to the supermarket this one time and my son is, uh, Phoenix, my twin, he's running around in the supermarket. And, you know, I don't, I try not to yell at my kids and all that stuff, right? So I just tap his brother and says, don't I show, and I said, look at him, look at him. And they look and then we just start laughing at him. So he turns around and goes, like, why are you laughing at me? I said, and I start imitating, look, doin' all that type stuff. And he's, so he's, I put the mirror in front of my little demerit. Yeah. And when he does that, never again. Yeah. I didn't have to yell at him. I didn't have to hit him. I had to cuss him out and have to threaten him. That's great. You know, it's just, it's just basic psychology. Yeah, that's one of the hardest things for people to do to see how other people see them. When someone sees you with humor and you look like a fool, like, oh, shit, that's me. Damn, yeah, that is me. Yeah, exactly. So he was got to put your mirror up. But you know, Twitter, you know, I handle, I handle everything. Oh, you know, I figure you can't change culture through lecture. You change culture through entertainment. What do you think about all this talk like Elizabeth Warren's talked about it and some other candidates have talked about as mother politicians have talked about breaking up these big companies, breaking up Facebook. It's too big. Break up Google, break up Twitter. What do you think about that? Well, I think we have to study what happened to Standard Oil. What happened to Standard Oil? We've standard oil. They broke it up and it became Exxon, Chevron, Texaco. I think BP don't quote me on that one. But does anybody have brand loyalty to gas? Does anybody like dude, I'm a Chevron man? They create those, those carts, right? Oh, loyal to gas carts. Oh, okay. Yeah, yeah. So that's how they create a loyalty program. Here it is. The evolution of Standard Oil, Jamie pulled it up on the screen. Yeah, there you go. Wow. So Standard Oil was too big. Yeah, like fuck this place. We have to move it around a little bit. 1911. Standard Oil of Kentucky, 1911 they did this. So if you look at it, it's broken up. I think it says 34, right? 34 companies, right? So you start on the left, right? And then as you go, what do you see? You see a consolidation, don't you? You see these merges? Yeah. So when you break up a monopoly, you're not really breaking up a monopoly. What you're doing is you're creating a divide and conquer dynamic. So it's like, okay, I let my brother control this one, my sister control that one, my cousin control this one. And you actually corner the market. So breaking up a monopoly isn't exactly a good thing in that case. Yeah. In that case, and I think we'll see the same thing with Google. If we break up Google, what you're going to do is just have little subsidiaries or little satellite things that will just control a certain segment under a different name, which will make it harder to track back to its source. So on I say, break up a monopoly, I think that the establishment's like, yeah, come on. Break me up, baby. Do you think so? I think they're going. I don't think they want to lose any control. I certainly don't think Facebook does. It's not even control the Zuckerberg forever. Right? Aren't they trying to get rid of him? The board members are like, that's a day claim, but get that robot out of here. Let's look at the way it drinks water. Right, he does look like a robot. But we'll drink water in front of Congress. But isn't that socialism? That socialism, when you go to it comes in and tells you what you can do with your cooperation, that socialism. So what I feel is like the powers that be are pushing socialism are like, we can use this as an excuse to infiltrate corporations. And you know, blah, blah, blah, blah, and start controlling this internet space. So the internet space is now communist. I'm of the opinion, though, that if we believe in freedom of speech and you create something that's so big that it's essentially a town square, which is what I think these platforms are. You, if you ban people, especially if you ban people shit like learned to code, like things that don't make any sense. There's people that are getting banned for some pretty ridiculous ideas. Yeah. That as soon as you start doing something like that, you are going against the fundamental ideas that this country has found done. Absolutely. Freedom of speech. I think it's incredibly important that if you have someone saying something that you think is wrong or is hurtful, there should be an avenue where people can examine that and talk about it and combat it with good speech, with speech that makes sense. Yeah. Well, a couple of years ago, last year, I forget, no, it's about a couple of years ago. I was lambasted for defending white nationalists. When they first got deep platform, someone got deep platform or just white nationalist period, I'm like, well, if this is how these people feel, let's listen to them. Let's listen to their gripes. What are they mad about? And then people are like, oh, how could you, these people are racist? I'm like, I don't care if they're racist. That doesn't affect me. I'm not asking them for a job. So they can't be racist towards me. You know what I mean? But when you have these groups that people call fringe, I feel like the people that are fringe are the test for freedom of speech. It's not the people in the middle. It's the fringe groups on the outside. If they don't have freedom of speech, everybody in the middle is screwed. So I stood up and I was like, yeah, let these dudes talk, like stop doing that. Like, I don't care if they're racist or whatever, people call me names. But then now you see it coming down and we lost, you know, Lewis Farrakhan and got D platform. He lost his verification, you know, and it's like, he's like, oh, okay. Everything specifically that he said that allowed him to do that, they just make a sweeping, because they got rid of my love, they got rid of Gavin McGinnis, they got rid of a bunch of people that were on Instagram and Facebook that they hadn't D platformed. But it didn't seem like there was anything that happened that caused them to do that. It seemed like they just made some sort of a decision that I think was probably based on preparing for the 2020 elections. Absolutely. So what I think happened was the banning of Lewis Farrakhan is just a theory, but they were like, all right, if we ban these conservatives, the conservative crowd is gonna just go abe shit, right? But if we throw them Lewis Farrakhan, it'll kind of settle things down a little bit because it'll look like we're fair. I think you're exactly right. Yeah, so that's what they did. They're like, all right, let's throw them in there now. You know, smooth things over. That's exactly what I thought when I saw it. Yeah. Yeah, I was like, this seems weird. Yeah, yeah. It's like they have to justify it. Like, no, we got rid of him too. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's a strange time because there's, even though there is gap and there's mines and there's a couple other startups there that are trying to make their way and that the Jordan Peterson won and there's nothing that really stands out. And once someone starts, once a giant group of people starts using something, unless it's like, what's hilarious is when they, one of them vanish like my space. How fucking badly did they manage my space? Oh man. Because my space had it all. They had everybody. Yeah, yeah. And then it just fucking died. And it's still around, but now it's like some fringe music publishing platform. It's very weird. You know, it still exists. But what Twitter is right now and what Facebook is right now and what Instagram is right now, it seems like there's no real competitors, specifically YouTube. There's no real competitors. Because when, you know, I don't wanna, you know, dog pile on mines or a gap or anything, but the problem is when you build a social network and this is why I will not build a social network, at least not into the next 10 years, you have to understand that. You can't build a social network that mimics another one. Hmm. That's the bruh. That's to be different. That's why Snap is still here, right? Snap is inside a certain demographic. That's my daughter's, you know, generation. Right. That's them, right? They're on Snap. So when you build these things, you really have to sit down and say like, you know, what's the, what are we gonna focus on? Like with mines, right? You post videos, you post photos and then how do the photos appear, right? So when I look at mines, mines is my Instagram. When you look at mines on mobile, that the font's really small. So it's like, I can't read this. So I'm just gonna use this for photos when I put the photos, it pops up, right? So it's like, is mines going to go that route? Are they gonna go the video route? Are they gonna go the tweet route? You gotta pick one and then grow from there. If you look at Twitter, Twitter didn't have what these features in the beginning. You just had tweet. That's it, there was no threads. You know what I mean? It's none of that. So you have to start a sugar core. But when you, the other problem they do is, they try to build these social networks, completely robust, right? With all the bells and whistles of the giants. Nah, bro. You gotta start small and slim and then let your audience tell you what the next feature is. So what would you, if you were gonna start one up, what would it be? I don't know. I don't know. No, it's not, I don't wanna give it out in information. I think information should be free, but, you know, I hate the idea that people wanna create social networks. I'm like, they exist. Let's just use the ones that exist and let's just figure out how to make them better, right? But when you do that, then those have so much power because they can dictate who's on and who's not on. Right. So what you do is when you have something like a Twitter, you use your Twitter to congregate your minds, right? But then you're, you know, you're, you're bills of the world, you're, you're, you're, Andrew Torb is at the world, have to listen to the community and then curate their product around with the community needs, right? Andrew Torb have figured out with the dissenter. When he found out, oh, the internet is blocking comments. So they created, you know, you can comment on anywhere, on the internet and then Google prompts master, right? I say, get that out of here. Yeah, why do they do that? What was the justification for getting rid of that? They wanna censor, they wanna censor information. Is that what they wanna do? They wanna keep a competitor from using their platform and profiting off of it. That's how I looked at it. I looked at it from a marketing or a business perspective. Not anywhere about the name. Because it could have been, but if it becomes huge, I mean, anything can become huge if it's useful. It seemed useful to me that they were gonna be able to comment on anything. You'll have like a little link. And if you use GAB, you can comment on anything that comes up. Yeah. Yeah, you can look at it like that. I don't, I feel like, you know, they, their budgets are so huge, they, you know, their cash reserves are so huge that they're not worried about competition at all. You know, what they're worried about is controlling thought. Mm. And that's their primary goal. Control thought, right? For the betterment of the ruling class. And that's, to me, that's the end of it all. But you, these, you know, these, these people that create tech products like when we create coin bits app, or for example, my app, Jiffa Toss, Jiffa Toss, do you only do one thing on Jiffa Toss? The only thing you can do is save a video or, or Jiff from Twitter. I was called it GIF. Is it Jiff? I think I should. I think it's Jiff. I've never, I don't think I ever hear anybody say it. GIF could be correct. It could be correct. Do you know what you call Jamie? I call it GIF. Yeah. Jiff, GIF. Jiff is peanut butter. Jiff is peanut butter. Jiff is peanut butter. But our app does one thing, right? And people love it. When I first came on as a co-founder, this app did more than that. And when it did more than that, it didn't do as well as it does now. What did it used to do? It had incentives to share the app. You could edit GIFs. You could put text on them. Crop on all types of like, it had an editor in there. So I was like, you know, it takes us editor, toss it out. Oh, we had a keyboard. You know, it still has a keyboard. But I was like, some of the functionality's and I just started taking stuff out. It's like, get this out of here. Get this out of here. Get this out of here. Get this out of here. Get this out of here. And then it's slim it down. As soon as we slim it down, we chain gave it a new face. Boom. I revenue quadruple. What's it again, tell people who don't get it? Yeah, GIF it ties. GIF it ties. There it is. G-I-F-I-T-I-Z. The ultimate Twitter GIF downloader. Yeah, yeah. And this is, this thing's about to be super huge. We have a gallery coming soon. And that's gonna be awesome. I'm gonna be perfectly curated. I speak to my partner Simone this morning about that. That's one of the fun things about Twitter. When someone says something stupid and then you look at all the GIFs underneath that. Oh, the memes and GIFs? Yeah. So we empower people like black Twitter's on our app. So whenever there's a new video while something funny happens and you're using it as a reaction. So on iOS, there's no way to save it. Now you can with our app. But our app only does one thing. Everybody's, and they love it, right? That's the core of the business. What's the core of minds? What's the core of gap? What's the core feature? Does anybody know? There is not a core feature. Yeah, I wouldn't say just something as an alternative to traditional media. You see what I'm saying? Yeah. So there is no uniqueness. Where there is no uniqueness, you can't compete. You have to first create uniqueness or fill in need. There's no need for me to be on these other platforms. Well, the problems when you get on those other platforms and there's no one there, do you feel, let me go back to Twitter real quick. Yeah, and that's why I say when you build a social network, the before you build a network, before you build the platform, you have to build the network. Hmm. What's interesting if you go back to 2003 when my space was king, and then you imagine what the world would be like 16 years later, no one would have saw this coming. No one would have saw all these social media platforms and that it's used as a way of breaking news now. I mean, especially in places that don't have real objective news. So if you're in some country that's some war-torn country and some horrible shit is going down, you see the news breaking on Twitter before anywhere. Oh, yeah. Really interesting. Oh, yeah. That's why I tell people like screw Facebook and Instagram and news breaks on Twitter. You know, by the time I show my friend, my friend shows me a video. I'm like, I saw it on Twitter like two weeks ago, bro. Yeah. Because he's on Facebook or he's on Instagram. Right. So it's like, how do you market a product or market yourself when you're two weeks behind? Is it how you do it? It's only behind on Instagram, though. I get a lot of shit on Instagram, too. Like, but you're joking. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So it's a bit different. I guess. It depends on who you're surrounded by, right? Right. So when we talk about a network, it's like, who are the people connected to who you following, who's who you interacting with. But I get like, wow, that's not true. It's going to say I get like most of the fucked up videos of news stories of bad things that are happening in the news come to me on Instagram. But I think- I send it to you. Yeah, but I think it's even. I think it's even with Instagram and Twitter sending me things. Well, when you're Joe Rogan, even if you're a whole type of Jesus, like, a people who say to me, how do you know so much? I'm like, yo, my followers say, like, yeah. Books and links and stuff like that. Like they're just sending it to me. I'm sometimes I ask them. Sometimes I don't, but they're volunteer and information. So when you're in that position, you can afford it. But when, so the key to marketing is this, you got your four piece of marketing, what the key to marketing is relevance. If what you're talking about is irrelevant, nobody's paying attention to you. Right? Yeah. So the only thing that makes somebody's platforms relevant is to juxtaposition to the big tech giants. You remove the tech giants. Are you still relevant? What makes you relevant? Right. Right. That's where a lot of people that do content, whether they're podcasters or whatever, they probably should be thinking about developing an email list and putting things in the website, having something available independently of these big platforms. I've been thinking about that a lot lately. Don't let. But something independent of these big platforms where like, if, you see all these people that have gotten D platformed. And I don't think I'm at the risk of that. But if the, I didn't think these people were just a few years ago, as the climate shifts and people get more and more radical with this idea of D platforming, I think it becomes like a game of like shooting ducks. People get excited about it. They're like taking people out, whether it makes sense or not. And I think there's a lot of that going on where people are calling for people to be D platform just because they disagree with them. And so far, these big tech companies have resisted some of it but not enough of it for my taste. Yeah. Yeah. You know, my boy Alex Jones, they got him out of here. I think, you know, if I was Alex, my ego would be so huge after getting D platformed. Well, when we did a podcast together after he was D platformed, it was one of the biggest podcasts of all time. Yeah. What did I get like 16 million YouTube videos? Sure. That's your highest one. Meanwhile, YouTube did not demonetize that one. We let them know in advance just heads up. Alex Jones is coming on. Yeah. And then they just took that money. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting how it works, right? Like what they choose to D platform that they don't choose to. You know, it's, I mean, I don't like the argument that they're doing it for our good. I don't think they are. Who made them God? Who made them, you know, mom and said, this is good for you. Do you think they should be forced to file the first amendment? No. What do you think they should be forced to do? Nothing. Nothing. I think they should be operating in a manner that doesn't hurt earth. You know, it doesn't hurt their nature, right? If they're polluting or doing something at harm, somebody specifically, then yes, right? So if they become a giant monopoly, just because they're better than everything else that's available, like YouTube has become, then they run the show. But there's always the underground. Yeah. Look at hip hop, right? There's always been an underground in hip hop comedy as well. Comedy as well. You know, so you got dudes, you know, so I was talking to somebody that they would talk about consciousness or conscious hip hop and do say, oh, there's no money in conscious hip hop. Like what? My fatter much, tours consistently. Dead press. Dead press. Yeah. Toys and systems never had any mainstream attention at all. The only closest thing they had to mainstream is when they were Dave Chappelle's block party. OK. That was about it. Yeah. Yeah. So it's like, you don't need mainstream. We don't need mainstream. You know, here's the thing with mainstream. When you get mainstream, you get a bitch now. You got to play about a rose. You know, and when you break those rose, you get the platforms. What you need to do is you need to focus on building your own platform so they can't touch you when you get to a certain place. Say if you were helping me out, I called you and hooked up Jesus. I need to help. Right. What do I do with this platform? This platform right here? Oh, Dan, what if this one did they come down on us? I saw, you got a self-hosted probably on blockchain. I would definitely a bitch shoot just locked up. How do I self-hosted on blockchain? I don't know. Blockchain is one of those words that I use that I don't really understand. Me too. I just say it because it's a cool buzzword. That's a great word. It's just like, you know, it's like if you eat some dude as a tech guy, like yourself as a tech startup, you start talking about blockchain. I go, oh, yeah. I just nod my head back to my friend uploaded MP3 to the BSB network, maybe. OK. It's just very confusing. And I was trying to ask him, I was like, right now that it's on there, how are people going to get it? And he wanted to just be like the first on there, which he is. So I might not be BSB. I might be speaking wrong. Is that your rapper friend? Yes. OK. Hey, he's ahead of this. He's just like getting out of some of the Bitcoin stuff. Yeah. But that's where it's at. And I was like talking to him for that. Like he's almost like any pick. Like, all right, you did it. How you figured it out. Now, how do I get a three hour podcast on there? Right. How are people going to get it? And it's like, not figured out yet. People are definitely working on it. And every day there's been advances. Yeah. I just don't know how it's going to go. I mean, you could build your own cloud. Yes. Build your own cloud and self-host. And you know, you know what else you could do? You could connect with all your other celebrity buddies, pull your resources together, and just build a competitor and then own a space. And be like, I'm the new YouTube. It's called Rogan Tube now. You know what I mean? You could do that. And then everybody just runs to your platform. I'd support it. I'd have to have the way better name. How do you do that without using Google's cloud services? What you need to do is buy Vimeo. Vimeo is tying on the vine. That pitch is barely alive. So these questions that you ask, right? They own the internet kind of. Right. So these questions that you ask, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. So what we do is we get the best tech minds in the building. And we ask them the questions, hey, answer this. It's not like they can't answer them. Sure. They're going to find solutions. This is always a way. You just got to put the right minds in the room. The right minds in the room and the right people that are influencers that can get the word out. Yeah. You've got to follow the drop on an app can rule. And when you put the drop on an app can, it spreads out. So you've got to figure who's your network and then maybe build like 12 people around and make sure that these people are linked based upon interest. So then it starts at those interest points or affinities and then the next tier grows out from there. But as long as that tight knit group, all right, so problem of gap, right? It's all people say, oh, it's all Nazis, right? Well, that's that tight knit group. And it's a tight knit group of Nazis. Gapped so sure it says that. It's not just that though. It's not just that. And no one. A hundred regular folks and one Nazi that Nazi becomes the defining factor of the group. Right. There's Nazis in there. Right. So, you know, it's not that at all. But there is a strong white nationalist movement that first gravitated over there. If he didn't have that, there would be no gap. Do you think so? I mean, I don't think so at all. Really? Yeah. Like, who would go there? People that got kicked off a Twitter. But the only people that got kicked off to Twitter in the early days with a white nationalist. Well, who is the first people like, if you go back to them again, is... Yeah. ...gav him again as his interesting character. Yeah. He does not identify as a white nationalist. No, he does not. And his wife is actually Native American. He's just made some stupid choices. Right. Well, I mean, like, baked Alaska was kind of thrown into that. Yeah, but he just has a meme maker. Right. He's got to make funny memes. Very funny. Right. Very entertaining. But I think it comes down to who's dangerous or not. Yeah. Well, the proud boys became a dangerous idea because once you have a group and you don't control who joins a group, then assholes can join your group. And then your group is made out of assholes. And you're like, well, I didn't want it to be assholes, but well, you let anybody in. If you let anybody in a group, I just have a joke about vegans about that. The problem with any group is the same. Like, if you get any group of 100 people, if you're in a room with 100 people, what's the odds that one of them is going to be a fucking idiot? What's 100%? Yeah. One of them is going to be a fucking idiot, right? If you have 300 million people, you're going to have by odds three million fucking idiots. Right. And the joke was a lot of them are vegans. Yeah. Yeah. It's not there's anything wrong with vegans. It's with a group and people just identify they get in that group. This is my group and I'm here to represent. And then it's just dummies. Well, the thing with the proud boys is the ruling and Lee are afraid of men. You know, there's a huge soy boy movement coming down at the down the pipe, right? Soy everywhere. If anybody's listening right now, everybody that's listening right now, soy's bad for you. It's not good. It is very bad for you. It's processed nonsense. You don't see estrogen. Yes. Well, it acts based on phytoestrogens. No one has a phytoestrogens that attack the endocrine gland system. Now, when you look at the endocrine gland system, people in the spiritual world, the endocrine gland system is the physical manifestation of the soul-core shockers, right? Now at the heart shocker, what we have is called the thymus gland. And the thymus gland is the one that controls your sexual maturity. And when you have an endocrine gland disruptor, your sexual maturity is affected. So a man who would ordinarily like women now likes, you see what I'm saying? But wouldn't you have to have massive quantities of soy for that take place? That's that subjective based upon your biological structure. I always think of it as more just like a fun thing to say. I don't think you need to eat. Well, here's a tool for you to turn to a pitch. Well, here's a thing. You can't go in a grocery store and find something that doesn't have soy. When you go look at your cheeses or your crackers, it was a say, soy, less than soy and everything. So are you aware, right? They use it as filler for some meats. So the whole vegan movement, right? You go and you go get your vegan burger. You can burger, yeah. A lot of these burgers are soy based. A lot of them are plant based, for sure. Plant based oils. But so it's not good for you. Right. And then you also look at the links between soy and cancer. But that's a whole other story. But when you have something that's disrupting your so-called shockless, you can see how you can start affecting an entire population of people. You start affecting their development at an early age. And then you got these men who are acting like women, who can't even control their wives. You got some men out here that let another man sleep with their girlfriend. All right. And I don't know about that. Well, you're saying out here. Well, when I see how he I mean everywhere in the world. Yeah, yeah. But why don't you just people just can't keep in the weird shit? Well, no. You know what I think it is? I think it's pushed. I think about it. It's just highly pushed, yeah. By who? The ruling elite. ruling class. I want to say really I'm not elite to sit around and go, you know what I need to do? We need to push the bachelors. Well, when you look at the degradation of Russia, right? Before the Bolshevik Revolution, what they do is they come in first with alcohol, right? So they purchase your hops and you can barley and they produce alcohol. Then what they do is they sell the alcohol to the farmer on credit because he ain't got no money, right? Because he's been drunk. He hasn't been producing the crops like he should. He falls into credit. He falls into debt when he falls into debt. He's now enslaved to the land he wants owned. Now, and I can sell whatever I want to this population or give this population whatever I want because they are now technically my slave. But in order to rule a nation of people, you have to destroy morality. You have to destroy integrity. So you feed them drugs, alcohol, and sex, and then tear apart the family. But do you think that that's just a natural progression of people's slavon... Alcohol and sex and in tear part to family. But do you think that that's just a natural progression of people's slovenly instincts or do you think that some sort of a grand plan? People have a slovenly instinct. Some people do. Yeah. I think some people lazy and some people weak and some people greedy and some people just they lean towards, they lean towards just pleasure without sacrifice and discipline because it's easy. They just lay in bed and jerk off. I don't think anybody's telling them. I don't think there's any sinister government manipulate in their strings. It makes them watch porn all day. I think they just well yeah, it actually, you know, Instagram is a gateway to porn. Instagram you can't go on Instagram without looking at some booty. Right? Yeah, but it's also a gateway to sunsets and people's kids and muscle cars and come on. It's a cool shit. Everybody going on Instagram. Look at that sunset. People are going on Instagram but look at booty. There's a lot of that. No yoga community has went from hey check out my bakasana to check out my backside. Yeah, I love that. Right? A lot of yoga pants pics. Booty booty. Booty. Just booty alone is an industry. It is a giant industry. On Instagram. Yeah. So what happens is you wake up in the morning, you check your notifications, then your homie tags you. Look at this chick. The poem. Right? Now you have an erection. What's the first thing you do? You're like, oh, let me go to my browser hoping to incognito browse and hit porn. Boom. Now you out of here. Right? Now your day's done. You just depleted your energy. Right? And just coming out my book where I talk about, you know, why you shouldn't jerk off and all that stuff. But you're right that you shouldn't jerk off. Yeah. Never? Well, there's a calculation. You have a jerk off algorithm? Yeah, there's a jerk off algorithm. It's created by the Tao, the Taoist, the sexology. And I think it's your age times to, you know, your age divided by two times when I forget what it is. It's in my book. I can't remember it. But I got it from the Tao. Right? Which is why I don't have it memorized time. Point It's age times point two. Things age times point two. And then to tell you how many days, right? So at my age, I'm 38 now my age, it's about seven and a half days between ejaculation to maintain who I am. Really? Yeah. And damn. Yeah. So a man's strength is his balls. Right? That's right. So every time you deplete yourself, you're not the same man anymore. You lose your superpowers. Now, when you lose your superpowers to some, you know, IG model, it's not even worthy. Your orgasm doesn't feel the same as a natural interaction with a woman. Right? You know what I mean? True. So you're wasting your superpower on like a fictional fantasy. So you're wasting a percentage of your vital energy. Your vital energy as well as the proteins and minerals and zinc and magnesium and all that stuff that you know is lost. Yeah. You know, I think it's equivalent to like two New York strip steaks eggs oranges and apples or something like that. Really? Oh, yeah. It's a lot of vitamins. That's why I have a woman on the sides of the loads you shoot though. No. Oh, yeah. That's why ladies should swallow. Whoa, Jesus ladies. I'm sorry. That's why you should ingest it if the man is healthy because it's a full meal. It's a full meal. It's a full meal of nutrients that a man loses. Is it bioavailable that way? One of him has done studies. We should have a bet people have done like nutrition slash load studies probably a startup out there like trying to do this right now. Yeah. Like calculated into an app. Where's this conversation going now? Well, we're talking about manipulating you turning you into a soy boy. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You think this actually this is where we differ. You think this actual manipulation taking place. I think it's just natural instincts. And then I think that people see it around them and then they cater to those natural instincts and then they support those natural instincts. But I think people have a natural instinct to be undisciplined and lazy and just gratuitous and you know, you know, dive into pleasure before sacrifice and commitment and so are we making excuses for it. Not making excuses. I think it's also the softness of the world we live in. Oh, yeah. I mean, we live in this incredibly easy to get by in world. Right. You know, where the poor people are fat. Yeah. He's never been a time in history where poor people are fat. Yeah. Yeah. That comes down to weird and actual food. Yeah. So cough. It's certainly that it's certainly the food is garbage. But it's also that this is strange lack of discipline because it's not it's not necessary. All you have to do is just show up to your job, put in the least amount of effort you can without getting fired and you can exist. Right. That didn't that didn't happen in the wild world when people are hunters and gatherers. If you didn't put 100% effort, if you didn't really struggle, you didn't make it. You weren't a benefit to the tribe and they kicked your ass out and you had eaten. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's how it's supposed to be. I do agree with that. Yeah. I do agree with that. Um, discipline is is, you know, what we have to demand from people, you know, um, but you know, your culture has to recognize the about your being and and shut it and ban it and say like, hey, you know, we don't want this here. You know, uh, porn is readily available on Twitter. Watch it writing your feet sometimes growing my feet and I know like, that's a weird thing about Twitter isn't it that it's a giant platform, but they allow porn. Yeah. So you know, when I had jack on with Tim Poole and I think Tim Poole didn't even know that porn was illegal on it. Yeah. Right. I saw that. I saw that. Yeah. I found that a little bit of information. I don't know. I carried this. Tim Poole's Twitter used. No. I'm the ejaculation frequency. Yeah. Recommended by the towels. Yeah. It said the most respected of the toutheres sun, semi-au, quoted above recommends ejaculation no more than once every 20 days for men over 50. Oh, Jesus. And no more than once every hundred days for men over 60. That I should be dead. Okay. And it has to do it. It says no energy. How am I getting everything done? You're getting age retarding hormones as you're about to ejaculate. And then there's a level you want to keep before you ejaculate. So you balance what you're before you excrete the hormones. That's what it's saying. So tantra. Yeah. I think that's what it's saying. Yeah. You're supposed to come and turn. Where's it at? Yeah. There's a level you kind of like optimize yourself in ejaculation. They call it. Let's be one of their fucking minds. I'm trying to get rid of the shit. I've always said that it helps you think because too many times with a man, your mind is clouded by sexual desire. If you could just jerk off and then you can think clearly. I always tell myself a bit about it. I say jerk off first, then think about it. Like if you jerk off and then you want to call a girl, it's because you love her. You're not just trying to fuck. You actually like her as a human being. You want to be around her. You don't just be wanting to be around her sex. You actually really love her. Yeah. I think there's a level of discipline. Right. So yeah, if you go about to make that that risky text message, you might want to shoot your low and that's right. That's what I'm talking about. But I think what though, if I'm going to watch some fucking documentary, but that's for a undisciplined man. Yes. Right. So a discipline man is going to say, no, I'm not going to send this thirst trap, you know, this thirsty comment. I'm going to stay disciplined in who I am because in order to get the woman, I have to stay away from the woman. Mm. You know, I'm going to get the woman. I have to stay away from the woman. Yeah. And and and and keeping your your your vital man energy for me keeps me like on edge. Like I'm always like an animal, you know, right. Right. Um, because I want to release right. I'm saying so um, what I do is I'll work up that energy and then channel it into work. I'll just immediately pull my laptop out and just bang out because it's like that frustration there. And then just you got to release it that way. I'll go running. I'll go work out. Mm. Mm. But when I get around women, would a full sack, oh, I'm not the same as when I'm empty. Yes. And they see you can see the difference in how they are attracted. You you sit up different. Yes, chess, poke out. Mm. When you're around other men, you're like a little bit more edgy. Yeah. Yeah. You know what I mean? After you blow your load, you're kind of like so though. Yeah. Not competitive. Not competitive. Yeah. Yeah. So you just you hold on to that like fighters. You know how to fight. Good fight. Mike Tyson never did that. Mike Tyson said, no, I always like to calm it from my tooth possible from not distracted. You just shoot his loads and beat the fuck out of everybody. But I think Mike had a lot of extra loads. I think if you had a guess, like it's level. He was just an ultra man. You know, it was not a regular man. It's a research published by the US National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health found that after seven days of not ejaculating men's testosterone levels reached 145.7% of the baseline. Damn. Interesting thing is that they didn't observe significant fluctuations from the baseline on days two through five. The research also showed that the peak levels were at day seven. Yeah. The risks, Dow, it's actually Dow, by the way it's T A O. It's you say it is Dow. Okay. The Dow of G. Koon-Doh. Okay. Risks of two frequent ejaculation when sex is performed with the recommended Dow frequency, it becomes an inexhaustible source of energy like a well that never runs dry. Yeah. However, when ejaculation frequency exceeds the capacity of the body to fully replenish the semen, man can experience chronic fatigue, low resistance, loss of sex drive, loss of focus and irritability, long term excessive ejaculation can cause chronic low zinc conditions, which can cause chronic fatigue, mental confusion and significant loss of sexual drive. But what if you're with a freak like that girl will Harris was talking about? My friend Will Harris was in here the other day and he was saying he he used to meet these girls and go over to see. Oh, it's also considered harmful to ejaculate when ill drunk or gorge with food. Oh, here's the next line. Oh, which one ejaculation control and discipline is not to be confused with frequency of sex. There are significant physiologic fizz. What's that word? Physiologic? I don't think it's supposed to be a period there. Oh, physiologic and therapeutic benefits to having sex, frequent sex intercourse maintains a man's interest in the acts as well as his capacity to continue indefinitely until his partner is fully satisfied. So they say in fuck, but don't come. Yes. Those people are out of their fucking mind. I come every time yo, I used to try and get rid of this stuff. I used to fuck with girls. I used to fuck with girls. Has like that. We would not come. Yeah, really. They start crying. Wow. I had a girl like straight down and break her crying. I can't please you. Is it me? Is it not? I'm just like, no, I just want you to be happy. How you feel? Feel good. Good. Then I go when I hit the laptop and it just just gives me a whole really. Oh, getty let it be let. Right. Because like nature wants them to get you to come. Yes, women only respect to discipline man. You know, what's true? Once a woman can drop your defenses, she's no longer attracted to you. If she can control you, she's not attracted to you. A woman wants a man. She could chase in my book. I talk about how women are the apex predator. They're the ones that chase after sex. I mean, they can have sex endlessly. Right. Once we know it's like we're pretty much done. Like, you mean, you mean a couple of minutes to recharge, but it could keep going. Right. So there, you know, technically like, you know, freak or whatever. But just because she's undisciplined in her sexual energy doesn't mean you have to be. And if she feels like she has to go outside of the relationship to go get her fix, that's not her. That has nothing to do with you. Your aspirations as a man are higher than sex. A woman's role is to create life and support the man. The man's role is to create the the the the the the origin of future of humanity, you know, build in things and innovate. It is true that a woman is not attracted to a guy without discipline. Like men who are lazy and weak, that is a giant turn off to a woman. But if a woman is hot, she could be pretty lazy. Absolutely. They are the laziest people. But we don't care. Men don't care if a girl is lazy. She's hot. Well, as long as her body holds up, she can get to the gem. I used to make girls work to get me. Yeah, like, you know, I would say, you know, I'm working on this project. You know, I'm sending a spreadsheet over. I need you to go organize it. And if she'd say no, I just be like, all right, well, you're worthless to my life. All right, I need I need somebody who's going to build with me, right? What if she's building her own shit? Fuck her shit. So go build your shit. You know, if you need help, I'll help you. But you know, you want a partner. Yeah. I want just a lover. That's what we're saying. No, no, you want someone to help you. No, I want her to prove her worth. She got to be worthy to get me. Like, you know, it's easy to get a girl. Then he's gonna get him good man. You're not only gonna find one whole tab Jesus in your life. I could find a ton of you shorty. Wow. You everywhere Instagram after Joe Rogan is going to be they're going to be everywhere. So now some would say that that's a sexist generalization. Sure. I don't care what I don't care. Look, we can have that conversation like bring me a new platform when we could talk. And now if you want to call it sexist, it is what it is. Have you ever had a conversation with like a radical feminist about this kind of thing? No, they won't talk to me. They all block me. They're blocking you. Yeah. They all block you. You know, the whole black left feminist. The reason why they block me is because they can't beat me. Right? When we have conversations, I'm so objective that it's too dangerous for them to engage with me. How's all? Because I'll be like, it's sexist. Yes. And so let's let's continue the conversation. And then that's where they don't want to go. Because then they're going to have to provide reinforcement and evidence in a deal with an educated man. And I'm going to come with my evidence in facts. So you don't have a problem being sexist. That's what the problem is because if someone calls you sexist and you go, yeah, yeah, I'm sexist. Yeah, it is what it is. It's like a somebody called me racist or whatever. I don't care what your opinion is. I don't care about these isms that you create. I understand nature. I understand myself. That's an interesting thing that I see today that I find really strange is that people that are denying evolutionary biology, I mean, there's decades of research being done. Why people behave the way they behave? What women are attracted to? What men are attracted to? And what the spectrum is. And then they say scientists racist. Yeah, that's where it's where a scientist sexist to fuck your science. That's a fascinating to me. When people don't want to look at it because it doesn't support their ideology. They want to deny all this research to deny all these really objective geniuses that have been studying all this stuff and the best minds in the field have come to these conclusions based on just insurmountable amounts of data. That's an interesting. Yeah, so fine. The patriarchy. I have a shirt that says I am the patriarchy. No matter what you thought, I mean, I'm just going to embrace it. And I'm going to say, yeah, Israel, there is a patriarchy. There's also a matriarchy. You need to handle your matriarchy and stop worrying about the patriarchy because if you handled your matriarchy, the patriarchy wouldn't be your problem. The problem is you don't know how to be a woman. What do you think is a good piece of advice for women and how to be a woman? A good piece of advice for women. Hotep teaches women. Hotep teaches women. What's a good emotional control? Emotional control. And so the number one problem I see with women is, damn, it's just a lot here, right? All right, let's go here. Okay. Women let their friends, they tell their friends they business. Yes, stop that. Stop telling your friends you business. Stop telling your friends, you know, my brother, you know, when the past man had problems with women. Hey, run back. You'll guess what, man. We don't do that. If my friends do that, they better be laughing. Right. If my friend goes to you, you don't have to believe with this shit. It's said to me. They give you a hard time, but if they go to don't know, man, she wants me to quit my job. Like, hey, don't do that to me, man. Put that shit on me. Yeah, you know, um, so, so, so I think women also, you have to understand that they're giving this information to a friend who is also single when a woman gets in a relationship, she loses a friend, right? Because now you have less time to spend with your bestie. So the bestie's jealous of the relationship. So whenever you go back and tell her, she's never going to give you sound advice. True. She's always going to take your side. Yep. So you have to judge your friends and say, well, if I'm giving this information to my friend, is she an objective friend or she a subject, the French is going to feed my ego. Then you can't analyze that on your own. Then you'll never have peace in a relationship. Cause the worst thing to do is here's the problem, the relationships built on trust. So if a man and a woman come together and you tell all my business to your friend, where's the trust? Where's our privacy? We have none. Right. We haven't done. We don't have a relationship. You have a relationship with your friend. So go be with your friend. I don't got time to be, you know, something happens in my personal life. I'm going to go tell this strange girl, what happened in my personal life, something I told you that was private to relate it to something else that could be happening in our relationship. You know what I mean? Yeah. It's something we have different instincts. Women have the instinct to gossip. They love it. It just comes from that hunter-gatherer culture. Mm-hmm. We're back in the day. That's what would happen. The men would go out and try to hunt the food and the women would stay home and they would talk shit. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Again, discipline yourself, women. Yeah. Dis But you know, in my book, I say, you know, say all because it gets to people going, right? Get some upset. Yeah. It gets people gone because they always go, well, no, it's some. It's like, I know it's some, you know what I'm saying? I say all just to get people going. But when Jardyn women don't have hobbies, you know, do something that is because they're inundated with advertising, you know, their hobbies become consumerism. Oh, you know, retail therapy or, you know, I do makeup for fun. No, you don't do makeup for fun. That's not what you do. That's not a hobby. Makeup's not a hobby. I'm sorry, ladies. A hobby is something that develops your individual person, something that makes you better. Some kind of a discipline or a form. Right. Some way to express yourself. Yeah. So physical thing that you do. Yeah. Like, so like, one of my hobbies is chess, right? That helps me focus when I when I see that my attention span is getting short because I spent too much time in social media. I go to chess and I'll spend time on chess to bring that back to reality. Do you play physical chess or do you play online? Uh, online. Yeah. I can do OTV, but, you know, I do most of it. What's OTV over the board? Oh, what's that? That means physical. That's what you call it? Yes, go OTV. Do you do speech chess? We hit the timer. Do you do regular chess? Well, online, I do speech chess. I do five minute games. That's impressive. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's it's a whole nother. I'm in scared of chess. I've always been scared of chess. I have an obsession with games. Yeah. Real problems and chess is, it's one of I've played it a little bit, but I'm like, fuck, this could take over my life. It would. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, um, if I'm not careful, I'll be sleeping and and playing chess. Oh, yeah. Like, sometimes I'll be chilling. Like, we'll be having a conversation and I'll space out and be doing chess problems in my head. So that happens sometimes. You know, a lot, especially on days that I play a lot of chess. I remember Howard's terms really getting in the chess and he was taking private lessons. He was talking about all the time. But I think he found the same thing. Do you remember that? I think he found the same thing. I think he just got two obsessed with his like, I can't fucking do this anymore. Yeah. Yeah. Well, one of my life goes as to be a chess master one. Really? Yeah. Yeah. You know, and when you say chess master, what do you have to do to be a master? Okay. So you have national master, then you have international master, and then you have a game master or the GM. I forget what it's called. National master, you have to participate in, I believe, one of the tournaments, one of the, I forget the Federation. But you have to enter one of these tournaments and you have to place a certain you know, I think it's maybe top two or top three at a certain tournament. Don't quote me on this stuff. But you have to go through the tournament. And I think in order to become international, you have to first become national master and then national master, you can go be international if I'm not mistaken. And then, you know, GM. Do you ever see the video of Eddie Fisher or Bobby Fisher? When Bobby Fisher was walking down this row of chess games, he was playing like 10 different games simultaneously. Yeah. Um, uh, the, the, the, the champ now, uh, Carlson, uh, does something similar. Uh, where Carlson will, uh, play, you know, several people or he'll play without a board that always interested me. I've seen people do that. Yeah. I'm just, dude, I knew who went to prison was playing with this pool hall that he's played on white planes and executive billiards. And this kid was a chess master. He's like a 16 year old, I don't know, a master. I'm used to, you know, chess genius. Right. 16 year old kid. Um, and he was playing with this dude, he was like in his 40s who had been in prison, he learned how to play chess with no board in prison. So they were just sitting across each other talking, saying the moves and then they were both like recognized where the pieces were on the board. Yeah. Really interesting. Yeah. I mean, that, that level of visualization is where humanity has to take itself. You know, that's why I say chess is great because it allows you to visualize and in order to manifest your desires in this world, you have to be able to visualize what you want. The more you can focus, the more you can visualize, the better your mind is I believe because our life is based upon visualization. You see what I'm saying? Yeah. Um, a women need to get back to that too. They visualize and go. I think women are, are very spiritual. So in Africa, this, uh, I'm slipping on my studies. I studied a long time ago. But, uh, the man is holding a child and the woman is pointing up to the sky. Right. And it's like the man is like that earthly thing, like we handle things in a physical and the woman's sort of like that intuitive being. Women have to get back to being that intuitive being because if you notice, our women always seem to warn us about stuff, right? Oh, my God. Don't just seem like damn. I should have listened to that time. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? They have to get back to their spiritual nature. And I think a lot of them get away from that. And that'll ground them to when they won't need so much emotional support from friends and family because they're back in their spiritual nature. Well, how does a woman do that? You just have to meditate. You know, meditate and, um, being happy which is being alone with yourself. A lot of people can't be alone with themselves. Yeah. You know, they always need like some sort of device or is it an interesting that it's attractive when people are capable of being alone? Yeah. I remember these two girls were talking about some guy that one of them was dating. And, uh, she goes, yeah, he's really into his career, which is a huge turn on. Mm-hmm. I was like, Oh, that's interesting. Yeah. He just needs time. He's, he's disciplined. He works all the time. He's always working on his career, which is a huge turn on. And I was like, well, you too. Those people are cluckers. Well, women have to get back to that too. Like, yeah, I learned how to pick a good man. Sometimes y'all are picking crap men based upon the money or things that they have. Mm-hmm. You get in relationship with a fun example of $100,000 in debt. Yeah. And it's a piece of juice, right? Yeah. You know, he's got these things. I think women have to get better at seeing potential in men. But don't they have to be tricked a few times before they can see the problems? Yeah. Yeah. That's the problem. That's a fucking dirty thing for a girl. Let some loser fuck you and go, God damn it. Yeah. Yeah. I thought I had a winner. Yeah. I mean, I've been a victim of that. I'm not in the victim, but you know, I've done that to women myself. Sorry, ladies, you know, I did wrong with you. Back in the day. Yeah. Yeah. I done some wrong. It's stuff. Well, we become a different person as time goes on. Yeah. You grow from it. Part of evolution of the human. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think society's expectations in women are it's very difficult for a man to understand it. You know, we see it from the outside, but to feel it as a woman that's got to be very different. I mean, and there's a lot of women out there that are looking for a man like a successful man. They're looking for a successful man and they want to touch them. Something that's like that's the goal. Yeah. That's not a goal of men. So it's it's very difficult for us to understand that our goal for, you know, obviously we're generalizing, right? Yeah. But our goal is to be successful ourselves. Right. Well, you can't you can't know what man you want unless you know who you are. And a lot of people are getting relationships without being in relationship with themselves first. So when, um, you know, in order to have a sound relationship, you have to know your socioeconomic stance is sad when you get into a relationship with a conservative and your liberal and you start arguing about Donald Trump in a relationship breaks because he's on one side. These are the conversations that you need to have at front. And if you don't know where you are politically and socioeconomically, for example, they say a lot of relationships break up because of money, right? Mm hmm. And you got one person's a bad spend there, the other one's thrifty, right? These are the conversations you need to have first. How do you manage your money? Are you go with your money? You know, and if you guys don't agree with how you want to pull your resource and how you want to pull your money and what you want to do with it in the future, you know, some people, you know, you might get in relationship with a girl and she's like, I want to push. You know, I want to land over it. And I'm like, I want to business. I want to VC, you know what I mean? Yeah. So you have two people that are going separate directions. One's going is consumer out, one's going and then pending, you know, producer route. So you have to first see, are you a consumer? Maybe you need to be a consumer. Are you a producer? You don't need to be with a consumer. You need to find someone as producer. So if you agree on social economics, you'll have a better relationship with people. But you have to know what you want at a life first and then find people connected based upon that and not the physical looks and all that other stuff. Yeah. And I think sometimes people think they want something because it's very difficult to attain. They see these things and they go, oh, that's the, that's the prize. Yeah. You know, the thing is, he stuff aren't hard to attain. Like, you know, getting a portion isn't hard. Right. It's hard for a lot of people. Depends on how much you make. What you do, what kind of job you're trapped in. Hard is relative. Right. You know, like, like I tell my kids, hard is basically undiscovered. That's all it is, right? So for example, when you first do algebra, it's hard. Right. But that's just because it's new. So hard equals new. That's what hard means. It's new because once you do algebra three, four, five, 10 times, it's not new anymore. And therefore, it's not hard. So once you break past the, the newness of a thing, it's no longer hard. Like building a business, it's not new to me. Therefore, it's not hard. It's very easy for me to build a business. Yeah. Because I've done it so many times in my life. You see what I'm saying? Jiffetize is cash flowing for X. What it was doing when I first joined the company. And all I do is make a few tweaks. But that's only because I'm not new to the tech starter space. I've been working with over 20 startups over 20 startups in a matter of two, three years as a consultant. So this stuff when people say, Oh, it's hard. It's like, no, not hard. It's new. And you're an idiot. And you don't know what you're doing. It's not hard to achieve anything in his life. I just work for 50 cent, right? And when I lived in New Brunswick, right by Rutgers, I, I, I wasn't really a 50 cent fan. I enjoyed his music. I wasn't a fan to buy a poster. I bought this poster. It was him and G unit. And he had his big stash of money. I was like, yo, this just, this poster motivates me. You fast forward 10 years and some other things I did to get close to 50. And I actually work with 50. That was technically hard, right? It's not easy to get an active 50. But when I did it, it happened like that. Then I started working with Carmella Anthony. So you're saying once it actually happened, it turned it wasn't actually hard. No, hard to start. It's hard for some people. No, they're just not disciplined. The hard hard is dealing with yourself. That's what's hard. Can you defeat your own mind? So when I wake up every morning, Hard, hard is dealing with yourself. That's what's hard. Can you defeat your own mind? So when I wake up every morning, the only thing I got to defeat is doubt. It's the only thing I have to defeat. Once I defeat doubt, I live in a limitless world, infinite possibilities. I can literally do anything. So people told me, oh, in order to be in tech, you know, you need a million dollars and that's that. the third dude, I got equity in three tech companies, three tech companies. And I'm not rich. I didn't, you know, put up millions to get into these companies. I'm part of these companies because I built me and it wasn't hard. It really wasn't hard to get into these companies. I just had something to offer in these so valuable. Me. I want to be the next Elon Musk. I want to be the next Bill Gates. I want to be the guy that Zuckerberg hates. You see what I'm saying? I want to be the guy that that builds the new Silicon Valley on the East Coast. You know, like that's those are my aspirations. So when people tell me what you can and can't not do and it's hard, I'm like, dude, I'm selling Bitcoin. How many black dudes do you know sell Bitcoin? None. Anybody sells Bitcoin. Exactly. And people are telling me this is hard. It's not hard. You get what you want. And I didn't get in the Bitcoin out of dumb luck. I manifested that. I said, I wanted to sell Bitcoin. How can I manifest it? Then I let it go. And the universe brought me the opportunity that happened. And when I said, when I first said, I want to be a VC. First thing I want to do is start building a portfolio. I didn't look for companies. They found me. It just, I just had to ask the universe. And it presented opportunities and I just had to. What do you mean by how to ask the universe? I had to put the intention out there. So do you think that literally by thinking about things you can make them happen? You can make the opportunity present itself. And then you have to be ready to take advantage. So let's we got to walk through the story to 50 something. Right. So I get invited to his bus launch, right, for the company. Now I'm sitting on the bus. They moved me to the back because of security reasons. So I'm in the back of the bus. When the bus start moving in my head, fear kicks in and doubt kicks in. And I'm telling myself, I should just hop with the bus stop. And I said, I should just hop up and just start screaming. I'm on the bus of 50 cent. And I'm like, no, I don't do it. I didn't fight it. You got to sit here and that's not right. And you know, all these things the society says is right. So I stand up and I go, yeah, I want to bus a 50 cent. Right. And then the whole crowd rushes to bus after the crowd finishes, they take one of the energy drink shirts. They throw it on me, throw the hat on me. They bring me to the front of the bus. Now I'm sitting next to 50 cent fast forward two years later, I'm in a 50 cent company. But it's because I started off with defeat and doubt. But also listening to my intuition, my intuition said to hop up and do that. Right. But the opportunity was presented to me. I didn't I didn't create the opportunity, they DM me and said, yo, we want you to come. I didn't ask, they invited me. But it's because I kept putting that 50 cent energy out there. You see, I kept putting that out there. Like I won mess with 50 cent. I want to miss it for 10 years. I've been putting that that energy out there 50 of you listening. Yo, how that me? I want to work with you again. Um, but I really I just really love 15 is attitude. He's just really a fun dude. You know, yeah, a funny thing about Father's Day. You see his round of my father's day. Yeah. He's very funny. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, but you know, the universe, anything you ask for, it will present the opportunity. The only thing is, are you woken up to see it? Can you identify it when it hits and can you defeat the fear to do you have all the other bases in your life covered where you have the ban with the tackle? Correct. Correct. Correct. But usually the universe only present your opportunities. You can handle data. Usually it doesn't, because if you couldn't handle it, you wouldn't be able to recognize it. Do you say this like the universe presents us to you this like a spiritual concept? Is this like, are you manifesting reality with your thoughts and intentions? Do you really believe that? All of that. Why do you believe that? Because I lived it. I experienced it. But you lived it in your successful attitude. That's why my perspective on that is always you hear about things like the secret and law of attraction. You hear that from people that are successful. They say, well, I will it into existence. Yeah. But what about the people that tried to will it into existence and nothing ever worked out right? Well, or at La Bora, right? Or at La Bora is laughing for working prey. A lot of people going to the secret and they just praying, but they ain't working. Right. That's important. If you know, so I do see, we just, I don't look at it in the same way. But I look at it in a similar way. I think there is something to intention. There there's something and there's something also to having that kind of faith to believe in intention. Whereas I think a lot of people, they're reluctant to give into that because it seems to woo, woo, and it seems like some crystals and fucking astrology and horseshit. You know what I mean? Because there's a lot of that out there. A lot of that. The new age has ruined the law of attraction. You know what I mean? I was just speaking into existence. And that's not true. You have to first educate yourself. So when we talk about a whole tap, right? When we talk about a a whole tap, you got to bring up the 5% nation. You got to bring up Supreme Mathematics, zero, Cypher, one knowledge, two wisdom, three understanding. But it first starts at the number one. Right? Number one is knowledge. So the problem is people are trying to manifest, but they ain't got no knowledge of anything. Right. So how do you manifest something with no knowledge? You got to educate yourself. You got to first start educating yourself. Discipline yourself so that you can educate yourself as well. Right. And also knowledge is the spring brought for imagination. Right? So if there's a complicated calculus problem, but you don't know what calculus is, how can intuition feed you insight or inspiration to solve a calculus problem? You first have to have the knowledge of calculus. Then when you get it, you get all this influx of inspiration like Einstein talks about. You know, he says down he kind of meditates and then the inspiration comes. But the inspiration can only talk to you based upon your understanding. Is it on saying? Yes. So the problem is people are out here not educating themselves. You know, I my day begins and ends with educating myself begins and during the day. I'm just reading books, hopping between books and reading and listening to lectures and people think I'm deep. And I'm like, I don't know. I don't know. Whatever. Whatever. I want to tell you. But really, my secret is consuming as much information as possible. That's my secret. And in from that, I'm able to say, Oh, well, you know, that, you know, studying history, you know, you can, you do a lot of things. But if you're not educating yourself or doing, you got to do something like just start, you know what I mean? When you said you're going to write a new book, you're in the middle, writing a book, are you putting this kind of stuff in your book? All right. So the next guidelines like that, I'm sorry, I didn't rub you. Yeah, guidelines like that is that I think that's very critical. When someone sees someone who's successful and sees someone, they see someone who's disciplined and focused. Like, okay, what do you, what are your guidelines? How do you do this and how like the way you're laying it out like right now? So, so this book here, right, this Twitter marketing. Yeah, this book is the how, how do you do it? Right? Like, how do you physically build a brand from start using Twitter as a platform? Now this book can actually be used for any platform. I just use Twitter as the example, right? But this is the how that people won't tell you about what markers won't tell you about. This is the how, right? It's all this exists now. The next book I have is with the editor, it's done, it's written, that's for men and how to have peaceful relationships with women, right? Because as we see, there's a gender war in America. So we need to create peaks. And what I say is the fault is none the women the fault is on the men, right? So that book was, uh, uh, the cover was designed by Rolotamasi, the rational male author. Then we have the book of whole tip was what you're talking about, which is already written, I wrote it two, three years ago. And it's that that, uh, structure for your life. So you can manifest these things, you know, so you can use spirit in your work to manifest these things. If you're a Christian, there's secrets in the Bible that show you how to, you know, manifest things. So you have to, you can't ignore your spiritual self. If you ever watch Dr. Strange, she pushes them out and his astral body comes down. So the human being is, is dual nature. We have our physical body and we have our astral body. If you never connect with your astral body, you only use a half of your potential. What's your astral body? Uh, it's, it's basically, uh, any theory or version of your, uh, physical body, but it's not bound by time and space. So what do you mean by that? What does that mean? What do you mean? What does that theory or version of your spiritual body? Like it's not physically, you can't touch it. Okay, right? You can't like interact with it. Right? Okay. But it can travel through space and time. Right? Well, we talk about our higher selves or we can to make things more understandable because all this stuff is based upon a subconscious mind, right? So you use a subconscious mind to program, I mean, use your conscious mind to program your subconscious mind. Then a subconscious mind communicates it to your higher mind and a higher mind. That's what the magic stuff happens. It's out of your control now, the higher mind, or spirit or God or Jesus, whatever you want to believe in, that's when they start working on this stuff. But it has to be a part of you and then life starts reflecting what's in your subconscious mind. But the, the astral body thing is, is, is kind of like, uh, something that we use to, uh, either communicate with people in long distance, uh, travel through time to, uh, see things that have happened in foreign lanes at different times, uh, get inspiration. So when we look at thinking grow rich, right? The book thinking grow rich was to tell you to do it. It tells you create a council of, I think he says dead people or something like that, right? So create a council of dead people your council, right? So if I did mine and probably like Malcolm X, Tupac, Nipsey Hussel, you know, like a whole bunch of people, right? And you have this congregation meeting of minds. You can't do that with your physical body. So who's going to be present at this meeting? The astral body has to be present at this meeting. So that's an example of how we've seen that science taught in thinking grow rich, right? So we can't stay the stuff is like, but aren't you saying when you're talking about like a council of dead people, you're saying like your imagination, you're, you're looking at this council of dead people, like, what would Tupac do? Like that shit. Like what, how would I draw inspiration from hominally? How would I, how would I take the, the, the, the knowledge of, you know, fill in the blank whoever's dead. Yeah, brilliant. Yeah. So there is that aspect, right? Where it's your imagination, right? What would Jesus do? Right? Well, that's, that is, that's the thing. Right. So, but what we have to understand is there's going to be a sliver of inspirational insight. So let's say 90% of your meeting with these people are pure physical, your mind, imagining these things. Right. Then is that one sliver that one 10% that slides through that gives you that piece of inspiration that you never would have thought about. It's like an idea, you know, sometimes you're telling me like, oh, oh, yeah, you know, that idea that just pops in your head, that is what happens. Now, once you get more advanced, you can get more of that influx of inspiration from, you know, spirit or whatever you want to call it. Get more advanced meaning, practice this all the time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, practicing, um, you know, using your astral body to project out and being in another space, uh, happy Gilmore calls it his happy space. And I would have movie. Yeah. All right. So what did he do in order to manifest his dreams? He went to his happy place to detach himself from his physical problems. Hmm. And then he came back and he put it in. He did the impossible. So it's like the trial that you know. So if you were to construct this and put this down into guidelines, you, you're basically streamlining the process of how to be a successful and how to, how to just, yeah, make your dream come true, make, make your reality, how to be a person who's got their shit together. Yeah. You know, the, the main thing is a problem where people especially young people, they don't know what they want to do. They don't know the passion, you know, a purpose. And again, that just comes back to knowledge. Are you studying? Take your interest and study it when you get bored with it. Drop it. Move on to the next thing. But you know, like over the years, I've collected a lot of skills. All of them being used now, you know, like I'm not a photo shop guy, but I know how to use Photoshop. But that happened because at one point, I was running a block, had to know how to edit something or do something, you know what I mean? So just because it's not a skill you want, like at one point, I had photography business where my space was popping out of photography business. Now, I don't do photography anymore, but I understand it. So when I'm some place, I can still use these skills, whether it's for a product or something or event. I can still use these skills to my advantage, you know what I mean? So even if you don't like that skill at that time, it might come in play later on. Right? But the bottom line is you have to start with your knowledge and then allow the spirit or intuition to feed it. Right? Allow it to feed it. Like I don't use my logical mind. My logical mind is only for after inspiration. Right? You get that? Yeah. So you get inspired and then use your logical mind to figure out how to make this work. Right. And that's where we have to be. Let the logical mind just carry out the minimal tasks, let the higher manner intuition lead the way. Now, do you think of these things as being like separate entities or is this all a part of you? That's all one. So you think when you think of your higher mind, how do you visualize this? Do you do? Do you visualize this as something that you don't necessarily have control of but you can tap into? Yeah, I guess you can look at it like that. Like, you know, I'm not the Dolly Lamo in this topic. You know what I mean? But, you know, I for one exercise, what I might do is I'll put light around my head. I'll visualize a sphere of light around my head. And you see this in religious texts and art. You always see Jesus Christ or Saints. They always have this glow around the head. They call it a halo. Right? But really the halo is like your aura. Right? But also the second aspect is that when I want to use my brain in an events way, I can start the firing of neutrons or whatever the technical term is by visualizing something. Even if I want to visualize thunderstorms in my head, you know, that'll get the brain working, you know, but usually like light. If I want to do distant healing, right? Let's say you tell me you sick, right? I'm probably showing you seen this. But if I want to do distant healing, I would envelop you in light. I would sit at home, rest, make sure you sleep, then I would picture light around your working. Do you think that you can do that? Do you think you can actually heal people from a distance? No. You're not healing anything. What you're doing is you're giving the intention to God that you want this person to be healed in God or the universe is healing. We can't heal a damn thing. Right. But you really think that by thinking about something, you can put that intention now and it'll change the result. Yes. Really. What makes you think that? Well, they have these scientific tests. I haven't studied this in a while, but there's a test where they fire like these electrons or something like that. And the electrons are supposed to be like on a predictable path. And then when they introduce people to the experiment, the intentions way of spirit. The problem with that is that's misinterpreted. The real change is in observing it. Yes. But the change is in observing it because you're measuring it. So by measuring it, changing the pattern. Like if you talk to a real physicist about it, they've added all this woo woo to this. That's unnecessary because really what it is is just the tools and the instrument they use to measure it or change their results. Yeah. I could definitely see that. The thing is that physics has to marry spirituality and spirituality has to marry physics. If you don't have that connection between it too, we don't got the whole picture. Spirituality is a weird word. What does that mean? It's a very taboo word. It's a very abused word. It's abused. It's not religious for them spiritual. That kind of shit. Yeah. That's where it gets weird. Yeah. I don't like that at all. You know, when I speak about spirituality, I'm speaking about something that really can't be put in the words. It's unfathomable. Our language isn't designed to talk about this stuff. You know, when we look at Orwell and news speak, there's certain words that don't exist for this stuff. You'd have to use an ancient language and even ancient language. You try translating the English. It's like we don't have a word for this. You ever had a... Yeah. You're a scene scene. Like ancient Hebrew when they try to translate things. Right. Ancient Hebrew, all the numbers were all the letters were actually numbers as well. Correct. Correct. Yeah. Do you know when you talk about halos that the original halo was a mushroom cap? Oh, what? Yeah. A mushroom cap. Yeah. Oh, you're talking about, okay, I got you. The original halo was... Well, there's a book called The Sacred Mushroom in the Cross. It's by John Marco Allegro and he was a biblical scholar that was one of the guys that was assigned to decipher the Dead Sea Scrolls, which is the oldest version the Bible. Yes. The only one I think that they've ever found that's written in Aramaic. It was found Kuma Ron and these clay, clay, these clay jars and it's all made on written on animal skins to decipher it. They actually had to run DNA tests on the animal skins to figure out which skins belong to which animals so they could put all the stuff together and figure out like, oh, all these pieces were a part of this one scroll. Yeah. Well, this guy John Marco Allegro studied it for 14 years and it was his conclusion after he was done that the entire Christian religion was a giant misunderstanding. What it was originally about was the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals and they started doing all of these like these different scholars who studied ancient art and ancient religious art. They started finding this mushroom iconography and all this ancient artwork. And one of the things they noticed is that the bottom of a mushroom, if you take like particularly the amineed of mascara and mushroom, which is the one that they connect to the Christian religion. Look at the bottom of it and see what it looks like with all those lines. Yeah. Now look at that. That was the original halo. Okay. If you see that picture about with Jesus with the halo around his head, the halo was essentially the bottom of a mushroom cap and the idea they believe was that these people were the ones that were consuming the psychedelic mushroom. So they had this great wisdom and this connection to God. That's what they thought mono was. That's what they thought the psychedelic mushrooms were the flesh of God. I liked that. Yeah. And so that when you have these ancient religions that were possibly based on the consumptions of these psychedelic mushrooms, all that stuff has kind of been lost in the translation over years and years and years. And then even the visualization of the halo's changed. Yeah. And there's also some really crazy ones of naked people dancing and ecstasy surrounded by this translucent mushroom image. So the idea that they were in these mushroom induced euphoric states and that they were dancing around. All these religious depictions. Very interesting. Because if you think about ancient religions, right? No science, they had no idea what shaped the world was. They didn't know anything. But they did know if you found these mushrooms and you took them, you trip your fucking balls off. You would have this incredible experience. And they thought that was God. That was their connection to God. You know, so there's... That's interesting. Yeah. It's a great book and the Catholic Church actually bought it out. And they got rid of it. And then you could only buy used copies of it. But then it was republished recently over the last few years. Someone got the rights to it. Mm-hmm. Yeah. That's interesting. It's intense stuff. Yeah. I like that conversation. Yeah. That's sexy. Yeah. You know, anything that goes away from the norm, I think is real sexy. I mean, it's to any to be taught and needs to be talked about. You know, at the beginning of a sexy, you see that woman that accused Trump rape said that she was talking about rape being sexy? Yes. And Anderson Cooper's like, we'll be right back. I got it to commercial. What? Yeah. She's a lonely bed. Well, she seems like she might be medicated. Yeah. You can definitely tell there's something off there. Yeah. Maybe. Maybe it's just super nervous being on television too. That's also... Oh, no. It's hard to figure out how people are when you see the the month television because I like to consider myself a good judge of character. She's off of Racco. She seems off of rocker. I don't know. I'm personal. Some people really do have panic attacks when they're cameras on that white light and they're in the CNN studios and then and it just comes out weird. And then they like what the fuck was wrong with me. Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I could see that. I don't think in her case. I think she's just really like, do you think she's trying to sell a book? She's trying to sell something. She definitely wants some attention. Yeah. But Teflon Donnie, she can't do nothing. Teflon Donnie. It is crazy how he's been able to shake everything off. Everything. If you stand tend toals down, he can't by doing that until you. That's why I keep saying like don't worry about these tech companies. Stand tend toals down. Stand tend toes down? Yeah. What's that mean? Stand on your foot, man. Like, you know, like, stand your ground. Yeah. It's it don't waver just because somebody says something. Yeah. I get criticized a lot. A lot. In my responses, I said what I said, you know, I'll haul in for your eat the left and I'll furiate the right and the right to feel like, well, last week you were pro Trump and now you're saying something that's different is like and well, you got the most shit I think for that Starbucks video. The Starbucks video was hilarious. Thank you. Well, you walked into Starbucks and you said, uh, here you are. You guys are racist. I'm going to get my free Starbucks. Yeah. And that lady was like, okay. A man to shout out to a man to shout out to a man to. She's like, yeah, I heard that. Hold on. I'll get your coffee. It's like, I didn't know you could just give away coffee. You were a good Starbucks, but I guess she just did. I manifested that. Where was that? I was a New Jersey, uh, Waburi, comm is more. I think it's hilarious. Yeah. But, you know, like, I'm in if I said, and you can go look at that. The tweet two weeks before said, I said, uh, if you want to be on mainstream media pretend to be a liberal, then I also said, I said to my followers, I said, can you get me off Fox News? The next week I pulled this stunt and then got on Fox News. Now when they had you on Fox News, what was the premise? What were they going to talk with? They say, it's one of the story. There's one. There's one of some. There's one of some specific people. And they also probably wanted a little bit of potential outrage. Like, this is probably asking for coffee reparations. Yeah, you got a black guy who's asking for reparations. They kind of like that, especially when it's spoofing the left. So, yeah, they, you know, they, they kind of want to weaponize me. Yeah. Um, so yeah, there's a lot of that. I thought it was funny. I thought it's Larry's. You were very friendly about it. You know, it was like, you were being angry anything. Did you have your son with you or someone too? Yeah, my boy's the whole family was in me. That's funny. Yeah. Yeah. My son didn't. He was like, I told him, I might go ahead and get free coffee. He's like, yeah, right. Yeah. You're dad's really about to pull this off. You had a debate recently about reparations with CJ Pierce. Yes, that young guy who's very, he's an interesting guy, very, very intelligent and articulate fellow. Is he like 19 years old or something? 16? 16? Yeah. Is he really only 16? 16. Yeah. Really? Yeah. I said they say at least. I thought he was older than that. He brights for Quillette and he's really only 16. Yeah. CJ Pierce and his own is. Yeah. Kind of hold you. That seems crazy. It's got Drake. Great. He's a 16. Wow. It's got fucking smart as shit. No, he's not. But, why do you think he's not smart? It's not smart. Smart people create things. Stupid people. Oh, fuck it. 16. You don't think it's got an exception of vocabulary and ability to express himself at 16? And what does that mean? It means you got something going on. I don't mean shit. It doesn't mean shit. An exception of what you speak about. What is absolute sometimes? What is the whole? What does vocabulary mean? You memorize some words? Well, you have use of them at access. It's an instantaneous access that means they're in your mind all the time, which means you've done a lot of reading, which means you've done a lot of studying, which means you have a command of the English language. Which is the only thing that we have if you speak English, that you can use to express your intent. Right. And Orwell talks about these political types who sound very educated. He says it. They sound very educated on a better. Right. And then when you break down what they actually said, it's so very vague. It's so very nonspecific. There's actually no solutions. You know, all they do is talk about problems. What is your platform CJ Candace Owens? What is your platform? Is your platform I hate Democrats or is your platform I want something for the people? Because it seems like when you watch these people, they're all saying the same thing for clicks. Like I told you, my homeboy that makes all that money on Facebook, he's doing the Candace Owens and CJ Pearson thing for money. But are they the same? They're not. They don't have the same ideology. CJ Pearson's and Candace Owens. They're cut from the same cloth. You think so? They're the same person. He's just younger version. I heard him speak on the Sam Harris show. I believe it was him. Right. Was it him? CJ, see, it's Google that CJ Pearson on Sam pretty sure it's the same cat. And I was very impressed, especially with some of his age. Yeah, I mean, he talks very well. That's hard to do. No, here in the United States of America is not him. I've got both the names and nothing. Okay. Maybe it's a different dude. They have pre that's why I thought it was older. Catch phrases. Pre-planned catch phrases. You're learning. You're just learning another language. And that's what he's speaking that language. No, they don't have that. That's a little broke. You know, I see what you're saying. So you're saying that they have this sort of ideology that you're subscribing to, this predetermined pattern of behavior, they know what works and then they just follow it. Sort of like a top 40 DJ talks. There you go. Right. Right. What has what new thought has he created? I don't know. He hasn't. I just listened to that debate. And it's a conversation that I think is a fascinating one, the conversation of reparations because it can be no doubt that something horrible happened to the black community and they're still suffering from it. Especially in the deep south and you look at these places where the people who lived are the direct descendants of slaves. Yeah. And then these are the same in published neighborhoods that no one's ever done anything to try to fix. Right. So how do you fix it? You first have to start with the subconscious mind of the black man. The problem with the black man is the fact that the black man starts off with the fetus mentality. From the day you're born, you're taught the white man's out to get you. So you start off with a boogie man and then you're taught that you're a slave. Right. So when your subconscious mind believes that they the beginnings of your race is a slave, how do you aspire to be more than that? So in order to correct the black community, you have to teach black history or so called black history or what I would say African history and chronological order before we were slaves or were kings. So how do you have a whole entire nation of 40 some odd million black people and majority of them never heard a queen in Gola who never heard of the song high empire, the Molly empire, you know, none of this stuff. Right. King Masamosa. How do you how do you how do you raise the people's level of awareness about this stuff? And how do you elevate them to want to do things in life when they think they are a slave? That's the first thing that you have to do to help black people. You have to teach them who they are. The expression before they were slaves, they were kings. The problem with that is a king is a monarch and a monarch is one person who controls giant groups of people. He can have a bunch of kings. There's not a lot of kings, kind of a nation of kings. Correct. But that's very different from saying, you know, that we had four kings, right? Let's say they were just four, right? That's better than saying Harry Tubman, Fred Douglas and these free slaves, right? You actually have to see at least one king. I see what you're saying. At least so see one advanced human being that also looks like you that came from the same part of the world where your ancestors came from. So recognize that the trajectory that you and your family are on is a direct from the same part of the world where your ancestors came from. So recognize that the trajectory that you and your family are on as a direct result of being enslaved, that someone was enslaved in the past and brought over here against their will. That's why there's the negative mindset. That's why there's a negative self-image is because there's a great history of oppression. Yeah, yeah. You know, when you think you are slave, you can't operate outside of that. And even if you don't think you're a slave, you think you're inferior. Right. Do you know who Ms. Pat is? No. A hilarious comedian. One of the funniest human beings alive and she was here. And one thing she was talking about was when she was younger that when she would see white people, she wouldn't look them in the eye. She was getting nervous. She felt inferior being around them. She just wanted to get away. She didn't feel like she belonged. Right. Right. And that's a product of not knowing who you are, not knowing your own personal power. You know, when you look at the second Munich war as a Carthage, you had a Hannibal went through the Alps, which is a mission impossible. And he went all the way to the doors of Rome. And Rome said, you know, when you're coming outside the fight, you bruh. When you're coming, that's how strong the power for the army was. They said, we don't want to fight. They knew if they came outside those gates, they would get their ass with. So, how do you how do you have a people that walk around not knowing that Hannibal, Barca is a well studied war general today, the Pentagon still studies him. Right. So how do you operate in an America as a black person and not know who Hannibal Barca is? Well, it's difficult to think for people that were born in America and all their known ancestors from America to even relate. Like, I'm my family's mostly from Italy and Sicily and some of them from Ireland. I don't relate at all. I visit Italy in the side of the times. I don't relate at all. Right. So then the other side of the other side of the fact that we were the natives, we were not brought here on slave ships. That's not economically sound. What do you make sense? So when Christopher Columbus guy here wanted to, what Christopher Columbus got to the Caribbean according to a primary source, they basically said the first thing he did was take slaves. He didn't bring slaves. He took slaves from the island. He captured people. So when you have colonization, you got to remember, the United States was only built 13 colonies at first. Right. Do you think this whole land was empty? No, there were natives here. Right. But today we're taught that natives as some other people. No, natives are the melanated African being that has come here since the beginning of the Marley Empire. We're talking about 14, 13th century. We had already come here from Africa. Really? Oh, yeah. Yeah. We had already come here. To the United States or to the land mass. This land mass we call the United States. So the way the ocean current works is it works from Africa. It leads out of West Africa, comes to South America and the Caribbean. That's just how the currents go. You don't need no paddle boat or nothing. It is just the currents that's taking there. And then you travel up. But we had already been here. All you got to do is look up the story of Sarah Rektor. Sarah Rektor is a wealthy so-called native American. I think she was a Choctaw tribe or one of these tribes, but she was wealthy. And she wanted to be our pastor, go somewhere. And they had her classified as a free person. Why don't we know about the wealthy so-called black people in America? Why don't we know that there were black slave owners in America? Why is that not to it? How many black slave owners were? Man, the natives here had slaves. They were trading slaves with the so-called white man. Well, they definitely did that. Natives and slave people of other tribes. Right. So if those people are us, the so-called black man, those natives were us. Then we have to tell that history and say how we did have territories and we did carry out commerce and we weren't slaves or we're slave owners. But the majority of African Americans that lived here were brought over here. No. No. That's not economically sound. What do you mean by its not economically sound? Like there were slaves. Let's say you wanted to have, you wanted to sell marijuana, right? Right. Would you import marijuana? Would you grow here? If it's already here? Well, it depends on whether or not marijuana grew here. Well, can you- Can you- You know marijuana here? You can. Okay. But we're just talking about marijuana. Like what is the talk about? So it's something that you can't grow here. So what I'm saying is people were already here. Does it make sense to go all the way to this other continent to bring people on the boat? When we know that half of your stock is going to die, you wouldn't do that. So how many people do you think we're brought over from African slave ships? Because that definitely happened. I don't believe it. What do you mean you don't believe it? I don't believe that story. You don't believe that Africans are brought over on slave ships? Correct. I believe it may have happened. You know, maybe people were brought over as slaves. But I don't think that the black people in America came from Africa on slave ships. I believe the people that were here were slowly conquered. First, they got the east coast. And then they started spreading out west little by little conquering. And when you conquer a tribe, what do you do? You wouldn't slave them their POWs. Right? Okay. That's what you do. So you after you conquer this tribe, you make them slaves. Now, how do you conquer the natives here? So let's say you got this tribe is worn against this tribe. Well, this tribe goes talk to the white man. When I says, yo, if you help me wipe out these people, then boom, you know, I'll help you with whatever, whatever. So they get together and they wipe out this other tribe. And I guess what? The white man now out numbers this tribe. So he wipes them out. You just kill two birds at one stone. You just keep moving like that. But I'm still confused. There's a great history of slave ships being brought over from Africa with Africans that became slaves and worked in the south. So do you think that's lies? History is his story. Right. What about my story? Is my story not valid? But if you do 23 and me on someone from these parts of the country, you'll find out 20 days. So 23 and me. So 23 and me. So when I when I take a 23 and me test, right? Yes. Was it going to tell me about Africa? It's good question. We should find out. Probably going to say, oh, you're from Kenya or you're from Angola. You're from this. There's right. Right. These things, these borders were created by Europe. In terms of, yes, right. In terms of like what parts of Africa and how it's distributed and what's a country and what's not a country. Yeah. These bananas, conners and dutch. Yeah. Okay. So you can't classify me based upon a European name. I understand that, but they're saying geographically geographic location. You call whatever name you want. Right. They can tell you where your genetics originated. Right. I've got some weird shit in me. I got like 1% Asian. I don't know why it's there 1.6% African. Okay. There's also weird stuff that you find in your DNA that like your ancestors and ancestors and ancestors. So let's walk down there. Let's walk down there. Right. So either way, if you take black people here in America, you do they DNA sample and it point back to Africa. What does that say? It says black people in America are Africans. Now the argument is where we brought here or where we already here. Did we bring ourselves here or the white man bring us here? You see, when you say the white man brought us here, what you're doing is you're removing our ability to transport our selves. You're saying, oh, we didn't know anything about boats. That's what you're trying to tell me. You're trying to tell me that we didn't know that there was a landmass here. The only the the holy white man knew there was land to the West. But when you look at the holy white man, he said, when we got here, we met black people. Go look at the primary source. You got here, we met black people. When you got to Caribbean, we met black people. You think the Caribbean is right next to America and they weren't in America? That's interesting. It's like any sense. Well, you got a sense that you do have people that have traveled, whether it's Polynesians that traveled to white or people. I mean, there's the all-mex, thousands and thousands of years ago in South America. They have clearly African faces. I mean, really, the noses, the lips, they look African. And that was a South American culture that existed. We don't know anything about them other than the fact that they have these gigantic stone sculptures that have African faces. Well, again, just go to, if you can pull up the ocean currents. I've seen that. You know what Grandma Hancock is? I've heard about him. He read his stuff. It's really fascinating because he's all about that. He's all about the fact that the idea that human beings were probably living in advanced civilizations far longer than 14,000 years ago. They did travel all over the world and that you do find the remnants of these ancient cultures that we have no explanation for throughout the Amazon, you know, and throughout different parts of the South American Central America. I mean, when you go and you look at rail European history, you had the Magyards would believe that if they took a bath that was bad, right, they didn't even want to change their clothes. They thought that dirty was purity. When we talk about the moors going into Spain and into Europe, the stories in the history, our history says that when we met the so-called Caucasian, he was sleeping in the barn with the animals and we told him, no, you can't sleep in the barn with animals. We taught them etiquette. We taught them running water. We brought that technology to Europe. Now, if we brought the technology to Europe that saved Europe from the black plague, you may not tell me that if we saved the white race that we weren't already in America already, when we brought the technology, when Rome was dependent on Africa for food, remember when the black plague hit Rome? The cause was one of the officials was still in the grain that was coming from Africa. So there was famine hit Rome. If your source of sustenance is from Africa, how will you superior? You're not. You get your fools from me. So if you get your fool from me, who's more likely to travel this globe? Me, I'm the source of food. And that's the first thing you need to survive on this planet. So if your whole civilization is dependent on me to supply food, I made it to America first. It's just that you want to work on it. You've got to tell the story. Is that their only source of food? I mean, it's a source of food that Rome had, right? But Rome is also very close to Africa. Well, let's talk about that. What kinds of food did they have? Well, I don't know. It's a very rudimentary. It was a very rudimentary civilization. It wasn't all what is cracked up to be. When you go look at what the Greek said about Egypt, when you go into Egypt, just like, yo, it's like the New York City at that time. The ultimate. If you really want to talk about African civilization being advanced, Egypt is the ultimate for Egypt to this day is still unexplained. Right. No one really understands how they built those things. No one understands how old the culture is. That's another thing that Graham Hancock and Dr. Robert Schock from Boston University who's a geologist. He's pointing to water erosion and the the temple that thinks that leads you to believe that that place might have been as old as 9000 plus BC. So it actually is. If not, oh, yeah, I don't think it's a pharaoh. There's also different styles of architecture. Right. There's older styles of architecture. They find deeper in the sand. They think it might have been indicative of an earlier kingdom. And then there's also the new being structures of some of the faces, particularly the Sphinx. You know, the Sphinx, they believe had a lion's face. And then when they were conquered by the new beings, they changed the actual structure of the face of the Sphinx and turned it into a king's face. What a way it was so far from me was that it is upper and lower Egypt. So upper Egypt is actually our new south, right? That's our south. And what the way it's taught to me was that was the mind of Egypt and the economic section of Egypt was what we see Gizaperemons. And it's economic because if you look at it, it sits between three continents on the Mediterranean Sea. So it's a perfect place to carry out commerce. It's the perfect place. That's why everybody wants to be there. That's why there's a war in the Middle East because it's a perfect place to be. So do you believe that some Africans came over here in slave ships or none? Very minimal. Very minimal. So you think it's a myth? Almost. Now, does there any scholars that support these opinions or these your opinions or where are you getting this from? So here's the thing. This is stuff I've studied probably close to 15 years ago. So I don't remember a lot of my sources or who I learned it from, but I can give you a couple of names. So what you got to do is you got to look up Shaka Agmos. You got to look up Dr. Kaba Kameen, Dr. Phil Valentine, Bobby Hemit, who else is a good Egyptologist? Shaka Agmos is a real good Egyptologist. I think you should start to deal with Shaka Agmos. But these are these are videos I used to watch and lectures I used to watch back in a day. Now I focus on like startups. That's where my knowledge is focused on. Right. But a lot of this stuff comes from my own common sense. It just does not make sense logistically to take people from all the way from over there to bring them here, especially when half your stock is going to die when you got people right here. You have human resources right here. All I got to do is pop them, shoot a couple of them, the rest of them are like, all right, fine. And you went slave them. And none of them died except for the ones I actually killed. Right. I got a whole millions of people right here like, why would I go all the way across the ocean? They bring people back across the ocean. It just doesn't make sense. It's just stupid. They didn't know why we run a business like that. What's up, Jim? PBS. How many the title was how many slaves landed in the US? Well, scroll that up. Scroll it up so I can read that whole thing. Right to there. Perhaps you like me were raised essentially to think of the slave experience primarily in terms of our black ancestors here in the United States. In other slavery is primarily about us right from the Christmas attacks and Philip Wheatley Benjamin Bannaker and Richard Allen all the way to Harriet Tubbin. So, Jordan Truth and Frederick Douglas, think of it as an instance we might think of as African American exceptionalism. In other words, it's the black experience. It's got to be about black Americans. Well, black Americans will think again, the most comprehensive analysis of shipping records over the course of slave trade is the transit landic slave trade database edited by professors David Eltis and David Richardson while the editors are careful to say that all the figures are estimates they believe that the best estimates that we have the proverbial gold standard in the field, the study of the slave trade between 1525 and 1866. In the entire history, the slave trade to the new world, according to the transit landic slave trade database 12.5 million Africans were shipped to the new world. 10.7 million survived the dreaded middle passage disembarking in North America, the Caribbean and South America. How many of those 10.7 million Africans were shipped directly to North America? Only about 388,000. That's right, a tiny percentage. So, a small percentage of all the Africans that were in slave were actually shipped to North America. That's probably closer to truth. They ain't come from Africa, bro. That don't make no sense. No buyer run a business like that. Well, they're saying that a lot of people did, though. That's 10.7 million people came on boats. That's what they're saying. That's why they're in a slave trade. I don't know if that means that they necessarily came here. They could have been going to Europe. Well, no, they were saying that they were saying that was in the free trade. The slave trade does not have to come from Africa. I can trade with you right here in America. But was it, why are they not? It's said to directly to North America is only the under 400,000, right, right, involved in the shipping and going all over the world. It could be going anywhere. But from Africa, that's less than 10% African shipped. Yes, right. That's less than 10%. Less than 10% in North America, but 10.7 million Africans in slaves and moved. Yeah, 10.7 survived. Right. We're shipped, but didn't say where they were shipped. It's to the new world. New world is very arbitrary. Only 388,000 actually made it to this to North America. I could trade from Haiti or Jamaica or South America. So you think that, yeah, right. So you think that there was probably already a significant population of Africans that were sea-bearing that made it all the way over here. Yes. Well, if you listen to the words of Hancock and the discussion of prehistoric, what we would consider, pre-historic use of boats and ships, it's probably likely. Right. Look at ancient Egypt. Don't you see pictures of boats? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. So they would bury them. I mean, if you could, there was the, what is the big science museum in LA that had the Egypt exhibit really recently? It's fucking credible. But they had a depiction of the boats that they used. Yeah. I mean, they had boats, for sure. They had boats. So how can you tell me that a civilization had boats before Europe was literate? Didn't come to America. Didn't set up shot. It's just not common. I mean, just, I don't need to read a book to understand that. But definitely makes sense if they made it to South America. I mean, if the old Macs were, I mean, if you look at, pull up an image of the old Mac heads, this is heavily disputed. John Henry Clark is an author. You should study John Henry Clark has a book. They come before Columbus. I mean, look at that. Look at these old Mac heads. They all looked like that. That's South America. Yeah. So it kind of, if you have, amazing, you, there has to be a large population of people in order to create these things. Right? It has to be, you know, these have to be advanced. So if they're here already in South America, why you don't go close to see when you got people right here? You just enslaved. South America is connected to America. You think we didn't come up North? You think we didn't take that look? Right. It's just common sense. Well, particularly when they're finding all this evidence of people that were here thousands and thousands of years before they ever thought people were. Yeah. Oh, the evidence in the Grand Canyon for me, James. What? I don't know about that. What's that? Is you heard about that part of it? Yeah. There might be some gold down there. Is this Egyptian gold in the Grand Canyon? Hey, imagine if they found a fucking Egyptian tomb in the Grand Canyon. There's Egyptian stuff that's been found in Ohio. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, I was looking some stuff up by the grandma's telling me I went home and looked up the serpent mount stuff and like right up the road from where the serpent mount is, there's been a couple artifacts found there like a hundred years ago. It's called mounds. Pull that up. Yeah. There's mounds in America, which yeah, supposed to be like pyramids or whatnot. So there's even an Egypt, Ohio. I don't think it's named after that, but it's literally like in the same spot. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is this this this history of human travel is fucking fascinating. Circum navigated this globe before, man. This isn't new stuff. It's new to Europe. It wasn't new to the African race, man. We've been here. They got the mounds to archaeological evidence from Egypt and the Grand Canyon. It's right there. See, I've never heard that before. That is interesting. Archaeological evidence in the Grand Canyon is not part of his story. He's got to keep you thinking. He's got to keep the black people thinking you were slaves and you came from Africa on boats. That's what they got to keep you thinking. But you really think that there's some sort of a grand conspiracy to withhold information. Yeah. Universities, scholars, all these people that are talking about the history of the world. Universities, indoctrination centers. Stan, the worst thing you could do is send a child to college unless they're going to learn a heart science. You know, you go to. Wait a minute. You think gender studies is bullshit? Of course is blatant. What are you saying? These make believe degrees. Gender studies, bro. Serious stuff. Yeah. Gender study. You know, it's a social construct. I studied gender in the bedroom. I'm going to buy them. That's why I studied gender. Okay. And also this thing is no gender status. Tell me what, but there is you're going to pay for it and you're being that for studying gender studies. You get a fat degree. Do you find anything about the Egyptian? When I found it, I was down a deep hole. So I can't just find it that way. I'm trying to I'm going to find it in a second. James was very good. Yeah. I just found the picture around here. Pull it up. Let me see some shit. This is this is this is this. This is the whole tubs got to get glasses on. We're getting serious. This is the good stuff. Man, we look at his head. You see his head right there? Yes. That's not nappy here. Uh, well, that's a Thai Buddha. So it's not his hair. Well, I think those are braids. This was like an ornament. There were braids. A lot of people including the Romans. Oh, like, great to those. What is this? This is a draw. This is from an old book. That's what I was telling. It's really old. This is a drawing of all the inscriptions that were found on this piece of stone. And a lot of these are very, they're like, uh, hieroglyphs and whatnot. See, it's like, maybe they're like, uh, somewhere on here is that, I think it looks just like that serpent from the mound. That's in a while. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. I forget what in fact, that's no Egyptian, but it's certainly exactly. Yeah, it might not be Egyptian necessarily. But when I found it, that's what it was tagged as. Oh, okay. It's from that time period or very similar, but that's the Pennsylvania archaeologist is what the book is found from. Okay. I've just just how I got to it. Yeah, I've never seen this before, but there's some archaeological evidence on the walls. Like you said, a lot of people don't even know that Egypt's an Africa. That's hilarious. We start talking to people about, think about that African culture. Why don't they want the seven wonders of the world to be associated with Africa? Well, because Africa is a continent, I guess. Like, thank you, but in terms of because Egypt is so unbelievably unique globally. Yeah. Like, there's nothing like it in the world. We know stone hangers in Europe. Yeah, but stone hangers clunky in comparison of the shit that you find in Egypt. Oh, yeah, it is. But they, they still pop up stone hangers like it's some great thing. You know, it's in Europe. Yeah, stone hangers fascinating. All right, it's fascinating. Like, hmm, why do they do this? There's a lot of shit in Europe too. They're finding now with Lidar, whether they're using this, they're, they can map into the ground and find these structures and roads and pathways that existed. And that's the long since been reclaimed by nature. Yeah, you're finding that like this was one of the Graham Hancock things that he was talking about how you look at South America when they're going through the Amazon, you're finding these incredible structures and incredible roadways and irrigations and that they believe that at one point in time, there was civilization of 20 million people living in the Amazon. And that when the European settlers came over, they brought smallpox and wiped everybody out bone. Yeah, bone just like they did with the Native Americans. That's the thing that people don't know. When they talk about Native American genocide, the vast majority is disease. Yeah. So when people say, oh, you know, the way man came over here with violence. I'm like, no, I don't know if he was that violent. I don't think he had enough bullets to kill that many people. They killed 90% with disease. Which state disease, man? Which is fucking crazy. So where did disease come from? Europe? Dirty people. So how can you tell me that, you know, I'm just a slave, right? When the filth, the degeneration of Europe is what came to America. Greatness didn't come to America. The degeneration came to America. Well, some greatness I mean, some people talk about the people that came here. They were escaping the oppression of yes, Europe. They were the undesirables in Europe. Right? Or the people tried to get away from religious persecution. Right. Things like that. Yeah. But these were the drugs of the society. Right. In many ways. Yeah. So you come here and you dirty and you infect the people and maybe now that's why you got to ever get to the place because you got there by your fear. Everybody's dead. What if you had to like if you were speaking in front of Congress, yeah, when you were talking about reparations, what would you have to say? Keep the conversation going. Open up the conversation. Let's get more minds involved. Don't shoot it down in Dem's Must Pay. You know, I got the hashtag going. Dem's Must Pay. Why Dem's? Because it's a great start. Number one. So, you know, when we had the debate with CJ Pearson, he said, you know, in his rant, he went off about that. And he said, if anything, the damage should pay is the liberals because they had the KKK. They had, they, they owned slavery. They ran a slave trade. So it's like, well, if that's the case, then why don't we make them pay? The other thing is, you know, if you're conservative and you, you know, you're having this election race or whatever, why don't you just take the wild card away from them, you know, from the left and say, well, yeah, you know, if there is a reparations conversation, you know, that was the Democrats. That was the Dixie Cracks that installed black codes in South Carolina. They're the ones that, that's an interesting conversation, right? When you say that. Yeah. And like, wait, what? Just actually the Democrats are responsible. Yeah, you had the thing called black codes. And if you were considered black, then you didn't have rights. The funny thing is you could be technically African and be white. White is in color. is the status Elon Musk. What do you mean from Africa? Is he? Yep. Why, I know it. But he's not an African. Well, he was born in Africa, but he's not in Africa South Africa. But so, so when we do his 23 of me, what does it probably touch or something? Oh, they, because he's something from Europe. Yeah. Yeah. You know what I mean? But there's white people that their lineage from historically is from Africa. Sure. Well, I mean, the Sephardic people that lived in northern Africa, right? Yeah. Where it's considered more Middle East. Right, right, right. You can see some of that absolutely. But these people aren't the African. These people come from Turkey. Right, right. Right. Come from Kiav Russia. You know, that's where they come from. They might grade it into Africa. That's not what they front. Right. Their bodies aren't even biologically conducive to that environment. You know, I'm not conducive to the New York environment. White folks is. Exactly. White folks is running on a street when shorts and I'm just like, yo, I need to jack it. But there's definitely a biological difference that we got to recognize a little bit. Sure. Now what we came from. Yeah. Yeah. It's a lot to this conversation. There's a lot of this conversation, but it's so heavily weighted. People don't want to be objective about it. Right. What's up? The thing I found about the Egyptians in Ohio was actually from a paper that was written. It's it's postulating it. I guess they took a lot of the evidence that they had been finding and saying this shows that there might have actually been Egyptians there. That's from 1937. That's when the guy was, I think, born. This is 40 years ago. Wow. That amulet was brass apparently and it was found here since in Addy. And where I actually think it might have been trading trade routes because there was some like stones that have been found in various parts of the world that are from specifically Ohio because it's like a rainbow shale that was used in like arrowheads and stuff along long time ago that area was used to make weapons. Like the first like 12,000 years ago when the first people were kind of in North America. But that area in Ohio also is known as the standstone capital of the world. And I don't know if that's related to the Egyptians. That's what the pyramids are made out of. You know, there's tons of sandstone that is very specific to that region. Yeah. Pyramids made a sandstone? I thought so. Yeah. There's 21 from 1800 to 1980. 21 times the amount of sandstone that made the Great Pyramid was shipped out of Ohio to make various buildings all over the world. Most of them in the United States obviously, but all over the place. Don't, don't. Yeah, just where facts I found out the history of the humans. We don't know history. We know some. Or only the only history that we know is the one we go discover on our own time. The one that's presented to us is not history. It's all lives. I was like all lives. There's some. I found that to it. Lost civilization in Grand Canyon was weight Egyptian. And the Smithsonian published some stuff in 1909. I guess that where all this came from, there's an article that got written. And I don't know how much of it they proved or was proven or was just newspaper. It's like bait back in the day. It's even more amazing. The artifact didn't match up to anything on the known record rather than appearing to be of Native American origin as one might expect. The object had distinct Egyptian or Tibetan designs. Could there have been an entire civilization of Egyptians living here? If so, how do they get here? Don't. Don't. How been a boat, man? You got cats that leave. Have a good try to come to Spain. You know, these places on a chicken. Yeah, it is interesting, right? Like the population of Cuba, Cuba, so insanely diverse. And it's right there. Like what is the history of that other than the slave routes? Like what is the history of Cuba? Because Cuba is very distinct African people living there. The whole Caribbean. Like what is the history of that other than the slave routes like what is the history of Cuba? Because Cuba is very distinct African people living there. The whole Caribbean all that whole area is a lot of African roots to it But that's just a place that was conquered by the Spain, you know by the courteses You know those type of people What really disturbs me is there's no way to know exactly what happened It's like you're piecing things together based on artifacts and historical record things that people wrote down and journals and logs and Well, there's people that have traveled so again, I've studied it so long ago But I remember reading primary source from somebody that traveled with crystal ball cologne aka Christopher Columbus and he was saying very specific things about his accounts when he reached these different places You know, he was saying things like we got to the land and we found Africans and he I remember him specifically saying So no matter where we go we find Africans and he said it as if he was disappointed and then he started talking about like you know This is they started talking about the culture and describing their culture He just got to go look at the people that traveled with crystal ball cologne and there's some first-hand accounts there And they're very honest about it, you know Dude, I'm gonna look into that now. That's a very interesting. I'm gonna ask Graham about that too What he knows about it? Yeah, he's studied I mean especially on his his latest book. He studied a lot about The various cultures that made it to North America and South America. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, this is very rich in history Very very rich in history. I got to wrap this up, but thanks for coming man. I had a great time talking to you Tell everybody it's vibe high on H.I on Twitter No more Instagram. No Instagram. Don't you show your YouTube show? Ho-Tep's been told you every Thursday 8 p.m. It's a great name All right, and my main website is Brian Sharp dot C OBRY and SHA. That's the real name CEO, but Ho-Tep Jesus is That's preferred. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Thank you brother. Appreciate it man. Those fun. Thank you. Ho-Tep Jesus latest in gentlemen