The general gonna experience Dude you ever hear about what Ben Franklin was okay, that's a different story But what did he do you never heard that like what he was found in it? They found in his house No, like tons of bodies bro What Ben Franklin they found tons of bodies in his Ben Franklin was a serial killer? No, he was like doing some weird shit dude Body like you're a minute. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Is this real? Everything I say was Ben Franklin's basement fill with skeletons repairs on Franklin's old London house turned up 1,200 pieces of bone from at least 15 people Holy shit For nearly two decades by the way, this is from the Smithsonian This is not some wacky conspiracy thought This is the same terribly dot com We're nearly two decades leading up to the signing of the Declaration of Independence Benjamin flank Franklin lived in London in a house on 36 Craven Street in 1776 Franklin left his English home to come back to America more than 200 years later 15 bodies were found in the basement buried in a secret windowless room beneath the garden in 1998 Conservationists were doing repairs on 36 Craven looking to turn Franklin's old haunt into a museum from a one meter wide one meter deep pit Over 1200 pieces of bone were retrieved Remnants of more than a dozen bodies said Benjamin Franklin's house six were children Forensic investigation showed that the bones dated to Franklin's day Holy shit The most plausible explanation is not mass murder, but an anatomy school run by Benjamin's young friend and protege William Houston. Oh Just an anatomy school. Yeah, we're just gonna bury them downstairs Okay anatomy was still in its infancy But the days social and ethical more is frowned upon it a steady supply of human bodies was hard to come by legally So Houston hunter and fields other pioneers had to turn to grave robbing Either paying professional resurrection men to procure credit cadavers or digging them up themselves to get their hands on specimens Researchers think 36 Craven was an irresistible spot for Houston to establish his own anatomy lab The tenant was a trusted friend and the land lady was his mother-in-law and he was flanked by convenient sources for corpses bodies could be smuggled from graveyards and delivered to the warf at one end of the street or Snatch from the gallows at the other end When he was done with them Houston's simply buried whatever was left of the bodies in the basement rather than sneak them out for disposal elsewhere and risk getting caught and prosecuted for a dissection and grave robbing Franklin was probably aware of the illegal studies going on in his buildings as the Benjamin Franklin house But it's doubtful that he was involved himself Still, we can't imagine that curious man that he was he didn't sneak down and check out the proceedings at least once or twice Of course he did You imagine if you're my friend and we live together and I say Sam, what do you up to you like bro? We got to find out how people work and there's only one way to do it. We got to look at bodies. Whoa How do you do that? We got to find a place where we can fucking legally or Secretly look at bodies while I'm gonna basement Okay, so what do we do with the bodies? Burying bro But back then when they were studying medicine isn't that what they did like all those people that like studied anatomy back then how did they If it was illegal to study anatomy if it was illegal to study bodies how else would they find out How anatomy work that seems weird, but who knows they have weird laws back then but it does seem weird But it makes sense right because if they had never studied anatomy before and then all of a sudden It came along like we've got to fuck up your grandpa. We got a carve grandpa like a turkey to find out what makes people tick You know, so weird note to add in another article about this. Oh boy It's just Franklin's history as a mason was one of the historian's initial points of inquiry Those shrouded in secrecy Masonic rituals have dark known undercurrents Which have at times gone horribly wrong for example in a 2004 initiation ceremony a new member was accidentally shot by a member Who meant to fire an empty gun but instead fired a loaded one. Yeah, they fake shot at each other. Yeah But when historians historians dug deeper into what was going on in the Franklin home during the years The bones dated back to they discovered the real culprit behind the bones is one of willing who's the real The basically same thing crazy right yeah