How did this whole thing start for you? Well, Danny, you hit it on the head. You don't think of game wardens involved in drug cartels growing illegal weed and now the responsible for fentanyl and meth and human trafficking. It's a national issue now. It's a national problem, major problem that I'm dealing with now post-retirement, post-operational by talking to you today. So once again, thanks for having me. My pleasure. It's cool to finally meet you. Yeah, when I started off as a game warden, I wanted to protect the three W's. Wildlife, waterways and wildlands grew up in a conservation family. My dad was a hunter, a military veteran, angler, flyfish, or men the whole nine competitive shooter. Granddad was a World War II vet. He was deployed to Pearl Harbor and survived when that attack happened right out of boot camp. But always instilled around his military and life of service, you know, goals that wildlife and wildlands and waterways are really worth protecting guys. We hunt, we hunt sensibly, responsibly to consume meat. We respect the animal. We don't take too much of anything. So, and you know, growing up, I just, I grew up in the outdoors. I mean, even where I grew up in the Silicon Valley, what most people don't realize is in those, all those foothills around the Silicon Valley are a plethora of wildlife species and endangered species. Waterways, parks, places to hike. So I cut my teeth in California actually, doing all of that stuff and really wanting to do something that I could do to protect the things I love so much, the dad and grandfather and our whole family, you know, really instilled. So I went to the game order out. Not directly. I started off going, like I said, grew up in Silicon Valley. I went to San Jose State there. Went after an engineering degree because I had a, my youngest uncle had a civil engineering firm and I was a designer and a drafter. I really enjoyed that and it was, you know, a lucrative profession, a profession where you'd be in the outdoors a little bit. And the only reason I was going that direction is up to that point, I had never met a game or my entire life. I have all the hunting and fishing and everything I had done outside. So you know, sometimes there's this, some people say divine intervention. They call it crazy faith. But I was in my first semester of engineering school. It sounds a state. I go to winter break. And the first thing I do when I finished my last like physics or calculus final, whatever it was that Friday, race back down to South County, where I grew up, meet my brother outlaw best friend growing up with us like a fifth member of our family, Jeff. And we have a pack horse all packed up named Lucky that's going to take a bunch of supplies. And we're going to go in the middle of winter in December in Henry Coast State Park. And Henry Coast State Park is the second largest state park in California. It's about a hundred thousand acres now. And they had all this new terrain and territory they have bought from private ranches, big corporations that were ranching cattle company type type organizations. And we launched on a Friday. And the ranger said, you guys know it's going to like poor rain nonstop. There's nobody in this park. I don't know that you're going to have flooded creeks. I don't know if you're going to get the horse through certain places. Like can we still go and bury the great ranger that was kind of an inspiration to me as well. I said, yeah, but I want to know where you're going to be every night. And there were no cell phones at the time. There was no way to check in. There weren't in reach GPS devices, but he knew you were signal out there. No signal out there. No, this is you're off the grid. You're over way into the eastern foothills headed toward the Central Valley of California. So we go on this hike and we're hiking all night to find this lake. We've never been to yet. And it's pouring rain. And it is 13 miles of just misery, but we're done college kids. So we're taking on as a challenge. And we finally find this lake in the dark. Now I'll never know, but we made it. And we all are sub soaked. So we string everything up to dry out. We take care of the horse. We have a fire, you know, we're not supposed to have fires in the state park, but nothing's going to burn down the middle of a storm. And we have a fire to start drying stuff out. And first light the next morning, I hear, you know, the compound low transfer case of this four by four coming down the mountain right behind us where this little camp is. And I went, oh no, that's the ranger. That's probably barrier one of his people. He proved himself right on this one. What are we doing? And it was a game word that was there for completely random reasons. He just decided to go back there and patrol for at a season deer poachers because we have the subspecies of the Mule deer in California called the Blacktail. And trophy genetics of that animal are all in that region of that park. And that's that area where I grew up. And a lot of guys will go in way after the right way after hunting season is over to try to get those quote unquote, you know, Boone and Crockett trophy size animals and poach them out of season. And that's what he was looking for. And so when he came down, he thought, are these, is this a poaching camp? Because nobody would hike in Co right now. And so after about five, 10 minutes of talking to us, he realized we were dumb college kids and told us, yeah, don't worry about the fire. You're not going to burn anything down, dry your stuff out. Where you go in next and I go, well, you're not, you don't work for Barry, he goes, no, I'm a game word. What's that? So you get paid to do this, dude. You're in a four right for truck. Maybe you have a dog. Maybe you don't as a canine working out of your house. That's your horse, your steel horse is that vehicle. Your back country running into people like us and working where I just thrive to hunt and fish or hike and see this stuff. And he goes, yeah. And so I've been zero for like two more hours. And he had to go. And Jeff's watching me is my, is going to do, do, do, do, do, do, do. And lighten up. And when he left, I looked at my bro outlaw and he goes, uh-oh, I said, yeah, I'm going the wrong direction professionally. And so we finished that crazy hike and it was mind blowing experience, you know, at that age for you have, I'm sure thousands of them where they're just pivotal with your best friends, your best family members and something just changes. And to this day, the fact that one game or would be in an area where nobody normally patrols even in my game or in profession coming up at that time of year with the wet, the rain, people don't have access. A little bit of special intervention, I think that we just kind of collided out there. So I didn't go this direction and have a really lucrative engineering career. And I would have done well and worked with my uncle. It would have been great, but I would have been flat. I just wouldn't have been passionate. So I leave the woods five days later. And it's winter break. It's Santa's estate. And I go right to the criminal justice advisor for that department. And unbeknownst to me, besides being one of the best engineering schools in the country, it's also one of the best criminal justice schools. And this advisor was awesome. And he kind of directed me in, oh yeah, we can place you your only half, you're a semester engineering. You've taken tons of math and science and all that good stuff and get on the general ed track, go for a criminal justice degree. And you can be a game or an FBI agent, a police officer, whatever. That's what we do here. And we're one of the best schools in the country. And I went, there's another fate-driven, great thing. Change my major and never look back. And five years later, I was in the academy in 1992 to become a sworn peace officer. And down here, the thing is people think game wardens just work on the wildlife stuff. But we're trained to do everything that state police do, that Tampa police do, that sheriff's do, everything that's public safety related. We have to go through that same level of training through our academy and then add on two more months of the wildlife forensics, the exotic weapon identification. And I started getting into that, I'm sure we'll talk about as we move on with with the whole hidden more story is the tactical unit we had to build for a better one a problem which we'll get to. But yeah, I went to that great academy, great instructors and everybody's back. Yes, I don't have that much experience in the woods. I spent pretty much my whole childhood on the ocean, like fishing and spear fishing and diving around bridges. You know, when I was young, I hope they don't get in trouble, but I've done quite a bit of poaching when I was very young. With, you know, spearing, because there's so many weird laws, like there's certain fish you're not allowed to shoot, right? But there's like, there's this freaking jetty or this little channel of this, this pass, very popular pass down the street from here where there's these snook that are like this big. And you can go in there as long as you can dodge the bull sharks and you can bring, get a snook like this big right off beach. And you know, like that was my experience with, you know, game warden's and fishing wildlife people my whole life was trying to dodge them and come, you know, go in out fishing for the day and you know, whatever and coming back in through the past, making sure there's no round. And like, you know, even when I was really young, I spent, I remember I spent a summer in the Keys and I had no money and I was there on like a video production project and was staying in this like shitty flea bag hotel. And all I could afford was canned, I was getting buying canned corn from Publix and every night before sunset, I would go, uh, free dive underneath this bridge and just stuff lobster tails in my board shorts. Yeah. Yeah. So that's like living in Florida. Like I never I never spent much time in the woods or doing like traditional type of hunting. But like in California or around where you started out, like how much of it, what determines whether you're going to be inland or like on the ocean? Yeah. That's really a question. So when I joined, you don't have a choice where you went out of the academy because you have to, you have to graduate the academy for some foremost. And then you go to a field training officer program, which is you get with three training officers that are, you know, kind of the iconic great, great trainers with great careers behind them. You know, a month with each of them all over and hopefully as a new cadet about to go into the field training officer, FTO program, you get time on the ocean specifically. You get time away on the interior mountains like the Eastern Sierra's were Mount Whitney's in California up to 14,000 feet. That's an amazing thing about California is you can be in the ocean and you can be in the frickin snowy mountains in the same day. I've done it a day. Race. I've literally made a ski trip by the evening after fishing on the, you know, Santa Cruz coastline. Yeah. Yeah. That's the coolest thing ever. It's the incredible stage as far as like terrain and like just geography, California is, there doesn't get any better than that. It's incredible. I mean, outside of the politics and the way that that state's been, you just get rid of all the crazy corruption. You get rid of all of that out there. It is probably if not the most diverse, one of the top diverse states in wildlife, everything we have the parks. And I'm still down there. I'm in Montana full time now retired eight years from operations from almost a 30 year game or an career, which is fantastic. Unplanned, you know, through some curveballs, but all for the best, like we're talking about. But yeah, I still spend a lot of time down there. Spend a lot of time on conservation projects. Spend a lot of time in the woods there. And spend a lot of time on all the cartel stuff and the weed stuff as well. Being on it, working with teams, speaking to the public, working with legitimate grower groups that are, you know, doing it by the numbers and getting run out by these criminals. But the fishing side of what you did is that's the biggest bread and butter we have like on the West Coast states. So there's more anglers over the amount of hunters exponential difference right now because we're seeing less and less hunters in California because it's becoming less and less of a consumptive state for hunting animals for consumption. But the why is that? It's just one of those things. Populations are grown up. Regulations are getting pretty stringent. There's just not a demographic of kids being raised to hunt maybe to fish or maybe they are not being raised to do either. And just in more just in more urban environments where their parents didn't have that background, right? They didn't grow up on the ocean. They didn't grow up spear fishing. They didn't grow up hunting inland, water fell, whatever. Like I started with my dad, you know, it like I sold. This one of those things it generationally gets handed down. Yeah, that's very true. Yeah. And if you're not exposed to it, most people don't go, you know, I'm seeing some of these feeds and watching some of these hunting shows and it looks really fascinating to me. But I've never eaten wild meat. I've never eaten a sport caught lobster or rockfish or anything like that. So and California, unfortunately, is one of those states that's just with the politics and kind of the lens and the demographic of population, it's becoming less and less of a consumptive state. But the fishing still in that state is off the charts. Is it? And that's where most of, you know, revenue is coming in from further department, from license sales is fishing licenses, right? Any other licenses that you need to have for any aquatic species? Yeah. I've seen some incredible spearfishing videos from Santa Cruz area. Yeah. It's like those kelp forests. Yeah. The kelp forest. Monterey Bay. It's just so cold. Yeah. My dive certification was in Monterey and that cold water and that kelp forest. For us, but tell you what, you want to talk about something you can't find anywhere else in the world. That dark kelp forest is creepy, but it's super cool. So majestic. I mean, yeah. Oh my God. I would be so terrified. I mean, the cold water just makes it even worse. You know, because it's just stressing you so much. It's rushing you. You're in a thick suit. Yeah. And you know, sea lions are coming up your face and disappearing out of the kelp and hmm. Potters. Yeah. It's pretty crazy. I remember my last experience in Santa Cruz was probably like when I was 18 years old and we went there for a week and I just served steam early in every day. And I just remember you have to dodge the kelp. There's so much kelp. You could be flying down a wave and you hit a patch of kelp and you can just fly and off your circle. You're done. Yeah. Stuff a lock you up. Such a crate. I mean, and just nature there is just so like it's powerful. Yeah. The warmth is in full effect down here in Florida and it only took me one round of golf to remind me that the warm season is hydration season. And that's why I keep liquid IVs hydration multiplier with me at all times. Whether it's a day trip on the boat, exploring the farmer's market or an eight hour round of golf, liquid IV is superior hydration than water alone. And right now you can get 20% off your first order by using the code Dany at checkout. It's mandatory that I keep a stash with me at all times. I love it because it's so simple. All you do is tear, pour it into your water and you're good to go. One stick with 16 ounces of water hydrates faster than water alone is powered by liquid IV hydro science with an optimized ratio of electrolytes essential vitamins and clinically tested nutrients that turn ordinary water into extraordinary hydration. You're getting three times the electrolytes of the leading sports drinks plus eight vitamins and nutrients in every stick. They've always got great flavors. My kids love the popsicle firecracker. So it feels like a treat instead of a chore to stay hydrated. So if you're like me and you've got some long days ahead of you this summer, this stuff makes a huge difference. Stay hydrated while you're on the go this summer with liquid IV. Tear, pour, live more. Go to liquid IV dot com and get 20% off your first purchase by using the code Dany at checkout. That's 20% off your first purchase with the code D A N N Y at liquid IV dot com. Yeah, and the fact that people aren't growing up being raised to be consuming the wild animals there and consuming the like what's going to how is that going to spiral out? It was like the third, fourth and fifth layer domino effects to that down the chain as like, you know, in 40 or 50 years, you know, is that going to be to where is the wildlife going to get out of control or yeah. Another really good point. Cons, the under the conservation model rather you believe in harvesting animals are not. It benefits all wildlife in the best way. Yes, absolutely because every hunter, every angler that buys fishing equipment that buys weapons that buys ammo that gets a hundred safety license that gets licensed and tags every year. All that money and from the Pittman Roberts Act that was established, you know, over a hundred years ago, so much of those are funding for managing wildlife and every state comes from hunters and anglers. Right. I mean, there's animal rights groups. There's a lot of, you know, species related. I want to protect this animal. I want to protect this, you know, endangered species. I want to protect this type of vegetation. That's fantastic. But how much money is really going into that? Where is that coming from? And what non hunters don't realize is that hunters whether you agree with the hunting model or the fishing model, you can't deny that in the overall balance, that's what makes you know, your Florida fishing game organs thrive. They're getting money for that from the public through that tax base to go out and enforce regulations that are built on biological studies of how many animals do we actually have? Like we talked before the show about the Florida Panther being down to just a handful of animals and the cold wildlife quarters you're needing for those. And that's fantastic. Do you have Florida Panther that's beyond threatened and endangered on that type of list or status? Now, completely contradictory to that is the California mountain line where back in the early 90s, it was taken out of control from our agency and it was, it was legislatively, it was voted into be a protected species. So there's no hunting for the California mountain line. And when they start depredating and get too populated or they're impacted by population or free ways and they have to start branching out. Then they're not necessarily killing for deer, they're not killing deer and other animals that are normally in their diet. Now it's house pets, maybe it's livestock. I work very closely with really good cattle ranching families, especially in California and in Montana as well. But you look at the cattle ranching folks that take the biggest impact from predators that are overpopulated, not that they're bad, not that they shouldn't be there, but pretty soon those cats get impacted. And the young and old cats can't really keep territory with the cats in their prime that would be taking maybe deer and maybe other big game animals or upland game animals. Now they're sitting on the edge of a cattle field and they're taking out calves as they're born or they're taking out other livestock, house pets, they're all over UCM in Los Angeles County on these cameras. You know, you've seen it. Stories all the time. It's easy. So with five approximately 5,000 cats give or take is the last figure I heard of the cats we have in California. With literally no pressure on them, the only pressure they're going to get from a game warden is when they cause a fatality of a human, which every known again does happen. Really. Yeah, I saw I worked through two of those when I was an operational game warden in California. But it's also the public safety thing where they get a little close to people in a park around a hiking trail. They don't necessarily attack, but now you've got an incident because they just don't have the pressure. And then look at my home state of Montana now where granddad settled in my dad and I've settled there now as a resident. That's where I spent the majority of my time throughout the year where we have a thriving mountain line population. We have a thriving wolf population yet both and a thriving grizzly bear population. We have every imaginable wild animal that slept in the lower 48 right in the strip that I live in in the 56th challenge places. Dr. Doodles, you know, farm of super critters. And some of the reasons we love it so much and why my own family settled there. But Danny, the thing that's crazy about it is you can get a mountain lion tag over the counters of resident. And if you run across a mountain liner, you want a hunt amount lion. You can do that. But it's based on the tag numbers and our population amount lands aren't low. They're not high. or in a good balance. We also have a wolf hunt, which right now the wolf is trying to, it's been pushed into California and groups want to reintroduce it and they want the wolf to thrive in California. It's taken us about 15 years of my home state of Montana with hunting being allowed for these wolves to keep them in balance where they weren't just sitting on a ranch and taking out, you know, tens, twenties, double digits of livestock or taking out a whole elk herd, let's say, in the winter. So really, rather people like it or not, honey, don't ethically illegally is a really good thing and it's going to keep the balance. And that's the counterintuitive thing that a lot of people do. It doesn't kill animal rights, people in the vegan and people that don't go out into the woods. They don't understand that. The hunters are the ones that want to nourish the environment and want to nourish that animal population and conserve it as much as possible. Yeah. I liken it to this way and I, you never want to get an argument with a non hunter or, you know, a preservationist versus a conservationist. I say, look, our hearts are both in the right place. Yes. We both love our wildlife, we're friends in waterways. Right. It's a matter of method. Right. It's like an operational method of how are we doing what's best for the animal population and people will go, well, how can you love animals so much and, you know, the same in my family for my granddad all the way down. It's even carbon in my dad's memorial where he's buried is the woods in my church. You know, I felt that from nine years old on doing my first waterfowl hunt with my dad, you know, moms 20 age and trying to look that thing through the, the muck and the marshes early morning to harvest my first duck that we would eat. It was a rite of passage and people say, well, you kill wildlife, but you love wildlife. How can you kill wildlife and love wildlife in the same sentence? I go, because I know I'm doing something really good for wildlife and the actual killing of the animal, whether it's by rifle, by pistol, by shotgun, by archery, that is the least enjoyable if you can even call it that part of that process of respecting that animal, giving thanks to that animal, reflecting on what that's going to do for your family. And knowing that you took an animal within the law and the money and the time and effort you put into that and then awareness to be out there when you see somebody doing it wrong. Like one of the things I love about being a game warden. And this is what sets it aside from other law enforcement. Sheriffs or police is those guys and gals, unfortunately, they're dealing with the worst calls all the time. Domestic violence, people are in conflict. Right. Guns are coming out, drug abuse, overdoses. You know, yeah, we dealt with that a lot. I've done a ton of those cases backing up my sheriffs or running across it myself and having to deal with it till I had some help. The flip side of that is a game warden, 90 plus percent of everybody we deal with our conservationists and their gun owners and they all have guns in the woods and their cars. But it's like, oh my gosh, everybody you contact has a gun, you know, other elite law enforcement will get freaked out about that. I go, yeah, but you know what? We do a lot of gun training in the academy. We expose our cadets to like a couple thousand weapons, exotic weapons of we do a class. It's like two, three days long. And they're going to see weapons from the Nazi era. They're going to see, you know, early, early military weapons in our country's history to the most current stuff we carry now. Hunting sport, military assault, whatever you want to call it because we're going to run across a lot of guns. But the flip side is those people are allies. They're for small suppliers. Right. I call them, you know, basically there are a thing green line helping that thing green line of conservation be a little more powerful and a little less than because they're going to turn into poacher because they care about wildlife and they care about doing it right is adamantly as we do. And that's the cool thing about being a game where you talk to need for Florida game where it's, I know quite a few down here. They're loving it. They're loving it because they always feel like they've got people at their back. They're not always going into something dark and negative where they're going to be hated. They might have to use heaven forbid deadly force and there's going to be a shooting this night or it's going to get fist to coughs or going to be tazing or something like that. So that's the hard thing to sell and what I don't do. I don't get an argument but I always stay calm and I say we can agree to disagree on if you don't think, you know, harvesting or taking or quote unquote killing a fish, excuse me, or a lobster or a grouse or a turkey or a deer is something that you'd ever want to do or you think it's completely wrong. I will never convince you otherwise. Absolutely not. But please extend me the same courtesy of understanding that I'm not a monster killer. I respect that animal immensely and I know that not only have I did have made a career but growing up in a family of conservationists which in the urban states, a little bit dandy, we're losing this and it's one of the reasons California which was, like you said, it's one of the most, the resources and the beauty of that state is amazing. But when it gets so populated with the LA Basin, the San Francisco Bay Area Silicon Valley where I come from originally. Just generationally it falls off. And then you're kind of raised with the idea that animals are awesome, protect them. Ooh, you know, don't ever be a hunter or any of that. And we have to kind of deal with that and it's agreed to disagree but let's all be in it for the same reasons. Let's agree that we can still have animals and play it both ways. It's also so crazy the area of California you're in and doing this stuff. It's like one hand, you're in nature, you know, regulating all this poaching and trying to do your conservation. And like on the other hand, you got like all the biggest tech companies in the world that contribute to that state being the number four GDP on earth. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's the energy in Silicon Valley is amazing. And it's funny because I'll be in Lincoln County, Montana which has 20,000 people out of the four towns in our county. And I told you all the critters that run around those woods. It is a mountain town. It is a mountain vibe. Most people hunt fish. Most people live out the land timber industry logging. You know, you have it all. But then they're like, wait a minute, but you're in California part time and don't you just hate it down there when you have to go down there for work? And I go, no, I don't hate it at all. I love it for different reasons. Yeah. You know, and I think I considered a blessing not a curse to have grown up in the hustle and bustle of the Silicon Valley and gone to school there, you know, and gone to school with engineers and guys that have started IP tech companies the whole nine. Because something that's really big in the Silicon Valley is a lot of disruptive thinking, thinking outside the box. We're known for it. And we're also very open minded, you know, and I think I got an open minded vibe because I was starting to feel that pressure is not only a hunter in California in and around the Bay Area. Even before I was a game warden, but being a game warden there was I went trade what I did and where I did it for a game warden career, I went trade California for the world because I got to see it all. You know, and when I talked to my game warden buddies, you know, that are my local game warden's where I live now. They're just like we read your book man and we're like, I mean, it was, and we heard the other stories, but drug cartels and this and that and you actually have hunting there and I go, yeah, man, let's talk about two leo, what's that? Because we got the Rocky Mountain massive. The biggest toolie elk species is in Montana. Then there's the Roosevelt, the middle elk that's a lot up and down the western states, but like we talked about before before the recording a little bit was the toolie elk is an amazing species simply because there's not many of them and they're endemic only to California. So they only exist in California on the whole globe. There's approximately 5,200 of these animals. They are magnificent and they're on ranches and on public land and parks right around the tech capital of the world like in eyesight of the Silicon Valley. In eyesight of the San Jose foothills going over the central valley just north, the town ranch where you have, you know, some of these elk just over the interstate five when you're leaving the LA basin to head north where I grew up. And it's, it's kind of wild to look at what these elk stand for now and bring awareness to how limited they are in number. Magnificent species. And they coexist with cattle, you know, ranchers. Are they going to be a hindrance when they tear fence up and send cattle out into the freeways around other yards? What do you do with these elk? Well, we're bringing them back. It's a species that needs to come back. The numbers are small. Other states want them as well. But what's ironic is to keep those elk alive just like keeping our cattle calves alive for the beef industry working with a lot of great cattle ranching families and friends that I've grown up with and still spend a lot of time with in California is the predators that go after these calves, rather than elk calf or their cattle calf. When that happens, we have coyotes on some of these ranches that have never had any hunting or trapping pressure, wild hogs that are utterly destroying habitat and will feed on carcasses of these animals periodically. And so what I'm in California, I find myself, you know, coming from... utterly destroying habitat and will feed on carcasses of these animals periodically. And so when I'm in California, I find myself, you know, coming from developing a sniper unit as part of the Met team when we formed up the marijuana enforcement team on the cartel fight we're going to discuss. But now it's more of a four-legged predator hunt than a two-legged and working to thin the number of coyotes, which are very hard to hunt, especially when you don't use, you're not hunting them at night, like in some states that we can do that. Or I'm so close to the Silicon Valley populace, I can't be doing things I would do just out of respect for neighborhoods. I got friends and my brother goes out every weekend on any hunts coyotes. I hogs at night. Yeah. And it's the same thing we have in California, but the impacts of these elk, I didn't get to see firsthand till I retired operationally and I'm on the outreach circuit like we're doing today and books and speaking and teaching and working with teams and doing cool podcasts like yours and things again. Great opportunity. I appreciate it. But now I'm hunting coyotes like I'm deploying like a delta sniper again and having to outsmart these things and it's quite a challenge and it's arduous and there's a lot of hiking and walking and sneaking around which I like to do. It's best to do it at night, right? It's best to do it at night. Yeah, so my brother says he does it with a thermal scope. It's the best way out here. It's thermal. It's at night. Right. Same thing with hogs where I'm at because of the demographic of one of them around. It's nothing after dark. It's no thermal. It's spot and stock. You can call them with the electronic calls for a while, but some of these areas are so isolated and they're so kind of impacted to one type of perimeter that coyotes like wolves are nothing. They're the most brilliant predators. I think on the planet. It's insanely smart. And I respect the coyote. I respect the timber, you know, the gray wolf, whatever. But playing that cat mouse game is a challenge because I can't use I have to spot and stock them. I have to outsmart them on a ranch. They're very familiar with and they can get used to me being in and around there. So again, it's doing something good for wildlife because it's bringing me back this balance because those four or five coyotes get on one elk calf that's born and they've taken them out in the past that animal. What's that animal worth? Given the number, limited number that they have, you know, like a endangered steelhead trout, let's take the steelhead trout off the California coastline, Santa Cruz coastline. I think last figure I was given if you wanted to put it in a monetary figure, every steelhead trout that migrates from the ocean goes inland, you know, lays eggs, does their spawning on inland creeks and goes back out to the ocean. And there's so few of them left. I can't even give you a number. But the US Fish and Wildlife Service had a monetary value of $35 to $40,000 per steelhead trout from a monetary loss to put it in perspective of the resources we got to go back in to try to protect those fish. Well, the elk are in that position and there's other animals that are in that position and they're coexisting in cattle ranching operations where cattle and elk coexist perfectly. And coyotes coexist really well with both of them until calving season starts and then those calves are vulnerable and you're using animals. So anyway, long windingly what I'm getting at is that's where you're doing a major major benefit for a threat in endangered species by having to kill other animals to protect that one endangered species where you don't know why coyotes out, but they're prolific. Two to five million across the US, they're in a risk control. You get out of control. So that's I know we're kind of getting around the preservation versus conservation story. And how do you agree to just disagree? But it's so emotional for people. Silla side been mushrooms are getting some serious attention from the scientific community right now and rightfully so. And there's another mushroom out there that's just as effective, but it doesn't make you trip. You've seen it in popular folklore and it's called Amanita, Mascaria. I never would have tried Amanita, Mascaria if it weren't for Amantara at high doses. It feels sedating and even a little bit dreamy at lower doses. It gives you sort of a calming patience. I used to take the Amanita capsules most days after work and when I wanted to get creative. But recently, I've been taking the blue lotus gummies, which are very fun because they put you in a calm, uplifted state and they even act as an aphrodisiac. There's a lot of gas station fakes out there doing lots of harm, but Amantara is the complete opposite of that. With 55,000 customers, everything is lab tested, clearly sourced and fully transparent. There's no synthetics or mystery blends and they also have a huge range of gummies, capsules, extracts, and even the raw materials. And just now, they launched limited Amanita and blue lotus beginner bundles. With raw materials plus ready to use products designed for people who are completely new to this and add a heavy discount. And if you use my code DJ11, you'll get an extra 11% off on top of that. So you're getting a pretty serious deal. Just go to the link in the description below or head to Amantara.com slash go slash DJP. Again, that's code DJ11, DJ11, but it's only available for limited time. The biggest issue with the cattle ranchers in Florida, which is what Carlton War was explaining to me is that the real estate developers are trying to buy up all the ranches. And you have these fourth, fifth generation Floridians who maybe got handed down these giant ranches from their great, great, great grandparents. And it's like, you know, am I going to take you know, $100 million? So they can develop a couple neighborhoods here. And one of the good things he was explaining to me that DeSantis did was he instituted some sort of, um, some sort of like gift or whatever. Okay. Well, it was basically it was an incentive for the cattle ranch owners not to sell it to real estate age or real estate developers, which I thought was really good. But um, yeah, and in that whole thing with the FWC that I was telling you about before we started, I didn't even know about that until this morning about how allegedly there's FWC people that are being paid off by real estate developers for, for whatever reason. I don't understand how that works. That's that's wild. And that's an ugly concept. And I hope there's nothing to it. But if there is that has to get nipped in the bud right away, because you know, money drives a lot of bad choices. It really does. It's very short cited. It's more short-sighted that you think. And you know, what you just mentioned on these Florida ranches, it's the same thing in California. You have fifth generation kids. Right. They're not going to cattle ranch. They went up to school. Maybe they were involved in the cattle ranch operation when they were really young, but, but they're not any longer. And it's getting more and more impacts, more and more pressure to sell to open space agencies or developers. Right. And the money out there, Florida and California's synonymous and kudos to your governor for backing that and helping that on the cattle ranch inside. I know, uh, in Montana, we have a good governor, too, which you in Florida. And he's all about that. That traditionalism and trying to hold on to it, not that we're not going to develop the state, but we're going to try to keep a balance. Right. You know, and I think, brother, if you, if you think of everything staying in balance and you don't get too selfish and skew it one way or the other, you'll be all right. But we never make that choice when the dollar signs start going. And when we're not passionately connected to it. Yeah. If I'm fifth generation kid, and I'm going to school and I'm not having any plan to live and travel in the world. Right. I like to care about some piece of land in Florida or Montana. I'm not going to go work my ranch in Florida. Right. I'm not going to work my ranch in the Silicon Valley foothills. Yeah. The Montana, the base of the cabinet mountains. I'm just not going to do it. But you know what? I'm looking at everything's getting really expensive. And you know, I'm struggling right now or, you know, I'm looking for the future for my children and grandchildren and I have a hundred million dollar payout if I sell. Right. And we're, that's the same, same thing that's happening in those other two states that I'm close to. And it hits me kind of deep on a personal level to see those iconic places that I grew up in and other people like mine, a rather anglers, hunters or whatever. These beachfront, these coastal access spots that are getting cut off for divers, anglers, you know, certain developments in California. And unless you're going to, you know, get on the water from a different, from the ocean side or from a boat, access is hard in certain parts of those states. So just the balance man, agreed to disagree. But if we can look at the science logically and not get emotionally, because I know for anti hunters that are so passionate about loving animals. And it becomes a judgment of a hate you because you're going to kill an animal. Yeah. And you know what I mean? And they're not looking at the science of it because we're already blinded by the emotionality of it. Right. And that's where that's where the debate always goes. So how we have those conversations, like I said, is I'm not going to convince you otherwise. I'm never going to, you know, demonize you for your view or disparage you. And please don't do it for me. And if we can talk about it great. And if we can't, I respect you. You know, you have your experiences have led to how you feel about hunting. And that's great. And mine are what they are because of how it was raised. And we're both right. Totally. Yeah. So you started working as a game warden in the early 90s. Is that right? Yep. And how long did it take before you started getting in these shootouts in the woods with cartels? Yeah. That, so I started in 92 out of the academy when I graduated in 1992. And it's my first three years of Southern California. And I was from Northern California. So the only thing I knew about Southern California was we're Disney land was I had been there, you know, during school a couple of times. And I got assigned to the inland empire just over the hill from Orange County where all that is. And cut my teeth on a lot of stuff. I mean, I was aware that I was hearing rumblings of cartel growers in a low car, tell marijuana growers, getting into the state of California, going into, you know, starting to get into the national forest and grow some of this toxic lactated weed for the black market and smuggle it and all of this stuff. But where I, well, I'll back up a little bit. I finished three years down in SoCal, I get the opportunity to come home to my home district of Gilroy, San Jose Bay Area. Of course, I take it. And now I'm in that spot. And I'm doing the traditional stuff. I'm trying to bust spotlighters at night, you know, behind lock gates, hunt animals illegally at night. The guys that really know they're doing wrong, that's a big game or in case. They explain to that for people who don't understand what spotlighting is. So spotlighting is where you're hunting after hours using an artificial light that you're not allowed to use to hunt ever. And you're shining it to get these animals kind of startled and shoot them in the dark after hours when it's illegal to shoot them because it does freeze them. You see their eyes glow. You see their eyes glow and they'll kind of stop and kind of get petrified. They don't really see what you are. So it's, you know, beyond cheating, but it goes a little further that this happens out of season. This happens during the right when certain animals are breeding. This happens like when that game word was looking for us that day, thinking we were deer poachers and not stupid college kids in that park. He thought we were poaching those animals out of season, which is when you don't want to take them, right? It's all around the right season to take them before they breed or shortly after whatever the case may be. So things like that, poaching crimes like that is what I was targeting. I did a lot of them in southern California environmental crime, water pollution, streamhead alteration, illegal hunting, people trespassing on ranches. Hunting where they're not supposed to, that's a pretty common traditional game word in crime. And how much of it was in this emerald triangle area? I didn't work the emerald triangle like officially until we developed the tactical team that was stayed. So and that's where you get into Mendocino, Humble, Trinity, Delnort County, all of that. And that's where the wardens that were assigned up there that either went to the academy with or trained or worked with throughout the state, they started to see this stuff. But weren't dealing with the just game words because it really wasn't our, it wasn't our, in our wheelhouse game wardens, hunting drug cartels, doing drug cases in the forest, like isn't that a D a job or a forest service job? It's not even, you know, what's going on? Yeah. The whole story reminds me of the branch to Vidians, Waco scenario where you have this giant like tactical shootout between the ATF and this like armed religious militia in a church. Like it's just like, shouldn't you guys have like the military or maybe the FBI or something? Yeah. Yeah. And eventually they did get in there and it was just miscommunication and people died. Yeah. Horrible. But that's that's a good, a good, you know, kind of a good analogy. But when I got back to the Bay Area and got back to my home district in 95, it was still traditional stuff, but it was good to do it at home hadn't found a grow yet. But after 9-11 when the Twin Towers fell, there was a big push with some of us internally, really all of us in the law enforcement side to get better prepared domestically for another attack. Whether we were military or going to join the military or some of us are reservists going to go back in the military and fight the global war on terror overseas or where we're going to hold down the fort at home, that was going to go both ways for a lot of us. But what I started doing, and I didn't know this would apply and be so helpful for the tactical unit that I talk about in head war that we ended up building and it would be a long journey to get there, but we would start finding the first grows for me. It was 2004. So before that though, a handful of us were getting to know Tier 1 SWAT groups out of the Bay Area and something that's cool about the the Bay Area. You have some really good teams that are full-time teams, whether they're SWAT teams, sniper units, tactical tracking units, whatever the case may be. And we started doing bed with those guys and they're like, you're a game warden. You want to come to training a sniper school, a SWAT school, an entry school. Why would you? I go because someday we're going to need this for our agency. And at the very least, by getting this training, if we ever have another terrorist event or an active shooter when all the active shooters were starting in schools to really pop up then, and we all get called and we all just doesn't matter what patch you have on, what badge you're carrying, you all integrate. And if you don't have the right training to go in and get the and do an active shooter drill and get in and start saving lives as shots are being fired and children and or teachers and other people are dying. That was the catalyst for us to start doing this. And we did that even before we found our first grow. Yeah. Yeah. So 2001 actually April 2001, before 9 11 happened, I was in my first sniper school, Santa Clara County sheriffs. And with another anymore in partner of mine, now retired captain Marcos is his call sign in the book. Long time hunt partner, you know, been been buddies for 30 years. We were those Bay Area guys in the Silicon Valley. And we were going to every school we could gobble up. Our agency wasn't going to send us, but we would go on our own time, our own dime by our ammo. Agencies would lend us ammo, lend us weapons, whatever we needed. Because we built a good reputation of being they're like, okay, well, you guys are in shape and you can shoot pretty darn well. And you're really great to get along with you work really hard. You're team oriented. And we're, we don't have the stereotype that all you're doing is, you know, checking fishing licenses being that burden bunny cop. I like to work with you someday. You know, if it ever comes up, that was an uphill battle for us given what game words are known to have traditionally done. You look at game words now. Let's take what we're sitting right here in your home state of Florida. Florida, California and Texas, and there are other states that have teams. And I'm not, I know I'm leaving some out. But the big population states, the three I just mentioned, have all had some sort of special operations, tactical teams trained to a super high level. And Florida was the first. And it came after Katrina and it came after if you had to do, you know, basically disaster patrol, stop looting, find fugitives. The special operations group, the Sog group here in Florida, have been a fantastic team and several teams throughout the state because you're so big. And I've worked with your people and had a retired Sog captain on our thing green line podcast that I co-host with a Wayne Saunders at a new Hampshire. California, we didn't have a truly SWAT type tactical special operations unit until I got to stand up and co-found and lead the Met team, which was also, you know, basically spurred because of Sinaloa Cartel weed, but it's giving you a team that can do a lot of different things in a disaster situation, an inactive shooter and a terrorist attack. Texas has a really good complement of teams given what they have on the southern border and game rhymes are part of those teams. So we were starting to get that training 9-11 happens. And we know we're on high alert. And then in 2004, I get a call from, well, we'll just call him G.I. as he's called in my books. Family friend grew up hunting fishing, went to be a fisheries biologist, get a biology degree, wanted to be out doing wildlife studies, but a real savvy guy, really proficient in firearms, hunts, tactically aware, just a good guy to have in the woods. Again, like another family member that grew up with me in my three siblings. And he's doing an endangered species studies on two little creeks coming out of Henry Copark where I met that game more way back and got the job. Now, this is kind of a personal thing for me because Henry co feeds into this ranch that's now public property. And G.I. is studying red-legged frog, yellow-legged frog, which are threatened and endangered little amphibians. Steelhead trout is well. We talked about that because they migrate up to that channel, spawn, and go and leave. And hopefully, you know, nothing destroys that creek or pollutes it or poisons it so those fish can hatch and eventually go back to the ocean, right? And he calls me late April and I'm out working spotlighter as exhaust. It calls me like a Sunday morning, dude, you got to get up here. What's going on? It's trout season. What's crazy? What's going on in the trout season? What's so crazy? What's urgent here, man? He goes, one of mine two creeks is bone dry. Then I'm studying. I go, that you're studying up on that palace or ranch? He goes, yeah, I go, how can it be dry? It's like the end of winter, end of spring. Run off is great. So someone had to divert the water. Something big must be happening up top. So I go, okay, that's a problem. You've averted the water. Yeah, like blocked it up top. And so this whole creek for miles is just, it's a moist mudbed now. And why would that set off so many alarm bells for you? Well, for me and for my biologist, but even G, the animals that are dead now, like all the fish had already spawned. And now they have no water. Their eggs are suffocating. Right. Those steel hunter dead. All those frogs and any other aquatic, you know, they're just dead. And because this water is their life blood. Right. You know, and the water can't ever leave that creek because these threatened endangered critters live in that habitat. I see. And they never leave that. And that's what people don't realize when, well, yeah, can you just, you know, can you block this creek, divert it? But we're going to, you know, make another creek like a wildlife corridor, like an exchange. And you go, okay, but does that wildlife corridor? Is it habitat for these specific species that are almost, you know, wiped, they're not, they're almost gone off the face of the earth. And that's always the issue. And so G. I studied this. He's been on it for a year or two, had two great years. And all of a sudden, one side of that channel is completely dry. So he's freaking out. And I know his history because we're close. I said, I'm on it. I throw him in the truck. We drive up to the top of the mountain. I've a new canyon. I've got an AR-15. He's an unarmed civilian. I've got my cell phone. I've got my, my handy talking, my police radio. But there's no coverage of anything up there. It's pretty remote. And I expected to find like another property owner using the water for something, diverting it for maybe in a legal agricultural op, maybe diverting it for personal water to fill upon make a pool. I never know. And we got to the top of the mountain found a spot to park, which on the maps told us we'd at least get to where this water should start. You know, the runoff should start dove off the channel. And we got to the bottom of what was beautiful Canyon. It was like, I would never know that. And this might be a really dumb question. But where's that water coming from? The water's coming from all the runoff from the mountains from just grains. Got it. Yeah. And and then it's being pulled up in certain channels that are holding the water in that creek. You know, there's natural pools and then it'll runoff and continue. Got it. So we climbed down the mountain, get into this really pristine drainage. And then we find the diversion. And it was like nothing I've ever seen before. It was like guys said, dug up some dirt and rocks and stacked it and made a a hand-built dam. And then they had lined the bottom of this channel with this queen, like really, really thick contractor, like a contractor trash bag, like seven miller thicker. And they had lined it to hold the water that was coming in. But diverted into one, like one inch water hose out the dam. So what we saw is here's the impoundment, all the water's being stuck. And everything down is bone dry. And it's all into one garden hose that would go to a that would later lead to a black poly pipe. And that's the telltale signs of a cartel grow is when you have that black polyethylene pipe, half inch, three quarter inch, one inch, that's used on big landscaping jobs. But notorious ideal, durable, easy to hide, dark and color, easy to camouflage. That's the water pipe that these cartels use indoors outdoors, you know, around rural type grows, but especially the real remote outdoor grows. But we didn't know yet, man, that that's what we were walking into. I'm just like, who would do this kind of diversion? This is never seen in this before. No, I've never seen it before. And either he, and he was pissed off. We both were. It was our backyard. And he's been doing studies. And, you know, I was right up above that just next ranch older is the park where I met that game where in some like these are my stomping grounds, man. I've hiked all over this country. This is home. And I go, this is weird. Spider senses are tingling. Something is just getting real creepy, because this doesn't look like anything I would imagine any landowner, any cattle rancher, right wrong or in different would do. So I put him behind me and we're carefully going down the creek following the waterline, but tactically staying kind of to the left edge where it's a cut bank. So we have a little bit of cover and concealment, you know, if we see somebody really aggressive down below. And we come around the corner and we follow this water line for maybe 100 yards. And then I see the waterline just kind of peter out. And now there's other little diversions. And I'm looking on both sides of the creek and brush and trees are gone. And there's 18 inch marijuana plants on both sides, just terrorists. And I'm like, okay, this is crazy. Now we are not dealing with your standard, you know, water grabber from a private land. Right. And a couple seconds after that, we see them two growers in Odie Green, all the drab green, battle dress, uniform, circa Vietnam era. Is it day or night? It's day time, it's day time. Yeah, it's day time, middle of the afternoon. And they're coming out of the brush around the creek, because we're following a creek bed slightly downhill. And what they're doing, I mean, it's to me at the time is they're just making their sweep probably for their afternoon check of watering the plants, how much water the plants getting marijuana takes a lot of water. Good weed get to get grown right. I mean, approximately five gallons of water per plant per day in an outdoor setting. And that's a concern for a vestiment. If you talk to private land growers, X outlaws, car tell growers, or legitimate industry people doing outdoor operations the right way. So brother, what we're seeing now is two dudes dressed like old school Vietnam military guys that was my dad's zero and the stuff he wore and my uncles. And they're not talking. They're moving very slow and dead quiet, tactically like like they've had some level of like training. And they know what the heck's going on. They're have Latin descent. They don't look like anything I would see in the Silicon Valley. They look more like the Sandinista, Nicaragua at the time. That thing was all grown on and the pictures in the video of the rebels in the jungle. That's what it looked like to me. And I had no idea these guys were they were sent a low of car tell growers. I would find that out later. But as they're working their way on the channel, one guy up front, he had a pistol on his hip. He had like a cutting implement some trimmers. And he was checking water lines, trim and plants a little bit, checking the drip emitters to make sure they were working. How far away are these guys from you? Right now they're at about 50 yards. So about 50 yards from in dense forest and we're in a cut bank of a creek and we got a lot of cover between us or not cover but concealment. People realizing that concealment hides you from people but it won't stop bullets. Cover like real thick trees, big rocks, things that can stop bullets or what you want to have. And we didn't have a lot of that between us and them, which was a problem because I can't really back out now because I'm going to give myself away. And last thing I want to have is a gunfight with an unarmed civilian buddy of mine that's grown up as a brother with criminals I've never seen before or this type of yeah you didn't want to even consider approaching them. No we were going to hold and we were going to hold until we either had to make an act against aggression that was potentially going to harm us or let them not see us slip on by do what they're going to do hopefully stay concealed and we were going to get out of there and not proceed. And so what ended up happening was they kept working their way through but the thing that was crazy is and then running a tactical unit now and doing all the special operations stuff and growing up as a hunter and being raised as a hunter you learn really quick to be quiet, to not move real fast because fast movement, any movement is a target indicator for people to see you, quiet in the woods, wind in your face all of that. But Danny the crazy part was these guys were exhibiting tactical proficiency on a level I only saw with tactical schools I was in or really experienced hunters. And they were silent, they were giving little like hand taps like we would hand signals where you don't even whisper. The guy in the back had the long gun, it looked like an AK derivative of some sort. So and he's scanning and he's actually looking back over his shoulder checking his six o'clock behind him which is something we do we call that the tail gunner position on a tactical unit because you never know you never leave your back unprotected. Anybody could come down behind him as they're focusing forward. So that second guy was the was a cover partner of the man that was handling the plants dealing with the water systems but wasn't ready to fight necessarily. So I saw tactical awareness for these guys I go these are not your typical poachers we are not equipped for this. We're going to just hold our best and I've got my dot up on this as they're creeping through. I've got my rifle ready, don't want to shoot but if they get close I'm going to have to announce and knowing what I know know of how they react when they're surprised by law enforcement in a growth site. Yeah. We've had way too many shootouts to tell me that wasn't a possibility. We would have many more. It didn't happen that day. You had had shootouts prior to this. No I had no. No I had not. This is this is one year before the first gunfight that we're going to talk about a minute. But brother what happened was they got 15 yards from us which is about from here to not even the couch outside the studio. It's close. 15 yards is you know times three that's not here. I could hear or they weren't talking. They weren't talking but if they were talking. If they were talking. If they were talking even whispering I'd probably be able to hear them the way it was so quiet in that canyon and they were working their way down and they checked a couple of plants. And you know even when you're really well concealed when you have something that's looking at you like an animal or where she had an arm gun in, you feel really really you just felt naked man. I'm looking at him with my red dot. I've got a cut bank and I've got rocks in the way in a little bit of brush but I'm saying if he looks really carefully and focuses he's going to see something and I can't move. I'm frozen and gee I think Feliz very savvy and he just frozen my shoulder. Yeah. And these guys looked right at us and had that oh crap moment you know and then they felt safe not to proceed and they were kind of at the tail end of that side of the little grow and they just worked their way up and around and went back the way they came further down the creek. I let out that sigh of relief. That's one I didn't want to ever have to explain my supervisors. I just got in a gun fight with unknown possibly foreign invaders. I have no idea with later on and that's exactly what they were. Our eyes were as big as silver dollars and we gave him time to get out of there and we crept up and went straight up the mountain back to the truck and now now I'm dealing with okay this is or our eyes were as big as silver dollars and we gave them time to get out of there and we crept up and went straight up the mountain back to the truck. And now, now I'm dealing with, okay, this is not your typical poaching case, but the environmental ramifications of it are massive. If you've ever shopped online, chances are you've purchased from a business powered by Shopify. It's easy to spot by the purple shop pay button. And that's what we use for our merch store. That purple button has all your payments and shipping info so you don't need to track down your card or hope your browser or manage your payment info. There's a reason why so many businesses use Shopify. And that's because they make it incredibly easy to run and manage your own business. It's the business behind the business that truly matters. And that's where Shopify excels with convenient tools and workflows. Shop pay has been the best converting checkout on the planet, meaning fewer abandoned cards and way more sales. That's a game changer. And you can spread your brand's word with the built-in marketing and email tools. Don't want to build your own page, Shopify has hundreds of beautiful ready to go templates to express your brand and forget the code, like daylight computer, which is totally gorgeous. So if you've got a product, a dream, and the drive to make it happen, Shopify is the platform that helps you do it with ease because businesses that sell sell more with Shopify. See less abandoned cards and more sales go with Shopify and their shop pay button sign up for your $1 per month trial today at shopify.com slash Danny Jones, all lowercase. Again, that's Shopify dot com slash Danny Jones. SHOPIFY dot com slash Danny Jones. This is a study. Transsect study. The GI is doing for threatening endangered species and all aquatics in a Silicon Valley creek, right? It's kind of big from an environmental standpoint. And so now I'm going to have to talk to narcotics, task force guys I've never worked with other agencies like Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement. You're going to be talking to DEA. And I got to know a lot of people really quick outside of the typical game warden circle. And about three weeks later, myself and another warden, NGI, were working with and kind of coordinating an effort for an anti, you know, grow operation for a B&E joint task force of tons of officers. We had some state park rangers. We had highway patrol. We had sheriff's deputies and then we had guys from the Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement that were overseeing this. And we had probably 30 people on that operation three weeks later. It was it was massive. But we were going to just guide them into the general area. And then they were going to take over. We were going to get to the back of the line. And they were going to go clear it. See if they found any suspects. And then we were going to eradicate it and go through that process, which I had never done before. And we got into position. And the two guys we had seen many weeks before were there. But they had heard us and ran. And nobody gave chase. Nobody wanted to pursue or try to apprehend these guys. I didn't agree with that, but it wasn't my operation. I'm just a game war that found the growth, right? At this point. Like, okay, they're running away. I wonder where they're going to go. They have guns. Are they going to come back around? Are they going to just get out and go like this and end up in another grow? You know, if this is not a one-girl operation, I had no idea. Then we ended up clearing the grow. And we ended up eradicating, I think, 7,000 plants. So we chopped 7,000. The plants were a lot bigger at this point. They weren't quite mature, but it was a lot of work. I got to experience that. And then we're chopping all the plants. And I had asked the task force commander before that. Right when we got in and the grow was clear. I said, Hey, if we're not going to eradicate right away, you have any issue. If I go just try to track these guys the way they went, I kind of know this creek. And my guy really knows it. He said, No, just go do what you do. We don't have time to, you know, chase and try to apprehend, but go ahead, whatever you need to do. And two sheriffs, deputies fell in behind me that I didn't even know. I just saw them at the briefing. They were asked to be part of the team. And they were snipers from the sheriffs department, hunters, you know, one guy grew up in Pennsylvania. He was an avid hunter and avid angler. They were wired right for what we do. And we followed and chased as best we could with them having a total head start. And we found out we're one, we saw we're one in Losta shoe where they had gone uphill and went over out of the canyon. We didn't need to keep chasing. But the positive that failure and I call it failing forward is like to meet two of my best friends in law enforcement. That being that being snake and another female officer as I described them in the book that we're on that raid with us. And that would lead to just a great relationship with that sheriffs department and going absolutely nuclear on taking out cartoagress with them wanting to work with us game war and zephter scene kind of how we were wired that we wanted to apprehend. We didn't think there was any deterrence and not trying to stop these guys because they're going to fear nothing. And most importantly, if you don't give it a give it a go, that's one or two people that are they're back in circulation to another cartel crimes perhaps. So we cut all the dope. We went back up the creek. And I talked to the team leader and I go what now he goes, I called in a black helicopter. We got the air national guard helping us out from Moffitt Field because we have the 129th counter drug task force out there. And when they're not deployed overseas like an Iraq or Afghanistan, they can't run missions, but they can support missions in the US with teams. So I would work with military special forces and a payfoc blackhawk team, they would come in and they're all going to hoist us out. We're going to fly out on the bird after we get hoisted and cable out of the grow. We're not going to hike down, right, which was any ticket ride day to get in a payfoc like that for the first time being a game or not put on this op. I'm like, all right, man, my buddy's overseas uses every day where he's on my backyard. That was kind of cool. But I asked the team leader. I go, hey, you know, this camp with all the propane and fertilizer and all the crap that's in the creek. And I see, in irrigation sprayers and I've know, you know, this place is decimated. Are we going to take any of this out? Are we going to like at least try to get the creek flowing again and take that waterline out? Can I get some guys to go up the top with me and GI and we can take the dam out and get flow back and they're like, we don't we don't have time for that, man. We're not funded for it. We don't do the trash clean up. I'm like, okay, you're up. I'm not going to argue. Got on my final helicopter right out. We'll start at a spin and I went, okay, I don't know how common this is. But if this is a big problem, we're having in California, especially my backyard, that needs to change. And so how much work would it would it have been to clear out that dam and restore that creek? With that many guys, we could have done it two hours. They just weren't familiar. They hadn't done it before because fast forward, we end up doing that on every mission that our met team goes and runs, you know, moving forward. So, um, best thing about that mission is what we learned, even though we didn't catch them, we cut the we at least we got the weed out of there. We would go back a year later and reclamation it when we'd finally do it on our own and get that flow back. But we lost a ton of wildlife for that year, obviously with the damage. But those sheriff's deputies said I met, started calling us directly and wanting to work with me and the game words that worked with me around me on the squad and said, hey, we're doing a grow up here, man. And we really like to work with you guys, you know, you just, gung ho, why it, you're not, you're comfortable in the woods and friendships were developing. So they were really good, really good guys and gals. So you guys sort of just developed your own tactical unit. We kind of did add Hawk, but we did it. We're helping the sheriff's unit. They were called the marijuana eradication team. And they were all from the sniper team and their SWAT team, but they were dedicated to that when they weren't doing the, the SWAT stuff. Um, so the next mission we go on with is a year later. It's the next season, August 5th, the 2005, which, uh, I'll never forget that's a day that's kind of carbon infamy from the standpoint of changing our lives big time, changing a career direction. Uh, because it was myself and two young game wardens, Mojo and Bull Doggiser, codenamed in the books for their protection. Um, local wardens that worked either around me or with me. Um, and eventually one would work for me because I'd be the lieutenant of the squad. Uh, but they always wanted to go on this after they heard what we experienced. They wanted the experience. They were motivated guys. And this was the one I felt, yeah, you know, you guys have been out of the academy for your two. You're doing great work. You're like tier one guys, you know, really, really proud of you. Let's do this. Um, and then we had three sheriff's deputies snake that we had, I mentioned before. And then we had a patchy, um, who was a Marine Corps veteran, another sniper on the team. And we had an unarmed park ranger with a mid-penance, a open space that had actually found the grow. We were going to go tackle and turned us onto it to scout it, but he wasn't equipped to rate it himself, but a great guy. So there's basically just seven of us on this operation and then rails and other sheriff's deputy that I would get to know that day. Uh, and we climbed up the mountain. This is in, this is in the foothills of Los Gados, which is an affluent kind of mountain town just a stone's throw above the Silicon Valley hub. Okay. And hot morning, it's a week from the a zone super hot deer season that we have like Florida has hot deer seasons late in the late in your year. And we're climbing the mountain and I'm seeing Cisco and eBay and Facebook and Oracle. That's everything that's down there and we have great cell coverage, but we have no radio coverage. And I'm thinking this is kind of surreal, man. We're going to take out a cartel, a sinaloa cartel grow, a stone's throw from this is a receptor capital of the world, the tech cap. What is going on? And it's my backyard. So there's kind of an excitement. There was kind of a surreality and this I've been a word, but it was just, it felt surreal, bro. It was crazy. And but now I feel like we've got a little bit of, you know, gumption behind us and we're working with people, not that other task force. And uh, start working up the canyon, go through a little growth site, small plants, super eerie because it was dead quiet. No animals were chirping, no birds. You weren't here in the sound. You would normally hear. So that tells me not only is there a grow, but this is a lit that people are close. And this one was weird because they were putting bust and branch and putting noise makers in the way. So you'd have to move real, real loud noises to kind of creep in, you know. And we got through that and everybody just felt like something was off after after what I'm about to tell you went down. We all just felt it coming. Um, we started to clear another grow now. The plants are almost my height at six feet. It's harvest time for these guys. And we're in a skirmish line where we're all maybe two, three yards apart in a line going through its straight so that if you do encounter a threat and have to fire, you're not going to cross fire with your partner. Right. But you can see almost nothing. You know, I mean, I'm seeing glimpses of mojo. I'm seeing glimpses of bulldog and snake because the plants are so tall and, and you know, butted out. Plus there's man's and eat and a bunch of stuff in this. And we got about halfway through that grow and one shot went off ahead of us. And it wasn't from one of our guns because we shoot a big old 762 millimeter 308 caliber M14 in the sheriff's shooting M4, which has a real distinct high crack because it's basically a 22 caliber bullet. And this was like a medium bore like a 30 caliber like an AK or 30 30 and it ended up being an AK derivative fired one shot. And then I heard my young warden partner a year out of the academy. And this is his first raid. All fired up. And mojo goes, I'm hit the starts yelling bunch of profanity. The fuck are hit me. And then he just dropped. So the second he drops from taking gunfire one shot from this guy. We can't see ahead of us one gunman. We don't know who he had. All of a sudden, I'm scanning looking for where this gun might have come from or if this guy's going to pop out. Mojo to his credit doesn't panic. He's only been on the job for a year. And he's just taken an AK 47 round to steal court round bullet goes in his left leg on the outside. Penetrates in his through his entire leg comes out his inner left leg. And now it's tumbling because steel core millithrucks are designed to tumble and disrupt. And a cartwheels through his right leg inner flying out of five in out his right leg. Yeah. So four holes Danny and you know a grapefruit size of tissue on his inner right leg missing and a big exit wound out of the right. We don't know this yet. He's on the ground. He's down, but he's not panicking. This is this is the warrior in him complete hero. He can't hold up his big heavy M1A that we carry drops it pulls his Glock pistol out and just starts covering himself and the team and scoots back as far back to get some distance. Doesn't even know where the threat came from. That was reactive show exactly what he was made of because you can't train that. Right. That was really, really a testament to how amazing he was that day and why we even able to have this conversation right now because we want to stay in the game. How he died because by the good graces he survived that ordeal. But he's lucky he missed a artery. Couple millimeters would hit the femoral, but he was bleeding out for a wee, waited three hours to get an air rescue off that mountain. And he was no more than 15 minutes, maybe even less from going into shock and maybe not waking up. It was, it was an agonizing three hours brother. And as soon as I'm looking for a, I'm scanning right after he goes down, I hear a bunch of gunfire right to my right from my our sheriff's deputies from there, M4s. And I'm like, what the heck are they engaging? So I'm scanning again to see they found the threat. And then the bad guy, we figure shooter of my partner comes around the corner. And I see that long gun look like an SKS, which is kind of a long version of an AK. And he's coming around either finished the job or see what he got, what he hit. And then I make an announcement. He turns a gun on me and I get some shots off having engagement. I end up back at my partner's feet as I'm back pedaling because we just you tactically retreat when you're when you're that close to a threat. As you're trained and hopefully don't get hit, I wasn't hit. And now we're all in a holding pattern. Everybody's quiet, gunfire's done. This is probably eight to 15 second time frame this domino effect. And we never worked with these sheriffs before, you know, not like this. My two young wardens hadn't, but everybody did exactly what they had to do. So we didn't have more gunfire from bad guys. We didn't have more guys that had to engage on our side. So we're drinking through a fire hose of learning and processing right now, especially his first gunfight I've been involved in, first officer of all shooting the technical term. Definitely the first one for the younger officers and many of the sheriff's deputies. And three hours later, finally, we get mojo airlifted out of there while we're keeping him, keeping him from bleeding out as much as we can with the minimal trauma supplies we had. But we got off that hill. We were all debriefed. Those of us that were involved in the shooting, all got interviewed. We went through a six month wait for grand jury. We were exonerated. Of course, it was completely justified shooting. We were attacked by what we later learned. We're sent a low car tell gunman in the middle of harvest time up there to defend and oversee the processing of that growth site. That was one grow of like five more on that mountain. That was a 32,000 plant hall of that whole mountain site for miles was covered with growth that had been there for years. She's a figured summer between approximately 20 give or take growers and armed defenders running that mountain. And so it became national news because never before in the country had any law enforcement officer been shot and hit by any marijuana grower remotely related to the cartels or otherwise. And it happened to be a game warden in the Silicon Valley foothills. So the news, the governor's office, everyone's like, all right, what's a game warden? Why are game warden's in this situation? This is a drug case. Why did this young man get shot? And what the heck is going on up there? Blah, blah, blah, blah. So our chief Nancy Foley held the line said they did what they were trying to do. There's environmental crime damage like you guys can't possibly understand yet. You know, and that's why we're involved. And that's why we're going to stay involved. Thankfully he survived or I don't, we might not have stayed involved. But that was the first big one. And I have like, tell multiple stories, but we'll leave that for the books. But we would go through four more officer involved shootings where we didn't get hit, but we had some really close calls before I'd get the green light in 2013 to form up the Met and dedicate a team to this that didn't do other patrol functions that had the right canines all the time. We didn't have to borrow officers from across, had the right weaponry, had better equipment, better trauma equipment, um, attachment nurse, you know, very close to the family, donated a lot of her time and a lot of her money and working with the PJs, basically the parajumpers, the special forces air force, um, their highest level, tier one operators, through the best metatromo medics in the military, they're amazing at the Delta level training, integrated with them. So we built a trauma program comparable with what our partners were seen overseas in the global war on terror. Yeah. Keep in mind, he was shot in 2005. And we didn't have the anti-coagulant sea locks that you pour into a wound to seal it up to keep like an artery from completely going. We'd have any of that, but we got a quick and next thing you know, we're not doing, you know, we're not in Kansas anymore, toe to date myself, you know, this is like a wizard of Oz. I just got transported to the Bizarro world. Yeah. Yeah. The Terminator movie. What's going on? Oh my god. So long windedly, but to get the facts out, to really tell the depth of the new enemy, we were up against that public safety, kids are hiking up there. Mm-hmm. This is on hiking trails. We've we had many grows that were so Stanford universe. And there's like Boy Scouts and stuff. Oh, oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yes. So Stanford University, foot hill county park is in Santa Clara County, Palo Alto is right there. You're looking down at, you know, one of the biggest Ivy League schools in the Silicon Valley, Stanford and in foot hill park two years later, we would find a massive grow, 20, 30 plus thousand plants live in grow that's on foot hill park property and kids are doing nature walks and studies and, you know, wildlife ID stuff. And by the good races, they never come across these cars before we took it out. You imagine with that community, aren't these guys also sitting booby traps all around it. Yeah. Yeah. I got there blood of pictures in the books, booby traps, punchy pits, Vietnam era, punchy pits, like my dad's generation that fought in Vietnam would see, except now Cartel or doing and when punchy pits are. So punchy pits are, we first saw them in Vietnam and the Viet Cong especially would put them out on the Ho Chi Minh trail and any trail that our soldiers would work to interdict their movements, their combatives when they're moving supplies. And whether they use a dig a big hole in the ground, they take bamboo, cut down bamboo sticks and they sharpen one edge to be razor sharp and they put them on a platform so they all stick up just on the edge of the surface and then they put down that your leaf litter to make it look like the trail. Yeah. And then our soldiers walk and then they fall right into it and they might fall two, three, four feet down. And that bamboo stick is shearing the ankle. It's going up the Achilles. It's getting into the, you know, your calf, maybe worse. And what they're doing is they put human excrement all over the tips of those bamboo, basically stabbing spears for the punchy pits for infection. Because if you take out soldier and you don't take them fatally, think of the internal infection, they're going to get from you've taken a ton of people out of the board field, doctors, you know, medics. It was a pretty for a guerrilla tactic. It was pretty damn effective. So fast forward to a little bit later, whiskey town national park, a national park in Shasta County in Northern California, close to the Emerald Triangle that we're talking about. I get a picture and a message from rumble as he's called in the book. One of the best canine handlers and canine febby was on this mission. And we got to talk about, you want to talk about a canine that just dassels and razzles. She, she was awesome. And I'll get into her in a little bit if you let me. They were on a grow trail going in on a hiking trail in a national park. They were hundreds of yards from a growth site. Just on the general trail and a cartel element had put their version of a punchy pit on that trail and covered up with more of the litter and it looked just like a trail. And one of the snipers for Shasta County, a really, really good operator was on point about to walk into that about to go right into the abyss and febby with their great nose detected something and alerted and the team stopped. And then Brian looked around and there was like a kind of like a backpack hanging off the edge on a branch where that's kind of iconic for an officer to grab because you're going to check it for weapons. You're going to check it for anything. And Brian pulled it back and there's punchy pit maybe a cartel growers except now they're like oak sticks sharpened and they're a little shorter. But what they had put on the tips was the EPA ban, EPA ban nerve agent insecticides that these guys use in the growth site. Carbo Firen, Metaphos imported, smuggled across, picked up in Tijuana by these growers, banned in the US because EPA determined over 20 years ago. They were made by Tier 1 insecticide companies even from America. And one 12 ounce like container, pretty solid container because it has material and it's crystal powder. Made to be diluted with about 6,000 gallons of water and then sprayed on our agricultural crops in, you know, the Midwest or anywhere. We got farming going on, dissipates and then nothing will get it, not bugs, not animals. It keeps everything off. Well, when EPA got their technology up where they could actually study the toxicity of this stuff, they're like, oh no, we can't use this is not legitimate insecticide for agriculture. It's way beyond human consumption limits for safety. Even if this one container is diluted with 6,000 freaking gallons of water, these guys take that stuff, take a descent in water bottle, and mix it up and shake it or put half of a whole container inside a backpack sprayer with six gallons of water. And they're hosing down marijuana plants, they're hosing down on the ground. They're putting a couple drops in empty tuna cans all around the growth site as you go in so that if a black bear comes in and never get to a plant, it'll never get to their camp. Licks a drop of that stuff in Tuna oil, 15 minutes is for an around black bear, frothing at the mouth, central nervous system, seizes their dung. So that these guys had put that poison on the tips of the pungi pits because you could see the stain and it was detected and the bottles when they later found the growth. So they weren't only going after cops going after their growth, that was an anti-personnel thing to say, hey, anyone that gets to this point, if they fall in, they're not going to go any further. They'll take a long time to go figure that grow out. And then we saw about five, I think six or seven total over the next few years of that level of anti-personnel trap, which was pretty deliberate. It just, you know, I told my father before he passed in 2013 and anybody that fought in Vietnam, a lot of my elders that I grew up under and they're like, you guys are fighting like a grill of warfare out there, Johnny. I'm like, oh yeah. I never thought of it that way, dad, but you know what, when you look at the wooded arid terrain of where we operate in California, I speak to the Vietnam Veterans Association have branches all over the country and they want to hear this presentation. They want to know what the threat is of if this gets in black market cannabis, which it does all over the country, kids are ingesting this stuff without knowing it, everything else. But the fact that these guys saw that type of combat, they're going, and this is poison weed in our country and not only California, other states. So I'm doing a lot of crazy that it doesn't kill the plants if it's so toxic. It doesn't. It's made to, and you know what, I have colored pictures in the book that it's really hard to see what it even looks like on a plant because if you're not there right when they apply it, it goes on like an opaque like a liquid paper, misty white spray paint, and it's kind of blotched, but in 24 to 48 hours it dries invisible and it just looks like the of an oil on a plant. So we went through that stuff for years having no idea we were going through anything. Much later when we got the team and federal officers with forest service and state officers, some of our own guys would go through these grows as carefully as they could and then like losing their going blind for four or five days, you know, have a major major nerve aches, right, respiratory problems, vision fading in and out and they're sick for eight, nine, 10 days and nobody really knew what was going on and then these cases started to pop up across the country. And then federal OSHA kind of kicked in and said, okay, before no more grow raids, federal forest service, you guys need, we need to button this up and figure out how we can safely, you know, attack this, attack that before we send you back in. So our protocol, the stuff we wear, how we assess a growth site if we're going to even eradicate it or not is all based on those assessments now. It's nasty stuff that has mass suits to go in there. If you know it's in there and you're going to push through to eradicate it, you got to have, yeah, you got to have basically, you know, at least a level one where you have the Tyvex suit and 95 fitted, you know, mass that you breathe completely filtered air through. But on a hot day, you're going to kill yourself and overheat. So a lot of times if it's contaminated, we back out until it dissipates and then we can go in with nitro gloves, long sleeves, just the mass, not the full. Yeah, how does that guy manage it though? How did the cartel do its? That's that's a great question. And the crazy part is they know just how deadly it is. And I do a PowerPoint presentation on this stuff from many different groups across the country in a blossom line. They actually call it, they call it the devil. They call that stuff, Eldiablah. Eldiablah, the devil because I know how nasty it is. But it's so effective that the bosses want them to keep using it. And we're starting to see more and more growers on trail cameras with gloves, you know, being a little more cautious, but they're not very cautious. They're wearing that stuff around. They got a backpack sprayer that's just complete poison. I have mind blowing pictures, like I said, that are in the book and color of either on trail camera, what we interdicted. And that just comes to not only the dominated the black market industry and they're killing the legitimate cannabis industry, but they're sending out this neurotoxin, you know, on stuff and doing a bunch of environmental destruction. So so fast forward, that's why I became a complete mission focus. And I never looked back months ago, I started to realize I was going through a can of nicotine pouches in like three days. I noticed my sleep started to get worse, my recovery felt slower and I couldn't figure out why. Then I picked up some of these ultra pouches and I'll tell you the difference felt incredible. Ultra gives me the same pouch experience I usually like, the burn, the little kick and the flavor, but without nicotine or caffeine, no jitters, no crash and no feeling wired at midnight. And my favorite part is there are packed with natural new tropics that help with my focus and mental clarity. And what really surprised me is how much better my body feels that are sleep and recovery actually happening again. And I've really been digging that blue razz flavor. Nicotine messes with blood flow and stress hormones. Ultra does not. It's a way smoother flow state, especially a pre workouts tend to overstimulate you. So I get to keep the habit without device holding me back. Ultra is the ultimate guilt free pouch, delivering instant focus and mental clarity without nicotine or caffeine. New customers can use the code Danny to get 15% off at take ultra dot com. That's t a k e u l t r a dot com for 15% off with the code Danny. After you purchase, they're going to ask where you heard about them and please help support the show by letting them know we sent you. So in the early 2000s, that was the first one you came across. When do you think or when do you know when these cartel operations and surgeons started to get into the woods in California and do it started to start. It started in the mid to late 80s. There were gross sites popping up in like Cleveland National Forest and Riverside County in the early 90s in the late 80s. It was just starting then. Mexico had entered the weed trade on the center lower side and back then it was um in the early 90s and the late 80s. It was just starting then. Mexico had entered the weed trade on the, on the St. Louis side. And back then it was a cartel called a family, Mitch Akana LFM. And then now, like, yeah, they were kind of the, the OGs that really started it. And they would produce the same type of growth sites, hidden camouflage water lines, you know, not very visible. Because the federalists were out trying to take them down and trying to get those growths out. But they had a way in the Mitch Akana foothills and in other places throughout Central Mexico, of getting really good growth effectively done. And then they would still have to smuggle that stuff to America, because that's where the big money was for, you know, really potent, although nobody knew, you know, neurotoxically tainted weed to get it to America. And a lot of us through those southern border quarters, California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, but California especially because we were the pipeline. And when I've debriefed, and I talk about it and hit more in the second edition, getting to sit in on a debrief of what we call a plaza boss. And this guy was picked up by our white dope team in the Sheriff's office for a 22 pound cook of methamphetamine in the winter. But he was also the head honcho for like 50 growth sites on the St. Louis side in Northern California. From the Emerald Triangle all the way down to Lipsanoma County. So areas that some of us had grown up in. And this guy wasn't one of your sociopathic saccarios. He wasn't one of the guys, we go hand in hand, knife to knife, or gun to gun, or a lot of the violence we've had in these grows with our dogs, or having to deal with them physically. The guys are, they're angry, they're tough. You know, they're nasty and nasty guys to deal with. But this guy was a boss. He was a businessman, and he was very honest. He was very cordially, he was very articulate. I'll be it in Spanish. My Spanish is passable, but I got to sit in on that interview with DEA, with our white dope team, and ask questions of this man to kind of validate what we thought we knew. And I said, so the growers we find, you know, in these operations, they're not US citizens by any means. And half the time we find out their deportable felons when we run them through international channels where we find out from Mexico, they have murder or rape or narcotics trafficking, charges. They're on an international watch list. These are the heavies, but these are the tier one guys that are setting up your grows, and we'll arrest them, and we'll deport them, but sometimes we'll find them, you know, back in a grow a week later. That quick, that quick. Yeah. And this was before, you know, this is before Trump's first administration started to tighten up southern border security. And that'll play into the story and kind of what's happened historically since. So I went, okay, okay, I said so. How do you get him back so fast into California? You know what he told us? He goes, well, we don't really call, we don't call this place I'm sitting in California. We call it Mexico North. It, you guys call it California because you took it. This is Mexico North. And they basically have to be part of Mexico, right? Yeah. They basically have districts that all the bosses kind of cooperate on. And he said, four to $7,000 cash, I can get any grower across that border in no time. Rather I do it in a vehicle, in a tunnel, whatever I'm gonna have to do, I'm gonna get my guy because that guy with his skill set. And then we got to understand these guys just aren't random growers. I mean, you do get the human trafficking where you get people forced to work in some of these grows from Mexico, if they're of Mexican descent, and they're put in there. And the cartel is saying, okay, your family's gonna stay protected and you're gonna get paid. And there is that going on. But the guys normally that will set up a really good legitimate growth site that have all the knowledge, they got vetted down to Mitch Akon by doing it effectively for years, kind of like their probationary period, not getting detected by the federal police or the military. And then they get pushed into California. And they're making quite a bit of cash we found out at that level. Well, they had the coyotes on the border that can literally have like shops. We had a guy on a couple years ago. He was one of the, like he was a young kid, like in his teens working with his grandma, just making passports and shit all day for people to get across the border. Oh, crazy. So this guy, this guy enlightened us, brother, too. He can get anybody anywhere. There's a lot more grows than we think. We weren't detecting them all. It's a lot more states. They have all their integration over there. They're going to put this poison weed. They have it already presold Eastern seaboard, the Midwest, who are they selling it to? Everybody in the black market, black market dealers, gang members. They're working with like the hell's angels. They're working with hell's angels, MS 13. I mean, you name it. Yeah. And you know, especially in states that had no regulated weed, we're the black market. And we'll go more into how regulation has enhanced and exacerbated the black market, unfortunately. But the question that really blew my mind, and I just wanted to hear that as a mouth, and we got that validation. I said, okay, so we noticed we've started this reclamation thing where we take out five of your 50 grows. And maybe we catch your guys. Maybe we don't. Most of the time we do now, because we've got the dogs, and we've got the skill sets, and we're going to probably catch most of the guys if we're lucky. But we're going to take the time to clean everything up. We're going to take the waterline out that you've spent hundreds of man hours. It might be two miles long. We're going to restore the creek. We're going to helicopter all the trash out, all the fertilizer, human excrement, grow waste, all closed sleeping bags with the kitchen area. We're taking it all. I said, but we noticed that if we don't reclamation a site, and we just rip plants, and we get our funding to continue this eradication, this weeding operation. No pun intended. That you might have a grow back there the very next year. And he just kind of smiled. And I wanted this question to come out, because we had Carlos Alfaro, who was the coordinator for DCEP. And it's just an acronym that basically the DEA, through the drugs are, under the president, has so much money to divvy out to all the counties of all the states doing this type of work. And the money you make is based on plant count. Arrest five arms, cicarios, no added money. Take out water diversions, killing four miles of creek, and every endangered species and drinking water for animals, and maybe drinking water for a tribal nation, which happens or a community. No, no money increase reward. Bunch of guns, AKs, find a bunch of weapons, no credit. It was strictly based on plant count. So what that guy basically told us in front of that coordinator, who's a great guy, we were tan in hand. He was a very, very proactive DEA coordinator to keep us operating financially, so we could keep doing the job. Basically verified two things. One, if you reclimate, it is deterring them from coming back to that particular spot. So not only are you protecting a lot of wildlife and getting the water back, and you're saving millions of gallons of water, because that water's just going right to plants. It's not staying in reservoirs. So there was all kinds of fringe benefits. And thankfully, we would see pressure on the president from the drugs are after that, where we started to get funding for people we caught, weapons we seized, reclamation totals, like 44 tons of growth site trash, five gallons of EPA ban, neurotoxin, carbophuria. You know what I mean? Guns, five guys. So that was a big win, and now it's not just the game word push that started that, but we started with the marijuana enforcement team. Most agencies now dealing with this on rural, private land, or public land are now into that game. And fortunately, federally we're being funded for it. But no one had a clue. They weren't looking at this environmentally at all. And so now we're starting to get the point where, OK, now it's not why are the game words here. It's why aren't the game words on this one, because I need to know how I can restore this, and what should I do with this, and what impact is this going to have long-term down the road. So that was an eye-opening bust. And he wasn't even busted in one of his growth. He was on a 22-pound meth cook. So I dissect that too in the narrative to what other types of drugs that they may have actually here. Oh, dude, you're getting meth super meth. You're getting fentanyl. You're getting fentanyl derivatives, a ton of synthetics. You're getting tainted weed. And we kind of got to go into, we can certainly jump ahead a little bit. But the collusion between China and the Mexican cartels fentanyl and the northern border. And Danny, this is something that just kind of exploded the last couple of years, really, really exploded. And there's something I've talked about on a lot of podcasts. It's something we're doing a podcast series on right now on the northern border. A doc doc you cast if you want to call it that with ironclad, which you'll really enjoy, I think, because of what's in it. I'll make sure I get it to you when it drops in the next 60 or so days. I didn't realize how involved the Chinese were in these clandestine growth sites in the black market we trade in California, but also many other states. Until we first started to see this around, I was kind of in my last year, 2018 was my last operational year. And I stood up the team, picked the guys, and ran that thing with the best best men on the planet, man. I mean, the last six years were the busiest six years of my career, but they were the best because we made a heck of a dent. But in the middle of that, in 2016, we regulated cannabis recreationally for the first time in California in our Proposition 64. And we also tightened up some of the medicinal marijuana laws as well. And we knew it was going to pass going into that election of November making it recreational, making it recreational. And we're like fantastic. Pass it. Pass it smart. Okay. Here's what we need to do. And what we had, there was like a year grace period where we would get like the emerald triangle, you know, the murder mountain growers that were known for just living off the grid, making a ton of black market money. Were they doing cartel damage? No. Were they using the P.A. They've been carbonyl, you know, nerve agents and sector sides. No, these growers were basically very environmentally conscious. They were just growing really good organic weed for the black market. And I would go to these California growers association meetings and it would be like a panel talk. And it was like crazy. So real, dude, I'm in camos in a polo. I got my canine. I got a computer. I'm going to do a PowerPoint on a panel with like the president of the growers association. This tier one grower from that's now part of a legitimate industry. And I go to these meetings and people are just like, what's he doing here? He's going to look at our license plate and follow us back. I'm like, breathe. No, we're not here for that. We're going to pat this is passing. Prop 64 is passing. It's passed. This is just let's work together. All right. We're not here to arrest anybody. It's we're going to go from handcuffs to hugs and handshakes. If you're doing it by the numbers, just hear out what I have to say because in your backyard, I know you guys have dealt with the cartels. You're just not talking about it because you guys weren't an outlaw business and you couldn't talk about it. I know some of you have. I've talked to some of you that have, but this is what's going to continue to go on all over around your grows. And if it continues and it isn't stopped and we have such a bad law, it's going to increase. And it's going to out produce you. It's going to outsell you because to be a regulated growing California, a regulated grower anywhere in most states, your 10 11 permits, yeah, you're 80 to $200,000 just to sell your first plant and all this oversight seed to sale. There's certain necessary things to make sure it's not a poison product. It's going to a legitimate dispensary. No harm, no foul. Good. Make it so. But the problem was I told everybody I did this presentation to 30% of my job is the team leader lieutenant for that unit was to do what we're like we're doing now. Podcast went really hot and I wasn't doing podcast operationally and that was a long time ago before this long conversation format to drop and which is so good. We can go in depth. But just going everywhere, talking to legislators, governors aides, conservation groups, preservation groups, environmental groups, regulatory groups, hunter groups, citizens for, you know, keep kids off drug groups, whatever. And I would show I said, I'm never going to be big brother cop and come in and tell teenagers and an assembly don't smoke weed. It's bad for you. You know, not 80s, you know, just say no. I'm going to say guys, you're going to do what you got to do. Please be safe doing it. Let me show you what's really out there. Look at these pictures. And let me tell you a couple of stories. Pungy pits, carbophurian, you know, dead bears, you know, growers, I mean, us in hazmat suits. And I mean, that wakes up a lot of people. It also got the legitimate growers that had never had that experience, people that were multi-million dollar operations, and they were in tears. They were like, that is so disgusting lieutenant. We are not doing that. We never did that when we were illegal. The water they're stealing, the poisoning they're doing on this cannabis, the kids it's getting to, they make us all look horrible. And after that first meeting, when they realized I wasn't scared of like bust them all or start a surveillance op, I got my dog on leaving, I'm putting the stuff in the truck, load my dog up in the back, and like 20 growers are just like coming at the truck. I'm like, oh, here it is. Guess it didn't go so well. I got to just get in and go. And it was the owner of one of those companies, hold on, hold on, hold on. Yemi's business card and all these other growers did too. And they said, listen, I know you guys don't have enough resources and money to reclamation all these grows. I know that. I'm not really getting a third of them from your presentation. And the environmental cleanup is something we can all do together. And I've got trucks that can go anywhere. They can leave my men to farm. I can have them in Southern California. I can take them out of state. I don't care. If you have a grow that you need cleaned up, we will be there. And I went, this is what's so unifying about this issue. I can have hard left, hard right, pro cannabis, anti weed. I could have preservationist, conservationist. And I show them a dead bear froth in it, the mouth. And that bears cub that's 50 pounds, a little baby bear that saw that mom wasn't responding and got scared and climbed up in a V of the oak tree, like 10 feet above her. But in just the same poison and dies like this with her head right down, we got those pictures. Again, nothing says evil wherever you sit on the animal spectrum. Preservationist sees that they're horrified, a hunter sees that were horrified. No animal should ever die like that. And that is by a foreign invader of a transnational criminal organization that's highly armed in your forest people, taking your water, killing your wildlife. Because wildlife belongs to all of us. No one owns the wildlife or waterways as you know, water right from all the probably diving you've done and how awesome water is. It's opened all of us and it should be. So that was a real educational lesson. But what's transpired with this new China involvement is we can talk about in depth because it's been real relative real recent. Yeah. So I've heard stories about how Chinese people or Chinese like scientists or chemists or whatever have been making their ways into Mexico and sort of like training the cartels in this, um, all true in this production of fentanyl and all that stuff. And I know there's been lots of issues with like fentanyl being mixed with I've heard stories of it being mixed with marijuana and other stuff. Um, but from what I have heard is that the cartels don't want the fentanyl mixed with different kinds of drugs because they don't want to kill their customers. Right. They want to keep their customers alive. Like they want the fentanyl people to be taking the fentanyl. They don't want the weed people to be smoking fentanyl dying or the cocaine people to be, you know, snorting cocaine and getting fentanyl and then having some crazy cardiac issue. Yeah. So, so, um, are you saying that China is directly involved in these US covert operations? They're directly involved in the weed trade and they're working hand in hand with the Mexican cartels to help them really flourish in the fentanyl trade. And it works like this and it, this started, it might have started his back way back as about 2018. Like I said, when I was rotating out because we started to see Asian groups, particularly, um, the Chinese moving into like Northern California, Sisku County, a really, really remote county. You got Mount Shasta Glacier behind you and you're on the organ border. And why they were going there to start, um, pretty, you know, get involved in the weed trade. It just wasn't adding up. We couldn't figure out why one, why would Sinoloa or at least go whate whatever cartel at the time was really dominating mostly Sinoloa in the weed trade. Why are they letting, why is there not more infighting between the Chinese and the Mexican cartels when we're in the most rural kind of Wild West cowboy county in California. And, you know, rival groups just don't tolerate each other. So something's got to be happening. And what China started to do is they looked at the weed trade as it's a black market. It's not federally regulated. Everything's cash. And the Chinese decided we can make a lot of black market cash. If we enter the black market weed trade and we can avert that cash, launder that cash any way we want into our currency standard. And we can do that right in middle America. We don't even have to take it to the homeland. And we can amass so much wealth to put us on the grid is dominating the world's currency standard by 2035. Everything flips. That's the base, not the US dollar. And they can, but they can take that black market money because it's not really traceable. It's not in a, you know, it's not in a digital file, if you will. It make that conversion. And so before I testified twice in Congress in 2024 and 25 and right before the 2024. Um, hearing and that hearing was called, it was in the, the resources committee in the, in the US House of Representatives, Danny, and it was called, um, protect our borders, save our parks, you know, so it was getting in the environmental impacts. It was getting to something other than the southern border that the Congress and the Senate, everybody was focused on stop the southern border, tighten it up, tighten it up. What's going on beyond that? We know this story from Silicon Valley. We know what John and Game Orleans and we know this isn't just there. It's everywhere. So, but right before that happened, I got some really, really good information from very good friends at the top of DEA, specifically about China's connection and the money laundering exchange and not only working in the same areas and parallel to the cartels, but working in collaboration and in harmony with the cartels. I went, this isn't good. This has, how does this even work? And so this is how it works. Six percent of every black market dollar, the Mexican cartels make, fentanyl, human trafficking, gun running in marijuana, you know, whatever, super methamphetamine, six percent of every dollar they make, they are going to have to pay that or lose that to the, to the, to the money it's going to cost them to longer that money to get it into a legitimate business, right, get it into legitimate stuff they can move, right. So the Chinese came in and they started, you know, what's, what, what, what are the cartels doing a lot of ciniloah, at least going to generation, especially with those cash. Yeah. And what do they need a ton of? They need fentanyl precursors, right? They need those precursors. Those precursors come from mainland China in chemical factories and they are uber regulated. They're not even used. I'm being told in their own country for certain drugs because they are so deadly. Yet the Chinese at the very top have no problem having this stuff land in the port of Vancouver. We're going to get to the northern, northern connection. It's not just coming to Mexico now. It's moving to the north for a couple reasons. Largely because we've tightened up that southern border under the second administration, right? The walls going up. We've flooded the southern border. And I'm going to talk a lot about the northern border because now I live 30 miles from it. And what we just did for this project, I'm talking about this iron clad change agents project, Andy Stumps, the host friend of mine and great group. So now we have the Chinese and we have the Mexican cartels going, OK, Chinese like we're going to get you the fentanyl precursors you need. And we're going to charge you instead of 6% will charge you 5% you invest in Chinese banking institutions. We convert the money that way. You buy into legitimate businesses either Mexico or the US, some of our businesses. And we're all going to be copacetic, but we would really like the weed trade where we want to start getting into the black market. That's how it started. And this is. Yes. Yeah. Right. Right. I mean, you can't. This is like Cacario three or four. This is the Chinese buying up a ton of real estate in the US too. There are tons of that. Because our connection there. Yeah. They're they're they're buying land. Yeah, they're buying a ton of land. They're buying land in Sisku County. The growers are coming in because then they have not only do they have ownership. They have involvement from driving the politics of that county. And this is a county. I'm used. Sisku is an example. Youngish sheriff in California, Jeremiah LaRue, a friend of mine, great sheriff. And he's out there being the sheriff for the Wild West. No exaggeration. Because he's been overrun with these Chinese cartels that are running completely with impunity. And they're driving really what was the last great generation out of that area, veterans, cattle ranchers, farmers, all in Northern California, that went to that particular pristine part of California to live a rural, great community life throughout their entire life for their kids, whether they serve in military or not, working cattle, working farms. Those people are about gone. That county, that part of California, Southern Oregon dominated by the Asian cartels. That's the same. And that stuff is going all over. We're sitting right now that we now the same car buffering, metaphos, all those different, you know, nerve agents I talked about that Mexico has to get in Tijuana. Then they have to smuggle them up. The Chinese have their own poisons and they're coming in with the fentanyl. They're coming in through the northern border. They are. They're coming in through the northern border. They're using heinous heinous nerve agent poisons, anti-fungals. I have all the pictures of them. We dropped them on Congress. We just did a lot of training on it. Excuse me. You see the photos of the northern border are crazy. Yeah. It's just, it's like woods empty field. Yeah. Woods. Yeah. There's like no barrier at all. So find an image of the northern border, Steve. It's crazy. Yeah. It is crazy, Steven. We we talked about this for change agents. Then we got Nandy's helicopter with the production team from Ironclad in January. And I'm 90 minutes from him. He's in the flathead valley near Kalispell. And I'm over in, you know, Libby Northwest, real room corner. And we have Glacier National Park. Yeah. Yeah. Right. That's the boundary. That's the boundary. And guys, when I, when the footage drops from what we just filmed from a helicopter and we had a little bit of snow and the glaciers of Glacier National Park. And it's, it's a two track just like that international boundary sign. And look at those big glaciers. That the track of the border is thinner than the power line track behind my running trail on the house on the force of our property. It, that's it. And snow covered. And most of not only Montana and to Washington, but all the way to the end of our eastern side of the border of the US, this is 5000 miles, guys. And the northern border right now is absolutely under siege because obviously it's super remote. And what would it take say a least go new generation cartel trafficer with a backpack with up to a million fentanyl pills coming from dirty labs in China or in Canada now, not made Mexico. Why bother? Right. And hike right down that trail and get them into distribution center. So where I live or we live in what's called. And what's really got attention now, Montana being defined as the last best place, the frontier state. Right, Danny. And we're under siege. I mean, we have fentanyl in our community. The tiniest rural community, you know, left in the US. And this is what the border likes. Steve Great pitcher. And we got footage with snow capped in the snow of that type of border, and Glacier National Park, and it just continued endlessly. And this is walking distance. Is there any patrolling being done of the area as much as those awesome brothers sisters and border patrol can do? But I know some of those guys up there and you talked to them and they go, you know, when the southern border was under siege, we were sent down there through pandemic, especially. And after that, now the focus is up here and they don't have enough bodies. It's going to take an amazing concerted effort of technology and everything because that borders a lot harder. But it's all wooded. It's all mountainous. Right. And you know, we, uh, we, we like to say the cartels are like water. We tighten up the southern border and we do a good job. I'll say that. It is tightened up. It's not completely contained, but it is, I mean, the tunnels are still there. People can, there's still some trafficking, but exponentially never in the history of the southern border has been a secure to this day. So what does the cartel do? They're not going to fight that. They're going to like, what? The water got to the wall. They're going to go around it. And they're going to get rid of Canada. And they're going to go to the pass elite resistance. And they're going to drop right down, flow like a waterfall. Don't fight it. Don't fight uphill, flow downhill. And so like water, they've gotten to that. And the thing about it is Canada to get in with just a, like a visitor's visa or to recreate in Canada, there's no background check. You just pay money and you've got your visa. You know, and if you look at it's amazing, especially from a resource standpoint, and with the wildlife, wild lands and waterways of everything north of me, in Montana, Canada is amazing. I mean, especially, you know, the British Columbia side, now a bird, the rural side, which I'm bordering. But now you've got the RCMP, the Canadian, you know, the rural Canadian amount of police force, which basically is the force for the province. And they're not equipped to deal with these cartel threats. I mean, we're barely getting a handle on it with task forces and concerted efforts. And, you know, you know, classify them as foreign terrorist organizations, where you can use military assets, at least to somehow assist, hopefully not get overly involved if they don't have to. But and it's through no fault of Canada or anybody else. It's just this group of criminal element. They're smart. And they've got embedded people and they get the precursors right to Canada. They make the fentanyl right in Canada, bring it right down, shovel it through the northern border, probably going through the forest not too far from my backyard. And so that's where the attention really needs to land. In my opinion, and that's what we're trying to expose one. Thankfully with this conversation, because a lot of people just don't know this and it's just starting to come to light. So yeah, I never thought I'd see it in the most pristine part of Montana. And now it's like it followed me up there. But it's affecting everybody. And how many grows would you estimate are in the United States right now? And like how many states are being covered? And like how what is happening with the problem compared to when you first discovered it in 2020, 2005 to now? Great question. And the way the way to answer that is first look at why the problems were now that it was before we regulated. And we got to talk about that because what Prop 64 did, which I in our, you know, just a look at why the problems were now that it was before we regulated. And we got to talk about that. Because what Prop 64 did, which I, uh, in our, in our, you know, just excitement of the story, I forgot to mention that when I was doing all those presentations and I said, guys, we know it's going to regulate good. Go, go, go. Let's have good cannabis regulation. Let's get eliminated as much as black markers we can. Right now it's a felony if you're an illegal grower. Trust pass, not trespass outdoors indoors, whatever. If you have more than six plants, or you have 60,000 plants, you were, it was a felony. And that's the bite we needed to stay in the law before I was a misdemeanor before it went. It watered to a misdemeanor in Prop 64. I was told by everybody in the legislative, in the people making, oh yeah, I know we understand that. We understand what you guys are up against. We're going to push for that. And just the opposite to get that to pass under the governor's push in California, especially, they watered the felony to a misdemeanor. And then for a juvenile grower, and we get a lot of little saccarias in training one of these in 14, 15, 16, and fraction. $400 seatbelt ticket or be a grower inside, you know, be a 14 year old saccario in training, you know, in the Silicon Valley foothills with a 45 AC PRNA K. And, you know, the, the weapon that might be a felony, but you'd be it out there growing in 40,000 plants is a secret ticket. So, we're shooting an officer. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that, that'll, that'll enhance it. We'll finally, yeah. But brother, the, what we did in California and one thing being from California, like guys, we're like the weed state of the world. We're not even the weed state of the nation. I mean, we're one of six Mediterranean climates. We're known for growing really great weed, like really great wine in the Napa Valley. And we could have been a great example for the country. And you absolutely, you just, you know, you punch the duck on this one, man, because Oklahoma, Maine, Michigan, everybody copied us. And guess who ended up in Oklahoma, Maine, and Michigan right now on steroids, the Chinese. Unbelievable. They're even out producing, I think, black market weed in the Midwest in those states than California is right now, because they copied our model, and they realized there's no deterrence. If we're going to rip and when there, when teams now raid a private rural track with who houses say there's four or five who, you know, the basically the green houses that look like little white half domes, two to 5,000 plants in a meage, they go raid and rip 40,000 plants with the Chinese chemicals and 55 gallon bats being sprayed on them. And we actually in the side of those grow houses, Nanny, there's like a little decon room we're seeing where the Tybeck suit is that the growers put on. Then they put on their rebreat, you know, basically they're ventilated, breather in N95s, and they're in their hazmat suit as they spray all the plants down. What does that tell you? So they know exactly how dangerous this stuff is, how much the money is. And when you add the math up, it's like, okay, how is, how is China even allowing this? How is this, is this an offshoot of the triads? Is this just the gangs? And you go, well, cartels wouldn't exist in China the way they operate. There's a problem with these guys, they're going to get shot from a military group. That's just the way a communist regime is going to operate. That's why they can operate so freely in our country because we're not that for all the right reasons. But when you look at these chemicals coming from mainland China that are regulated and banned and highly structured, but they're exported harmoniously to Canada, two Mexico, wherever bullet places they're going, specifically for the cartels, that's a, to me, that looks like the biggest example of soft power of trying to erode our national populace within the benefits China and it benefits the cartels and it hurts us hurts us in exponential. Most in it, and it's, it's the most indirect way to it's like a long slow burn. Like it's going to cripple the United States and the population here and poison our, our wildlife and it's, it doesn't get any national attention. It's like let the States figure it out. And that's how these other countries win in the long game, because for all the negative things about living in a totalitarian regime on your communism, which has got to be terrible, that is one thing to be said about it is they would they would address this face on and literally send in their military to take this shit out. They just handle it right. So if you, if you were in charge of this, what do you think would be the best way to deal with it? Well, I've said it for years and years and I said it in Congress, I talked to our mutual friend Joe Rogan, man. I think having he got wind of this and had no idea. Yeah. And got outraged. And I've said this has to be a national priority. I think it's a number one priority over everything. I really do, because I think the buck stops here. If you look at harmonious life for our children and grandchildren, rather you're in the, you know, we're here in Tampa, Florida, we're in Silicon Valley, USA, California. I'm in Podon, you know, remote Lincoln, County, Montana. We have to be safe on the homefront for some foremost before we worry about, you know, there's foreign legitimate foreign threats I get. All these partners are like, Iran News. I hope they find a thousand pounds of depleted uranium soon. Right. I mean, come on. I mean, how many trillions have we spent on the say, ran wars? Yeah. Like how many trillions would it take to get rid of to take care of this problem here? I agree. No, you hit it. You absolutely hit it on the head, brother. And I, um, if we didn't name the new book, head more for nothing. I mean, this has been going on for 25 years. Yeah. We've done documentaries. We've done reality TV with the wild justice game, word and show. I've talked about it all over the country. Thankfully, we have podcasts like yours to continue to educate, but still not enough people know. And it's not just a law enforcement quasi military action. It's got to be a tactical, you know, a tactical goal. It's got to be a tactical objective and handled on a mission structure where this is something we have to do. And we have to have an objective, you know, actual, um, results. We have to have results and we have to make a difference because we're putting a dent in it. I will say that the northern border was a start. But until we look at the northern border until we educate all our kids in schools until we deal with um, the fentanyl, especially, man. I mean, the, the nor cannon haloers are free at every pharmacy in rural Montana, right now. You just walk up to the pharmacist in my pharmacy and my little hometown. Is it that bad there? It's, it's everywhere. Yeah. And the thing is, I know that these pills are not made to necessarily kill, you know, I mean, targeting. Let's go kill all your children. We want to to keep them alive and keep them customers from a Mexican cartel side, but they know what they're making are killing our kids because they're making them in dirty labs. They're not a consistent like a pharmaceutical grade, you know, opioid, like a fentanyl pill. And a lot of those bottles, if you get that from a dirty lab and it's given to you and it comes out of a prescription looking container, it's a death sentence. It's not a second chance. You know, and I've talked about this with other hosts where, um, you know, when you and I were in that teenager world and experimenting or not or whatever, you know, a bad joint maybe got you sick, right? A bad joint or a bad pain pill now, your guns chemicals on them. Yeah. You're just not waking up. You know, and that's what, that's what just, um, it breaks my heart, man. Because we're seeing so much of it directly that people don't see. And we just got to revamp a little bit more of the priorities and take what we did on the southern border and get more into community work as well and, and contain a little bit better in my opinion, long win, and leave those your answer. Now what would a nationwide deregulation of this, if this, if marijuana was made nationwide recreational with that, what kind of effect would that have? I think it would have a good effect on that part of cartel crime. I've always said that if you regulated quality cannabis, right, like tobacco and alcohol, bureau of alcohol to back when firearms and it was taxed and it was sold to people over it, you know, the adequate age with all the warning labels, etc. Um, you wouldn't eliminate the black market, but you would eliminate most of it in black in weed. I just don't see how the Chinese or the Mexican cartels would make anything, especially with the poisons they put on their weed, etc. But then you'd be buying a very, you know, a moderately expensive pack of marijuana cigarettes, but you wouldn't be paying these exuberant prices that some states are doing right now because of the overhead to make weed on the individual basis through dispensaries. Now a lot of homegrown organic farmers that want to grow, I totally get that and I know some exemplary ones in Northern California that are dem certified. I mean the best of the best, not an inorganic, they use as little water as possible and it's the best cannabis on the planet. Um, then you get into, is this going to rub them out if, you know, the Philip Morris's or the big tobacco companies get into weed, which they want to do, produce it at such a standard and sell it on a massive scale. And then what do you, what is everybody going to buy then? They're going to buy that that's probably going to be a little more affordable. It's private business versus corporate and saying, you know, how many money that are behind these drugs? I was just learning about, I was just reading a couple of an article the other day about the amount of money that has been buying up patents for I begame and other, other psychedelics that are getting ready to pass the FDA and getting pushed to the FDA. That's like there are these billion dollar patents that are being, that are being bought up and these companies that, and these giant international corporations that are like all getting in position, waiting for this stuff to pass the FDA. So, you know, these people can make fucking billions of dollars off this stuff. It's wild. It's crazy, not to say that it's bad. You know, just to just because people rich people are going to get more rich doesn't necessarily mean it's bad, but it's just crazy to understand that machine that's running behind the scenes, you know, dude, it's not. It's no, you hit it on the head. Um, yeah, it, it has to be looked at very, very carefully. Um, because there's too much money involved. Yeah. And there's too much money to be made and too many people to look at the money and not look at the bigger picture. Yeah. Some of the stuff we talked about for recording and I think you hit it on the head, man. Corruption is really easy to do. If you offer the right amount of money, um, Mexico's a pro at it. I mean, look at at the Mexican cartels at some level, you know, nation states are cartels. Yeah. Yeah. You know, these people at the highest levels of our society, yeah, these politicians, you know, they're taking money. They're not looking out for the people. They're looking to show game like their own, yeah, nation state. You're right. And it's the same thing from even looking at Congressman all the way up to the bankers that run the world. They're doing the same thing. They're looking out for themselves and trying to make more money. They don't want people to be healthy. They don't care about wildlife. No. It's the people who are actually have their hands in the game that are actually touching the ground and dealing with this stuff every single day, the people like you who are the people that actually give a shit about this and actually want to like move the needle in a positive direction. You know, I did this, uh, I did this doc, you mentory a couple about 10 years ago about the fishing industry hearing in, um, in Madeira Beach. Oh, I just watched this a couple of miles from here. Okay. So Madeira Beach is like the group or capital of the world. I guess there's more at least at the time I made the film, there was more grouper being caught and in Madeira Beach, Florida than anywhere in the world. And mainly grouper and snapper and it's just huge commercial fitness fishing industry around here. And we noticed these like heroin addicts that were hanging out in the streets and we started interviewing them and they were like, they were broke spending all their money on drugs and prostitutes and living on these broken down boats. They were just like basically like teenage drug addicts, but like in their 50s and 60s. And they were going out. They had to the way it were, the way the industry works is these guys go out fishing for like 10 to 14 days at a time. And then they come back with like a handful of fistful of cash and they just blow it on on drugs. And the way the system worked was, um, in the early 2000s around here, it was basically like derby fishing. So there'd be like an allotment of fish, right? That you're allowed to catch in this area. Yeah. Yeah. And basically everyone would go out and catch as much fish as they can. you'd come in, you'd have to declare how many pounds of fish you caught and like say say like that year, it was 2,000, 2 million pounds or whatever. So everyone would just go out and catch as much fish as they possibly could. And as soon as that 2 million pounds was hit, everyone would have to stop fishing. Gotcha. So after I want to set, I forget what year it was. I want to say it was like 2000 around that same time, 2005, maybe. I could be wrong. They did this thing where they gave an allotment to fishermen based on their previous catch. Gotcha. Right. So say like I was a fisherman, based on my previous catch history, now I'm going to be given 100,000 pounds of group or quota each year from the federal government. Interesting. Wow. So it's like the best retirement known to man. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Um, some people got like 200,000 300,000 pounds of allotment each year. Every year, every year, the federal government, it lots you that much, that much quota. But what, how it went off the rails was some of these people now that on these boats and they were fetching these fish, they said, wow, I get this good voucher every year. Why am I going to keep fishing? I'm just going to lease out my quota to other boat owners and to other people to go out fishing. So now it got so off the rails where this quota started being traded like stock. Yeah. So now you could just be sitting in a high rise on Wall Street in New York and buying and selling fishing quota. Yeah. 100, 100,000 a group. And the people that are very bottom, the people, the deckhands, the people that are that are catching these fish, no one's looking out for them. These guys are just, and no one gives a shit. These will hire some homeless guy to come catch fish who cares. Totally. It's a good save our bottom line. Just like a clandestine marijuana grow, right? Right. Exactly. We got about those people. Yeah. And it's what I learned was it's way different in like the Northeast where like the boat owners, the people that are like running the throttle, those are the people that have to catch the fish. Those are the quote owners have to be on the boats. It's not like that where you can be so disconnected from it. Dude. But, you know, it's the same, it's the same story. You know, it's just that money, that money corrupts us. It does. That's a great example. I got to watch your documentary now. Yeah. I'm intrigued. It's crazy. I got a lot for fishing like you do. Man, I go back and work the lot of commercial fishermen. Yeah. Most of them awesome. You know, had a few violations, but yeah, that was one of the funnest parts of the job before the start of getting Western. Yeah. It's crazy. Man. Well, thank you for doing this, bro. This has been, this has been really interesting and informative. What's, what's, you guys, you're as you said, you're working on a new documentary with Ironclad. Yeah. Yeah. We're doing, I've done a couple three or four change agents, Andy Stumps, the host of that. And we've got kind of a, kind of a four part thing that's in edit right now. And I'll get all that information out and make sure, you know, you get wind of it. It'll, I think it's going to be very eye opening, but it's going to cover the origins where this all started with us in California and kind of what it's blown up to nationally. And ironically, we both ended up settling in Montana. And there we are. And now it's on that border side. But first book is hidden wars. I right. This is, this is my second book. Okay. This is actually the second edition, the updated one. Oh, okay. Cool. This one's for you, brother. Thank you, man. Yep. No, thank you for what you're doing. Not only is your show awesome, but man, you're just getting this information out. I can't thank you enough for it. But that, that'll go a little more, quite a bit more into detail than some of the stuff we hit on today, but it also sets us up for what is next. It's awesome. It's amazing. Yeah. What is next? Possibly another book with what we've encountered lately going into it a little bit more on the cartel front and and some other crimes. And just keeping the outreach stuff going. There's a, there's a scripted project right now that's, that's, that's optioned that, that's in development. And this thing with ironclad is going to be really cool. And that's, that's dropping relatively soon. So, and that's where that got's amazing, man. You worked with at Caldron too, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. His story is crazy. It's, it's so crazy. It's so crazy. Yeah. And, uh, him, what he saw in Mexico and us what we saw in the California side, we both just, yeah, we're in a show. We just go, wow. Yeah. And everybody were both alive to tell the story. Yeah. It's incredible. It's incredible. It's a crazy, just hidden underbelly that, you know, was, I never realized that it was this crazy in America, man. And, and you're doing a great job of exposing it. And we'll link the books below for everyone. Appreciate it. And, uh, thanks again, man. This has been really fun. It's honor, man. Good to know you finally. Yeah. Thanks for a long conversation. Love to it. Yeah. Me too. All right. Can I folks?