Yo, yo, we're live with Seth Anthony and Kenny Mullins. Yo, yo, yo, yo, yo, yo. What's going on, guys? It's good. Seth Anthony, the country singer from where you from? Four Pierce Florida. Four Pierce Florida. Born and raised in Florida. Born and raised, man. Born and raised. How did you meet this guy right here? Uh, over in the couch? No, this dude. Oh, Shane? Yeah, I tell you, he told me about you. I told you, I told you, I told you, I told you. It's a funny man. And also, I know how you met these guys, too. Oh, yeah. We'll talk about that after. Yeah, they're important over there, man. That's what they're here. Shane, I met Shane just about two months ago through Kenny. My manager right here, and I said, you know, I'm not going on tour until about the end of June. Yeah. So let's, I need to work, man. I can't just sit around and keep going to the beach and not making no money. And you know, I mean, I'm not on the radio or nothing yet. So let's make some money, man. So hook me up with Mikey Lambert, man. Guy he works with. And I can't, I went all the way to doing concrete, man, for like, what is it? Dark till dark. Yeah, son up the sundown. Yeah, man, getting it in 95. Holy shit. That's great. You guys were working construction. Yeah. And then how did you just, he just told you about the country stuff and the music. And yeah, Seth was there for a little bit. And then we're going around our job site. He's some country music. We looked him up on YouTube. And he's got a lot of views on there. And yeah, I was like, he's a little bit. So that's crazy. How did you get into all that? How'd you get into music? It's crazy, man. Last year I left from Fort Pierce, Florida. And I just things weren't going right in my life. And I took off. I left out of there, man. And I came to, he was building a house over here. I boy Nelson Johnson, man. He was building his dream house, man. And all my buddies were working on it and everything. And they brought me in. And $20 an hour of cash. I was like, you know, I'm going to come over there and work. I started working and everything. And next thing you know, I'm doing tile one down, singing and Rob. Rob was like, maybe it's really try singing, man. You never know where it's going to go. You know? And I was like, yeah, fuck that, whatever. Man, fuck you keep fucking working. And I thought about it. And I was like, what the fuck am I doing? You know what I mean? Fuck you. Give it a try. So I took the money that I was making, working on his house. And I bought a beat. I wrote the song to it. I copyrighted the lyrics. I paid for the studio at executive studios. Over there was Sean Forbes. Where he records that. And I recorded rough next fall in love my first single. And then next time he came to the call, I'll rough next fall in love. OK. When you were playing earlier. Yeah. OK. That's the first time you dropped them out earlier. Yeah. So I recorded that. And then I played it for him. And he was like, make it better. And he just kind of walked off. And he was like, what the fuck? You know? So I was like, I make it better. All right. So I went to another. What was it? Clear track studios. And got with a guy. And he made it a little bit better. And next thing you know, we got it. And it was better. And he heard it. And he said, still make it better. So James was in Atlanta. He's other studio. And he paid him $300. He was like, I'm going to give you $300 right now. I went and mastered and done tonight. We're going to play it in the club. I'm not even established artists. You know what I'm saying? So it was pretty crazy. It was kind of from the start, it's been a dream. So I was just surrounded by the right people. And he did that. And we got the mix. And it played in the, it's on the video on Facebook. And round up, they played it the first night. And ever since then, it kind of just took off. But after that, I asked him, I was like, hey, loan me $5,000, man, I'm working for you. Give you $500 back a week. And let's do this, man. And he said, all right. Try to give him the money. And he was like, oh, man, I'm good right now, man. You know? He's like, all right, man. And who is he talking about? Nelson, John Nelson. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, he's the bank roll. He's like, he started my career. And he's a brother, man. You know, I mean, he doesn't support me no more. Only emotionally and physically is brother. Enough financial. I fuck out that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, and this is all down south. I can four peers there. Or is that a peer? This is right here in, right here in Clearwater. Oh, yeah. So I was four peers is a small town. If you know where West Palm Beach is, it's probably about 45 minutes. Yeah, yeah, no one's four peers. Yeah. So it's not a lot going on there, man. It's kind of a lot of people who retire there. It's a small town, but all the Jewish people that moved down from New York. I get, yeah, yeah. So yeah, definitely. Yeah, yeah. A lot of New Yorkers. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I'll complain about how the food sucks here. Yeah, I was just not talking to New York. I like New York. Go back to New York. It sucks down in New York. And flow it out. Right, Forrest? So you said, so what were you doing before you met this dude and started making music? Oh, man, I was fucking unfortunately, man. I was going up. I was growing up. I moved out when I was 16 years old and didn't make the right decisions. And then my father died of a heart attack. I think if you want, I took it really hard and got in a lot of trouble and went to prison for seven years. Wow. Yeah. So it was a long time. It was a really, really long time. So I went to prison for seven years. And through that time, I read a lot. I did a lot of working. I did a lot of physical healing and mental healing and figuring out what the hell I want to do because when you put yourself in that situation, and you stop and you look around and you see what the hell is really going on to the people on the ground. You're better than that. So I had to make a choice in life. And mentally, what I wanted to do, you know what I mean? So I knew I wanted to do music. And I knew I couldn't just get out and do it. So there were steps to it. So I got out and I had a kid and things weren't. We're going good and they went bad. And you know how it is. So I went to college for two years to be electrician. And I was doing good. I was making great money as a commercial electrician. And I just wasn't happy, man. I just, something in me was just like, you know, you have to go for what you want, man. And so I had to just, I just quit it all. And I just took a chance and came here. And I didn't come here for music. But the ultimate goal was music. But I just had to get to a bigger place where those bigger people that are networking bigger and bigger situations that are trying to do something if that makes any sense. You know what I mean? So yeah. Why'd you get a prison? Ah, all right. So I, my father died at 51. My mother just passed away two weeks ago. Oh, shit. That's right. Yeah, that's why I canceled. But before she was alive and it was just my mother and my sister and things were kind of rough. And I didn't make the best choices. I really wasn't there writing the mind and how my father died. So I talk about imbalance and I'll all little bit, you know, drunk when I missed the call and everything. So I took a bat and I got involved with wrong people and made money and was selling things. And you know, it's on drugs. Yeah, selling drugs, man. And I'm going to let a drug dealers on this podcast. Yeah. I'm not a drug dealer. It was a life lesson. A life lesson. You know what I mean? So yeah, so I did that. And then they wanted me to tell and do all this. And I couldn't do it. Man, I had a two year old daughter. And my kids and my mother wanted me to, you know, she's like, you need to be here and I just couldn't do it. So I went into the time, man. So I had seven years, man. What were you slinging? It sounded a little bit of weed and a farmer has two to go. You know what I mean? A little something? No cocaine. No, no, no. We had one guy on here who's got busted with like three pounds of cocaine. He was like 10 keys. Oh, he was like 10. He was 9 present. Why is he not? He missed the 90s. He missed the whole, all the 90s. He was in prison for 2000s. 10 years. Yeah. Obama part. Crazy motherfucker. Really? Oh, Tampa Tony. Yeah. No, I was talking about BB. Oh, we've had two guys. So two guys. I watched the interview with Tampa Tony. Did you? Yeah. I was talking about different guy, but yeah, Tampa Tony. Oh, yeah. He got a couple keys to it. That was 80s, 90s. Yeah. Damn, that's wild. So you got, so how did what did you learn from being in prison for seven years? Like what was the biggest thing you took away from? The biggest thing I learned to be honest, I learned a lot of things, man. I mean, if I want to be honest with you, the biggest thing I learned is every action that you, every action has a reaction. You know what I mean? In life, you know what I mean? So like, just the biggest thing I learned, I thought about it. And anybody does that, spending them in their circumstances. Like when you're sitting there and you got seven years, and you can't, there's nothing you can do. You got to do it. You got to be a man and man to fuck up and do that shit. You know what I mean? So, you know what I mean? Like if I wouldn't have done this, I wouldn't be here. If I didn't do this and you beat yourself up. So it's a life lesson like before you make a fucking decision, think about that shit because there's a reaction to that. You know what I mean? And it's not always the way you want. And I mean, was it tough when you got out? Like what it was that I learned in curve for you? Is it like the world different? I tell you what, man, in seven years, I'm sure. Oh yeah. How old were you first of all when you went in? I was 22 years old right before I turned 23. Okay. Yeah. I got out right, like, three weeks before I turned 29. Okay. Yeah. So I spent pretty much my whole 2020s in prison. I mean, shit doesn't change, man. Girls get pregnant, girls get married. People die of new Wendy's go up. I mean, I mean, the shit wasn't so bad. But the shit wasn't so bad. The bar scene stays the same. And it's the same people just different people if that makes any sense. You know what I mean? So the biggest thing that changed for me when there was like a awakening is like, I went to work with Lisa and I did seven years. And I, you know, very in, I had like two months and I was in a work really program I could work. I could ride my bike to a job and ride back and make money and they take pretty much all of it. But whatever, you know, you're getting back into society and I was with these group of guys and they're like, come on, man, I just said seven years of prison. I'm like, all right, I'm like looking around. I'm scared as hell, man. I'm like, I don't, you know, you just feel like a bad feeling, you know, when you go through something like that. So we go to a big intersection and you have hit the button to cross the main highway. Yeah, yeah. So they're just like, man, fuck it. And they just ride them like, man, I'm just you're waiting. I'm pressing the button. Yeah. I was like totally, I was mine screwed, you know. And so it's kind of, it takes a while to adapt, you know what I mean? And just not even that with, I had a problem of fighting when I got out, you know what I mean? Because in the ocean, we'll see what it's asked. Yeah, you know what I mean? So in prison, you know, you don't talk shit unless you really mean it and there's consequences and that's what happens. So after, you know what I mean? Like seven years of just doing that, I couldn't really go out, man. You know what I mean? I went back to prison. Yeah. What? Yeah, I went back to prison, man. I was like, yeah, I was out and I was doing good. I didn't go out one time. And I was with a girl and I got married and had a son, had a place. I was working, doing AC, probably doing 70 hours a week. And I got into argument with her. It was one year for me getting out of prison. And you know, it just, I decided to drink that night and I drank and she just, that, that, that, that, and I was like, you know what? Fuck it. Fucking done, man. I'm fucking done. You know what I mean? Like I'm fucking done everything as a man and done every single fucking thing. I'm just done. I got in the car and I went for a ride. And I ended up, I knew a girl that bartended somewhere. So I went up there and had to drink. And, and I'm just being real with you guys. It's my life, you know, it's just what you wanted. So I went up there and I had, I had a, but I was doing a lot of steroids then I was working out. I was, I wasn't partying. So I was really into that. I was like, my getaway, everything. So I was up there and I was having to drink. Next thing you know, there's a dude talking shit. He's like, so loud. He's like, oh, well, like you can't hear him, but you can see his mouth and shit. And I'm like, oh, the fucking dude's fucking trying me right now. I fucking get out of here, man. You know what I mean? I fucking got one night. You know what I mean? One fucking night. You know what he's expecting? It's a boring Florida. So come to find out. Come to find out. He was with my ex. So he knew who I was. Oh shit. Yeah, he was with my ex and I didn't know that until later. But I told the bartender and I said, hey man, I gotta get out of here. I'm up to fuck this dude up, man. She's like, just fucking go. I've seen you. You're doing, you look great. You're fucking just go. You're drunk. I was like, all right, give me one more shot, one beer, I'm out of here. She's like, no, go now. I was like, no, I'm not leaving until I get one more shot, one more beer. I was mad, you know? Yeah. So I know it's already drunk. Yeah. So I fucking, I took the shot in the beer and I fucking put the money on the table. I went to walk away and I heard he screamed above. And I was like, I gotta say something. So I walked over and I was like, hey, man. I didn't make it seen or nothing. I was like, hey, man, you got a problem. You know, you want to come outside and handle like a fucking man. And that's what it is, man. And he's like, all scared and shit. I just walk out and he starts screaming. Next thing, those bouncers run up, they pull me out. The bouncer punches me in the mouth. I get into the bounce or I go by the jail. I go by the prison for a year, or by living on probation. Yeah. So I went by the prison for a year, man. And going back after doing seven years or something that was just like, I wasn't really doing nothing. Now I was just, you know what I mean? I was like, this shit, there's no room for air. You know what I mean? There's no room for air, man. Like, hang on, have a good time. But don't let your mind put your situation that you can't get out of in that. So with the circumstances and that night was, you know what I mean? So I had, that was like the real, real awakening, man. So I got it. Yeah, yeah. You know what I mean? So I got out. And that's when I really, when I got out of that second time, that's when this happened when I met Nelson. I already knew Nelson. You know what I mean? He came through. He was doing his business and everything. And he went to prison for seven years. You know what I'm saying? They do? Yeah. Damn. Okay, seven. Did you meet him in there? No. No. I met him for a really good friend, Jeremy, man. And just tied in through people. And this guy right here, man, he, he kind of, he paid the way for me, man. You know what I mean? I messed up. I messed up. You two were the last two motherfuckers I'd want to run into in prison. Yeah. I've never been there right now. I can't imagine. Yeah, man. Wow, that's wild. Are you doing music when you're locked up and stuff back then? Yeah, man. It's actually a funny story because no one could ever say anything bad about me in prison. I don't have money. I was, I didn't fight. I would just me. You know what I mean? Like you got to put yourself, really think about it. You're in prison. Let's take all this shit away the world. Your show, your show, all this shit. You did whatever. You fucking left here. We had some drinks and killed somebody on the way home on accident. Right. And you're going to prison for seven years. You're in prison. What are you going to do? What's your mindset? Fuck it, man. I'm not going to fucking let nobody fucking try me. I'm not caught. I'm not trying to cause no try. I won't try to do my time. But I'm not a fucking bitch. And I'm going to fucking, you know what I mean? So when you go into that, you go into that and you fucking, you have that mindset, man. And if you don't have that mindset, it's bad. It's bad time. And it's just bad time. And he could vouch for that, man. You had to, you had to know how to hold your own, man. Yeah. And it would be strong. And not be, I wasn't gangming, man. I wasn't doing nothing. I was just, I was a tattoo man. I worked out and I walked all over. And you talk about singing in prison. Yeah. I wrote songs. And I brought that up to say this because the black guys at first hated me. Yeah. Cause I was crying and saying, but I ain't without a mother. I want a country. I want a mother. I want a mother. I want a mother. I'm doing, I'm doing a push up. I'm in my head. I'm in my head. Cause when in prison you have to learn how to- This country mother fucker out of here. At first they do. Cracker, shut your fucking ass out of the fucking ass. Fuck you, man. You want to do my time? All right, fuck you, man. I keep doing it. And after a while I said, you know what? I'm a right of song. I told my bunkie that he had life. And he said, country boy, I think you will write a song. I was like, I'm gonna fuck him out of song. And I wrote a song. And then I started singing it. And then next thing you know, I've been sitting on my bunk and I'll be writing music. No, like not here with beats or it's in your head. You know what I mean? So people go, hey, hey, they all get smoked and get high and shit and be like, hey, why would I play that country shit for us real quick? I just want to hear it. The country shit for us real quick. So you know, it's like, I was like, hey man, I make these mother fuckers like this shit. I think I got some going on. You know what I mean? So, except for the horror. I always rap in the heart. Yeah. Everybody's not gonna like like a song. And it takes me a long time to do a song only because I have so many good people behind me. Like I got luxury forwards right here. He's a singer or songwriter. And I know he looks like Usher. I'm not bringing a surprise or artist. How can say looks like J-Towam. I'm not even saying that. He's a pro. But I love J-Towam. A singer songwriter, singer songwriter, y'all know Kenny Moss from Resident Evil. Yeah, we know Kenny. Now I'll say so. So I have a team at Pete's not here. I have a big team behind me. So I do a song and I let every single one of them here through all the stages of it. And I might love it and they'll be like nah. Got you a team. And we argue. They'll be like, what the f- you don't wanna fucking hear my fucking advice and fucking don't sit at you. You know? He's like, this is fucking great. And they're like nah. So I try to take it all with all these intelligent, this powerful circle I have around me. And that's why it takes me so long. But I write this song from my heart, man. And anybody that just, I hate, I hate, man. I hate. I hate anybody that says their artists. And they just jump out of album in two weeks, three weeks, a month, or whatever. And just put anything down. It just sounds good. You have to fucking make that shit sound good. We're writing a song last night, man. And we're hanging out. We were hanging out, man. We were, we were vibing hard. We're vibing hard. Yeah, I was looking at your Facebook live video where you guys were hanging out. That was it. That was it. Yeah. We were writing a song last night. We wrote a song, well halfway through the song last night. So he's gonna branch out. He's in resonated. So he's gonna do a solo song with me. Kenny Mullins and Seth Anthony. We're gonna do like a little hip shit, man. Oh yeah. So it's about writing from the heart, man. And it's not about, I don't want to say some of the fans, but if you, you have to write from your heart and then the people would just love it. You know what I mean? Like, are there any artists that you kind of like look up to that you kind of like model yourself after? Like, I want to be like this dude mixed with this dude. Is there anything like that? I can break that down in every, in every genre. Classic country. Like, country everybody knows, Garth Brooks, George Straight, old country, when was your name? Hank Williams, Jr. David Allen Coe. I got the love David Allen Coe. I got the Hank 3 shirt for you. Fuck yeah. I love Hank. That's my favorite country singer. I love Hank. Hank 3. I seen Hank, man. I love Hank. Not like that fucking pop country though. I like that fucking pop country. Well, you got a pop country. You got to have some kind of fucking pop country in there, man. Like Luke Brian, you like Luke Brian? You're that guy that goes in the fucking on the internet. Lisa's dirty ass con. I'm not going to trim all the fucking fucking. What the fuck? What are you music Danny? Come on, dude. I'm not an internet troll. I just fucking love Hank 3. I mean, that's like my favorite country dude. But I mean, respect to all those kinds of things. Hank, the third is great. Wheeler Walker. But Hank Williams, Jr. is the great guy. Of course. Right. Right. I was introduced to country through Hank 3. That's how I kind of got like into the game. Well, of course. Because how old are you? I'm 31. 31. He's just me, man. So yeah, I heard Hank 3rd. But I grew up on Hank Williams, Jr. because my father. OK. So I didn't even, I knew Hank was Jr. before I knew the Hank 3rd. Right. I mean, so it's hard when you, it's different. I'm a fucking, I'm a country poser. Because I, you know, you came in through this. No, there's no country, there's no country poser, man. Look what I'm wearing right now. Look, look, look, look, look, look, I'm wearing fucking flip-flops, man. That works sorts. Yeah. I'm not, I'm not a redneck, man. I'm a country boy, man. I grew up in the country. God bless my mother. She was a singer, a songwriter from Tennessee. My daddy, she was a redneck. Right. This is, I'm going to explain this to everybody because everybody keeps asking about the rough neck thing. I'm not, I didn't work on a fucking wall of rays. And if you do, I have fucking respect it because it's a hard fucking job. Yeah. My mom is a singer or a songwriter from Tennessee. She's a redneck. My dad was a biker from Illinois's mood of four appearance of fish, man, he's a rough neck. He was a, he was a rough writer. So I took, I'm both, I'm both of them. I'm rough neck. You know, he sounds like that's why I came up with my whole little rough neck thing. It's because that's just who I am. And I'm not, I'm not a redneck, but I'm not a city boy. I'm not a server. I'm just me, man. And I grew up with country ways and I grew up on, and on the beach and I grew up, I just, it's who I am. You know what I mean? So I don't feel like it because my heart's in country that I hate that because people stare or type, if I don't got fucking, I got cowboy boots and I fucking wear them. And I just stopped dipping because it ain't fucking good. You know what I mean? And I was fucking loving it. How about that? Yeah. I haven't quit drinking or smoking weed because I love those two things and they just got to be hard to let them go. You know what I mean? So I'm calming down with it a lot. You know what I mean? My mom just passed away a couple weeks ago when I canceled this. I wanted really wanted to be here, man, but it wasn't. I wasn't mentally right. I mean, that's heavy, dude. I'm here, man. So I drank so much God damn whiskey and moonshot and fucking beer and fucking cried and fucking laughed and fucking sang and fucking, you know what I mean? So yeah, man. I mean, I got some fucking gifts for you guys, though. Really? Yeah. Of course. Me. Yeah, I'm a scumbag. I'm not going to fucking bring you guys something you want. I have no one's only personal. Nobody's ever. Everybody's ever. I brought you guys. He just sat in the Anthony shirt, man. Fuck yeah. There you go. There you go. Hell yeah. There you go. So I got you guys, you just sat in the shirt. Oh, yeah, I appreciate that one. I got you guys some reef and real. It's a company. It was the reef and real, dude. This is an other thing. Look, you see me wearing all their shit. If it's made in America, I fucking love it. Yeah. America pro. So my next song is American made. This fucking AC unit we got here is made in China. It's why it's broke. That's why it's fucking broke. It's a piece of shit, bro. All right. So we got two freaking fat ass Americans fixing it for us. And they're fixing it, though. Yeah. Because they're American. So look, I got you get some beer, some beer, coolsies. Yeah. Oh, this is a model man. Oh, man. Thank you, dude. Yeah, man. Oh, yeah. So fucking, oh, this guy's a disher company. They're not even paying me, bro. Oh, that's the craziest thing. Look, I got your beer bottle open. Oh, look at that. Oh, yeah. I should have brought some beer. I'm just saying, you're not some vodka. I got some vodka if you want some vodka. You're not some vodka. Oh, yeah. I'm good for now. Yeah. So I met these guys. I was with him on the jet skis, man. And we were just out ripping it up one day. I just came from an hour across town. And he's like, let's take the fucking jet skis out. I was in town for 10 minutes. I'm like, fuck it. Let's go. To the jet skis out. He's like, we're riding all over the fucking place and shit. And next thing you know, fucking, we see this whole group of people with these big guys boats, these girls, and became these. And I'm like, I got to get in the midst. That's what we got to go. I got to get in the mix. You know what I mean? So I walked over there. And it was these guys and family owned fucking company men, fucking, they're shirts fit great. They're fucking hat. I put their hat on. It's a big thing on me with hat. I wear a lot of hats. Yeah. Because I shaved my head. You know what I mean? So I don't want to eat. A lot of people say, oh, you look stupid. Hey, k k. Goodnight, always tattoos. That's the one thing. You know, I got these tattoos and everything. So I wore my hats to hat fit perfect. Yeah. Hat fit perfect. Looks good. Hey, k k. You're really shout out to me. That's what I said. Yeah. I say when I take my hat off, I look like the k k because I always tattoos. I got a full whole body's tattooed man. So you got all your tattoos in most of my prison? Prison. Really? Wow. Prison. Yeah. I mean, that's the best way to get them, right? Put the store behind it. Fuck yeah. I didn't get this or some guy drunk fucking not want to do the tattoo. This guy tried. Yeah. He plays art my body. Yeah. It wasn't bullshit art, man. He put some good shit on me, man. Hell yeah. That's what's up. You ever thought about collabing with a hip hop artist? Or anything like some old town road shit? Old town road. What do you think of that song? I fucking love it. OK. I like it too. You should fucking like it. What do you think about little Hank? Little Yoda boy. The Walmart, you're OK. I couldn't even tell you the fuck that. Really? I'm a little upset. I didn't even give people a little. I do. I wish you'd do. You didn't have a fucking candy. You know who he is? Are you talking about the guy who doesn't say actual words? No. He was yodeling in Walmart. He loved the viral video about it. And then he was in fucking Coachella. And you know what I think about that? Good for him. It's over with. What's he going to do next? I don't know. I don't know. He was like, what songs? I want to get one of these seconds. Thank you for entertaining me for 30 seconds in my life. But then fuck what? I don't follow us. You know where? Yeah. I mean, it just fucking, it's a fucking, it's, it's realism, man. Fuckin. Do you want to fight? You know, people are getting into the music industry. I thought it was a fucking so easy. And I was so blind to this shit, man. And I went through a lot of fucking trials and tribes and fucking dumb shit, man. I just dude fucking literally, he was investing in me. Give me $500 to $1,000 a week cash to live. Fuckin paid for a house for six months paid for my everything just because he believed in me because first of all, I want to tell any hours that watch this. You believe in yourself enough. You can make somebody believing you put money in team. You meet the whole world believe. And that's fucking truth. Positivity man. Got a true doubt there. It's the fuck it's facts. Yeah. It's facts of life. All right. So if you believe in that shit and you live that shit and you really dedicate yourself to that shit, it will fucking, it will manifest for you man. I promise you that's a little knowledge. I want to draw for you man. I met this fucking dude right here, man. And he did all that for me. And you know, about like four, four months into it, you know, I didn't think it was going to go that fast. Yeah. No one does. It kind of has blown up pretty fast. So within a couple months, you're all doing it. You know, I just have, I got the perfect people around me right now that have me to a point where everybody's knowledgeable in their own degree. You see what I'm saying? We have a perfect circle. We were talking about this. When you have a perfect circle where everybody just does their own third role in their role, things work like a old machine. You know what I mean? So when you don't have that, you're, you're overworking yourself and you're stressing yourself out and you're not getting productivity as much done as it could be. You know what I mean? So you're hurting you lack in an era's where you have a strong team and if things are going right and everybody's not fucking up, people are going to fuck up. But you keep each other up. That's why in the beginning, I just, I jumped so fast and I made a lot of bad decisions that I, I'm glad I made them. We talked about this because if I would have made them later in the game, it would have fucked me up. It would have hurt me. Yeah. Because I made them so early in the game. I mean, I fucked up. I was going out and fucking spending $300 a night at a bar and ended up in fucking, who fucking knows where was fucking females and fucking, you know what I mean? I was just fucking, I was like, hey, but I would always show up into my music. But people knew they were like, hey, fucking with like shit, yeah, you're here. Fuckin, you know what I mean? Like, the fuck have you been doing bro? Like, are you fucking, do you want this or are you on a fucking party and mess around with girls, bro? And I'm like, no, just I'm here. And I just kept going and I fucked up so much that this guy picked me up. I went to his house and he told me not to, I'm not going to name this is going to fucking cause a lot of shit. He's a girl and he told me not to, you know, just be with her that night and do my thing and I didn't, I didn't listen bro, you know, and I just kept, I was, I was still doing my music and I bought her around. Next thing you know, she's around. He gets to wind up and he's like, oh yeah, yeah, come over to the crib man, come over to the house. All nonchalances is why fuck with this dude man cause he's real. So he pulls me over, we're drinking, we're hanging out, we're doing all this shit man. He was like, hey man, he's got a AMG fucking rent tech all hooked up fucking scariest car been in man. Almost like killed me on fucking being clear water. Well, the fuck, man. 760 already, what I don't even know what the fuck it is man, fucking scariest fucking car man. So he's like, get in the car man, he just fucking just come with me. I'm like, all right, I get in the car, I got the beer. I'm like hell yeah, bro, I'm about to go do this show. He goes, but he slams on the fucking brakes. I'm going to slap my head on the fucking thing. And he's like, you think this shit's fucking sweet bro. I'm like, what? What the fuck's going on? He's like, well, you think this shit's sweet. I'm giving you money. I'm doing this. I'm paving your fucking career. You got talent. You're going to fucking, you're going to spend my money. He's going to hang the fuck out. He checked me and left me right there. I'm so in love. I still love him. I love him. And I respect him to this day because that's what I needed. Yeah. You know what I mean? Because I was fucking, you got to think when you, when you come from nothing man and fucking and do something that goes so fast, you kind of get caught up in that vibe of that, that stream of things going on and everything. And it's not, it's not good man. You know, because you're just going to ruin your career either if you're drinking too much, you're partying too much, spending too much money. You're spending too much on my women, not enough time on music. Whatever the fuck it is. You know what I mean? So he checked me on that and it was fucking, I was, and I didn't even, the way he checked me was so masculine like, motherfucker. You know what I'm saying? It was like some real shit. And I was like, all right, he's for real. He's obviously for real. You know what I mean? I don't think he's playing. So damn, I'm fucking up for him to be this serious. And I mean, and I have that. He's obviously for real. You know what I mean? I don't think he's playing. So, uh, damn, I'm fucking up for him to be this serious and, you know what I mean? And I have not, not stop talking to for any reason. In any time he flips out on me like that, I fucking, I know there's a reason behind it. You know what I mean? So, uh, I'm not perfect. You're not perfect. Nobody is fucking in this perfect. Right. And, uh, doing what I'm doing or doing, even with which I respect you guys, man. Shout out to you guys. What two, two hours, 20,000 subscribers or something like that? 227? So, I'm like that. You're a great boy. I look, man. Yeah. That's growing. That's a big shout out right there. There was nothing quick though. It was a good take, taking us years. Okay. I'm taking a little, yeah. What I'm saying right now, it took, it took learning and doing things and, you know what I mean? Kenny told me last night he said, uh, Seth, man, people asked me all the time. I've been in musician forever. I toured nationally everywhere. You know, I manage your, and you live the same life as me. Our life is like a pinball machine. Is that, explain it? How did you guys meet Kenny? I mean, we know, no, you Kenny's a high school when you're like, email band. Hey, with Mikey. With Mikey three times fast. I think it was called. Um, how did we meet actually, uh, about a year went to high school with, I don't think you guys know him. I asked you before about, uh, Naren Connors, uh, brother, um, one of the, uh, team members. I guess he could call him. Um, he hit me up on Facebook and was like, yo, man, I got this. I got a buddy of mine. Who's, um, a country artist and I want to write some, some music. We were trying to, he's moving over here. So I thought about you. So I was like, okay, cool. Yeah, I mean, bring him over. I got a bunch of sessions open. I've been doing a lot of co-writes. So he came over. Actually, I usually try to, try to listen to the music, try to figure out what the vibe is a little bit and try to merge my, you know, fingerprint on it with what he's trying to go for. And I had like this song written like half way written. And Seth came over one night, you know, he's rowdy as I mean, I wasn't, I didn't know what I was getting into. I mean, because I never worked with a buff neck. He tries how rowdy grow. Oh, get the fuck out of here. I try to keep him in line. I'm like, I was just telling him on the way. I'm like, we're the end in the end. I'm, you guys got a complete separate audience. I mean, you're like resonated as like reggae pop, right? Yeah. Yeah. It's like pop reggae stuff. But I mean, I write with soul artists, right with R&B, rock, yeah, pop, whatever. Anyways, he comes over. I met him that night at my house. We had a session and we just wrote a, a bang or song. And it was just on from there. He's, he was coming over to actually just write with me. He's like, bro, fucking, how'd you do this, bro? You, you, you're fucking, you're the man. You could be my manager, man. Oh, I, well, I don't know her. Maybe, you know, I'm, I'm thinking to my head. I'm like, this is just like kind of, right. You know, you meet a lot of people you write with, you hang out with, you know, you create something. And you create something and you get like into that shit, right? You end that like it, like I can't explain it unless, you know, you're like how you guys are into this, you know, you guys, you guys are into that shit. So we, we, I knew that it was like something good. I didn't even really listen to any of the, like look at the views and stuff like that. I listened to the songs. I wasn't looking out of that way. I was just looking at could I vibe with this, you know, and we vibe first night, we moved on to another song and all the sudden, you know, three months later, he's living at my house. He's living in the studio. Yeah. And in the studio, in the studio, so we, we've got to spend a lot of time together. And he's definitely, you know, he's got a lot of motivation. I see that, you know, like he was saying earlier, you get people who believe in you, like I know the feeling as an artist, you know, I've been in this game for a long ass time. And I've realized that my strong point is writing, you know, I love traveling. I've seen I've been tons of places played a lot of awesome venues played with tons of awesome bands and stuff. But my real passions just writing music, you know, so that came along and then I adore bills. Yeah, I had a bunch of buddies who jammed and I know tons of musicians, because you know, I do the jams and stuff everywhere lose jams, funk jams, you know, reggae jams, whatever. So I know tons of musicians, he's like, yo, I'm moving, you know, I need a band. I want to really do this. I was like, so you're not, you know, not trying to just put out music on your own. You really want to be a, you know, have a band. So I connected with a band, Abraham Harris to my house. We, you know, I don't even think we tried out anybody. I think it was the first guys. I was like, these are the guys. I don't want their rough band. I went there. I was like, yeah, so they, you know, they spoke the ball and I was like, hey, what's up, guys? We're gonna fucking play this music. You showed up late. Because that's how you do it. You know, we got a show of late. But no, they, they, they vibed it there, you know, they practiced all, you know, at the crib and at the studio and, and then, you know, he's like, I'm, he was working in Spring Hill or, you know, with Nelson, right? Working with you. I was working in Spring Hill. I was, him before. Okay, okay. So, yeah, so then he moved in and we just, you know, and vibing, got him an agent. So now he's booking shows. He's got, we just confirmed like, shout out to Georgia here in Georgia. We're gonna Georgia. June and June. June 14th and 15th, I'll be in Statesboro in Savannah, Georgia. I'm gonna be in Daytona, Stewart, Florida, California. We're going all over, man. So, yeah. So this year's gonna be a fucking fun ass year, man. I mean, I've been telling people on Facebook for like, fucking eight months. I'm like, I'm coming out of Florida. I'm coming. Are you guys all coming? What are you guys working on? Oh, yeah. I was like, a bunch of singles. How does it work? You guys just like, putting all that, what's your singles and then? I feel like we had a different mindset at first. I think Seth needs to album, you know what I mean? Yeah. So there's a lot of good hype on the singles and stuff. Yeah. But um, it doesn't have to be anything like super long or anything. But I think an album be easy to, not song pretty, tacks on. So I'm just like, working on album right now. We already got how we half of it done. Yeah. We all have album done. So I mean, literally in this next like three weeks, we're probably gonna be sitting there with a guitar jamming out me and him and cranking out the rest of these songs. And then we're making some demos, a good Orlando and Mike Steep, John with Lax. So like, you guys remember smoke signals resonating around Sativa Fiva. So that producer, he's now the drummer for the Lax. You know, the Lax. I've heard of him. Who's the Lax? Like Steve, the Lax. They're country country rappers. Okay. Yeah. They're really blowing up right now. I just kind of utilize my connections. Right. Do I know any country? Right. Who comes? You know, like maybe, you know, I just have the guitar and on the music. No, no, I just write. I just write. Who's point is there guitar? There's guitar. Yeah. They're not here right now. They're all sitting in musicians. Okay, I got you guys like hired on the spot pretty much for most of the stuff. Okay. Stuff that I did with Seth. I did guitar on. But it's a lot of collaboration and back and forth and stuff like that. So you guys are all there together at the same time. Just like, no, no, like we'll write a song together and then it'll maybe be him and someone else in the room next time. Okay. And then we'll share mixes and stuff like that. Okay. So everybody's happy kind of like we were saying earlier. And you know, just like get it where it needs to be. And that's what I do. You know, I mean, like that's what I come in. You know, I work with a lot of different pop artists in not necessarily country, but now that I've dipped into it, I've developed a ton of relationships with people. And it really just comes down to making the best song. And if it's not what these guys, maybe you could write a great song, but it's not produced, right? You know, I mean, so there's different elements to it. You could write a great song on guitar and then take it to this producer cost you all this or it doesn't cost you that and you get what you're not really expecting. So it's kind of like a fact is making a fucking song like O-Town Road. Oh, yeah. I mean, just fucking make some simple stupid. Yeah. It's fucking sad to say, man. It's really fucking sad to say, I mean, you know what I'm saying. It's sad. Hey, no, if anybody can vouch for this, the man sitting in the middle of the fucking couch will fucking vouch for this, and he gets so angry. Why haven't I seen why we should do it? We should do it. We should do it. We should do it together. We should try to bring him a little bit that like soul kind of R&B country. But you know what? Last time he was doing it. And he could do it. I can do it. I'm just playing down a little bit. I'm back and do it. But fucking, uh, O-Town Road is just think about it. It's so fucking simple and basic. But you know, people want people want something catchy. Yeah. And something they don't hear a whole bunch of words and they can sing along to another words. So when they're in their fucking car, they can jam the fuck out. Or when they hear they're like, Oh, shit. And they fucking jam out of this fucking dumbass bar where they're drinking margaritas. What a fuck you're at. You know, he talk. Go Tuesday. I don't go fuck wherever you're at. You know what I mean? Look at the fuck you hear that song. You get hyped because you know the words is catchy beat. It's simple music. And that's what's selling, bro. And it's sad to fucking say like people like anybody that does music. It's like it's selling out. If fucking, you know what, man. I wrote a song. I'm in it for the money because everybody's fucking talking about I'm in it for the fans. I'm doing it. I'm doing this. I'm doing that. You know what? I'm not going to name the artist. But I've hit up a lot of artists man that are in the game. And I talk to them. I'm going to say, Hey, man, look what I'm doing. Look at my views. Look what I'm doing. I'm only hearing this shit, man. Watch what I do. Man, I want to do a song with you. I like your music. And 75% of them come back with all right, I'm down. But you know, I don't do features for free. So you're not in it for the fans. You're not in for the love of music. You're not in for that. So I made a song. I mean, a photo money. I mean, a photo girls. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like, I'm gonna keep it real. I'm gonna keep it real. Like, what are you in it for? You're in it for that motherfucking money. And you're in it for the women and the fucking fame. I don't really give a fuck a lot of money to fame anything. I want to live a good life. I don't want to have to hurt for anything. And let's just be real. Know what he does. You know what I mean? I don't want to be like, Hey, fuck man, I'm worried. I don't want to stress about no bill. I just want to sing my music, man. And make people relate to it. And it's nothing. It's no high. I've ever been on, like being on a stage, man. And singing a song. And seeing people just, you fork stages happiness, man. And just fucking loving it, man. That just brings a high to me. That it just motivates me. Fuck the money. Fuck all this shit. And I love the money. I'm gonna get the money. All right. That's fuck you. You know what I'm saying? Right. You come to your job for free. No, you don't. Okay, then that's my job. All right. I need fucking get paid. All right. So, well, I mean, I love the fans, man. And it's a high that fucking brings such joy to me, man, that I never felt my life, man. I've been to a lot of fucking shit, man. And it just does. I get excited about it. This fucking guy, everybody in this fucking besides him, this as Sean's brother, he hasn't met me that much. Every single person in this room has probably hated me and loved me at the same time. I promise you that. It's my full fledged character. I really am a full fledged character. People don't know how to react. I mean, they're like, who the fuck is this? I just told him today that we should do some kind of cartoon with all his personalities. I'm telling you, man. I know a couple guys. I know a couple guys, right? I fucking, I mean, if I would have money, yeah, you could do. Hey, so what was the first show like you have him doing shows too long, right? Oh, yeah, man. I just started the one shows last year, man. So what was your first one? My first one, Toby Stampede. And for a night, they had nobody there. We had a pretty good turnout. And that's my first show when I played with the band, not my band, but the band that I record my music with. And they were like, this is your first fucking show. Are you nervous? No, I didn't tell them that. Yeah. I just fucking did the fucking show. I think like two shots, Jameson and my three both lights. I wanted to kill that fucking shit. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I fucking, I didn't tell them that. Okay. Because they can do that and you're fucking, you're putting down the fucking artists, you know, like, oh, fuck, now they're worried about, am I going to fucking be on cue? No, I don't tell them that. I had so professional. They're like, they think I'm a seasoned vet motherfucker. You know, I go up there and do my motherfucking thing, you know, I mean, like, fuck it. You know what I mean? So I went up there and fucking, I sang that shit and I clapped all our hands, I gave me each money. And I was like, hey, this is my first show. This is your first fucking show. I was like, yeah, like what the fuck? And I was like, yeah, man, this is my first show. Yeah, that's what the fuck man. And the next show was a fucking blank. It was fucking horrible. Yeah, people got fired. It was horrible. I'm a salsa investor. It was fucking, you know, but you got to do that. You have to do that as being an artist, man. If you don't have a story to tell, this is, this is how I look at it in my life. Anytime I get down on myself, I'm a positive thinker man. And I just saying, even when I'm in the rut, I'm in the rut. I don't think I can get out. I fucking think some positive shit, I get myself out, man, because I think about it like this. If there was no story to tell on the way to the top to make a music, you're not fucking interesting to me. Yeah. You know what I mean? If this is, it was just handed to you like, Hey, we see this chani rock and you hold this rock. You're on the radio. And I just handed to you and you hold it. You're in the radio. What do you, who the fuck are you? Like, you're in a chan. You know what I mean? Like, I don't go a fuck about you in a glasses or or a gluing rock. I don't fucking care. You know what I mean? Like, being honest, you know what I'm saying? Go through that shit, man. You get to fucking sleep on couches and eat ram and fucking noodles after fucking president. That's ridiculous. Yeah. To get where you're going and fucking do things and fucking be a mess and fucking be all over the place. And that's what you have to do, man. You know what I mean? Like a lot of people, every single person I've noticed and I research everybody. I'm like, YouTube stalker, man. I research people that are successful. And then I go us out of YouTube and I research them. And every single person that has been successful with music, acting, uh, anything has either known somebody and gotten them the fuck in there, or they fucking went through the ringer, man. And they didn't quit because, you know what, no matter how many times you fail, you keep going. You see what I'm saying? And the motherfucker that just quits is you're working on, you're working on, you're working on nothing. I don't want to say that. You take the wrong way. If you're working on five and you're happy with that. Not what you were trying to do. I'm not trying to do that. I don't want to go on vacation once a month and fucking working on a week or week paycheck and pay my mortgage and fucking goddamn the fucking radio or broken the fucking truck, babe. Fuck. You know what I'm saying? Like fucking all this dumb shit. I don't want to do that. I have a potential to do something different. So I have to fail, fail, fail, fail, and I have been not feeling. But I'm going to fail. I'm going to fail. Something's going to happen. And I'm going to fail. But it's not going to fucking set me nowhere. I'm not going to get upset because I always go, when I fail, I boost up and I'm going off the mistakes and I don't make the mistakes I'm more and I fucking go forward. Well, that's what it's about. That's what that's like, man. It's energy. You know what I'm saying? Like some shit that fucking a lot of people don't get. You know what I mean? Like it's it's serious shit, man. Like what's been the key to your success so far though? Because you're you're like blowing up now. You're doing really well. So what are you even doing? It's working. Like well, to be honest, you may keep in positive people roaming, man. Okay. You know what I mean? Like all these dumb sayings that people that people you hear through growing up in a birds of flagrant fuck together. You know what I'm saying? Like it's truth. Fuck together. It's a fuck fuck tomato tomato. Birds of a feather flock together. Yeah. Yeah. All right. So you know, it's it's used as an analogy of positive people and bad people. Everybody, everybody in this room has negative people in their fucking life either it's a family member, homeboy, anything, man. And I don't give a fuck of you or how big you are, how small you are. You have that. You have positive people and negative people. If you don't have that much positive people in your life, well then fuck you, be by yourself until you find more positive fucking people and stay on the right track. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? Because if you go back, because it's easy to go to the negative people, man, I'm telling you from life experience, man. It's very easy, man, to do dumb shit, to make money or hang out and just get in trouble, man. You know what I mean? That's deferring me from what the fuck I'm going with anybody, man. And I preach that because I believe that so much and take it from like, I got a fuck up a lot, man. Yeah. Take it from a guy that fucks up more than you fucking know. I don't let it be seen because I have an image to keep yeah. I don't want my fucking personal shit when I fuck up. Who would you know what I mean? I fuck up. And I mean, but guess what? I'm gonna take my horse to a little town road. I'm gonna ride to the cane. I'm gonna take my horse. I'm gonna get back on that road, man. I'm keep going, bro. I'm trying to tell you I'm not stopping. So you got to drive. Yeah, you gotta have that. What the fuck are you doing? Yeah. What are you doing? Yeah. What are you doing? A little bit of confidence, a little bit of driving, a little bit of vodka. That's all you need, man. Usually it's whiskey, but oh, it's fucking out here. I'm trying to quit drinking. So why are your videos blowing up so much? Like your music videos? Oh, fucking going crazy. What's the fucking thing? Yeah. Fuck you. Yeah. I was thinking about you ain't blowing up like that. No, so no, I got the best marketing guy in Florida, man. And I was blessed like back to what I was saying with the perfect circle, man. Fuckin. These fucking, this fucking guys, he's on point, man. So uh, he got a good team. Yeah. I have a good team, man. You know, I mean, that's what when I went to this, and I took it serious, man. I had to take a step back and, you know, I've been the more flawed guy out of the circle than anybody. You know what I mean? So if that's a situation, that's a good thing. Yeah. You straighten yourself up and correct the little things here and there, but you know, I'm saying so it's just, you know, me with, um, just me dealing my own shit and fucking, uh, like, you don't understand. This thing has literally came overnight. You know what I mean? So, uh, me just doing music and even doing this shit right here, him being my manager, him, my life, these people in my life. This just came like, uh, overnight. So, um, you know, I don't stop thinking. I'm a thinker. So I'm thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking, but I'm not someone shit is going on. I'm, it's almost like I'm not thinking. If that makes any sense, like I'm just like kind of like rolling with it. You know what I'm like, I gotta go here. I gotta we here. I gotta do this. I gotta, it's so much shit. Yeah. So, uh, I gotta track a lot and did a lot of stupid shit, man. Not stupid decisions, but, uh, not the correct decisions. And it fucked up things, but it was supposed to happen, man. And that's what I believe, man. The phone, the place. It is. It is. I mean, it, things are supposed to fuck up for a reason. There's always doors opening in life. You know what I'm saying? It, it, people aren't, uh, wok to nothing. People are probably think I'm crazy for talking like this, but I'm so, I'm not crazy. You know what I mean? So, I just used it in my life and I know it works. Doors open in your life, man. And if you don't take that door, don't get discouraged and go back to the bullshit because there's always going to be a door opening. You know what I mean? Like, you have to take the door and that door release on all the door, man. And it's what you put into it is what you're going to receive. So, you know what I mean? So, I know what I'm fucking up. And I know what I'm drinking too much or I'm not concentrating enough. And it weighs on my conscience because I, I trained myself to do that. You know what I mean? And once you put yourself into that element, man, to, to, to doing something, I don't go fuck what you want to do. If you want to build, I go keep going back to this fucking stupid ass glowing rock. Which I like this rock. I'm going to take this rock. I'm going to take the rock. If I wanted to build this fucking rock, I could just say I like the rock. I'll be like a night like a night. So, if I want to build this rock, yeah, all right. Literally think about this with your mind. I want to build this. I have an idea with a glowing fucking rock. And I want to build this. And it's going to cost me fucking two, 33 or fucking four, 33 to fucking make it. And you do all this in, and, and, and you put your mind to it, you're going to fail. That's fucking life. You're going to fucking fail. But guess what? If you reconstruct it and you do a fucking right, you will not fail. And I'm not saying how fast it may be. Maybe, maybe he's a fucking light boy, Sean. You know what I mean? That's the cheaper way, right? I might have an LED in there. Fuck the LED or putting a regular light bulb in that bitch, bro. You know what I mean? Like, it's just fucking life, dude. You know what I mean? So I do music. So I fucking, I fail and I fucking learn. I'm like, fuck. He can't even deal with me, bro. I'm trying to tell you, I wish I had a GoPro. This guy right here, he's like, fuck with him. This guy's like, right here, he's like, I can't fucking deal with this dude. I mean, like, I can't get you two all over the place. Seth, and I'm like, I just got to figure it out. So like, you hit it. Obviously, you've hit like a certain level, like a pretty high level so far. Like you've started to take off online. If people are noticing you was so like, what, like in a certain timeframe, whatever that may be, like, what's like the next that what's the next level that you want to hit that you have like insight right now? That's a big, that's a big question, man. To me personally, um, I stay true, man. So I'm going to say true to the people that it's, you know, this is fucked up, man, because the music industry, man is so political and people don't even fucking realize it, man. You know what I mean? Like, there's so much things that go into it that you don't realize until you do music. I want a big scale. You can fucking release a song, put on your music. I mean, like career wise, like what's the next level of career wise, money wise, like like, like, oh, what's the top, bro? Yeah. I mean, well, you got to take it step by step, though, right? You should straight to the top or you think, it's not going to happen that with some realistic dude. Yeah. Right. That's got the bullshit. This dude's got to like, so we just got this agent. I think developing like true, like organic fans seeing him live. Yeah. Because, you know, I mean, it was kind of overnight, like, like, almost what do you call influencers situation in a way. But taking those people, figuring out where those people are and torn into those areas. Right. Right. I think that just, right. I'm not going to happen. So I think like that, that's like gaining real people. Right. Real. Like if you have one, that's not going to pay to come to your show. Yeah. That's that one. Step one is to do this. I'm, what I'm already doing. Get on some tours with some bigger artists. Yeah. Get some, maybe do some features with some bigger artists. One kind of features you guys want to do. What kind of artists do you want to work? Ah, like you could pick three right now. Pick two. Two. Yeah. Pick two. Any anybody, any artist? Ryan up church, Walker Hayes. No. Miller Walker. Ryan up church and Taylor Ray whole broke. I don't have any of those guys are. I mean, yeah. That's the two people that I personally would feel personal satisfaction, music wise and personal game. Have you ever have you ever reached out? You know what I mean? No, I will. You know what I mean? I will. Right now I have someone shit going on. Man, you know, there's a ton of place for everything, man. Yeah. You know what I mean? For sure. If you step in too soon, yeah. You got to help the whole thing. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. You got to feel in your body when it's like, it's like, it's a, well, it's a fine, well, way old machine. Like it really is man. You'll know when things are just moving and you'll see it. You'll see it. And you're like, it's time. Bam. And you reach out. You know what I mean? Yeah. So, um, I already got a couple of artists. I'm not going to name them. Man, I'm going to do some features with men and they say they want to do them, but they're on tour and they're doing this and doing that when I talk to them. So, you know, we do it. If not, keep whatever. You know what I mean? There's a lot of, there's a lot of big up and coming music musicians around this area. Like in this, this, like, like, what's the word? Do it. St. E is very fucking hard for fucking so many. It's crazy. St. E is like a reggae capital, man. Yeah. It's reggae vibes. Yeah. A lot of hip hop, a lot of rammin out of hip hop, reggae. Like, you know what I mean? We got Ruger Rive, we got fucking, well, he's clear water, luxury for me. He's in. He's a, they do a song with a, who's that one dude that did the big two party on a, oh, yeah, he's four channel blow. Oh, yeah. We did some videos before. He did a song with him. And we're just other kid, Rod Wave, who's blowing up around here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We did some videos with those dudes. There's a rod and Glock nine. Yeah. I'm not really into the rap thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I got a, all rap. All rap. Just stick your toe in. Yeah. It's got to be like a little, you have a little like rap hip hop field to your music. Yeah. Well, I'm changed the country, 20 a little bit and put a rap beat behind it. But we just did last night a little bit. Well, we did a little bit last night. I told him last time I was like, I want to fucking, I want to rap a little bit, man. You know, it's just have fun with it, man. You know, people have talked about it. People will talk about it. No matter what. Oh, yeah, they roast. So fucking, yeah, we will fuck down. Fuck down. You know what? We're gonna get, we're gonna get fucking ethered on this video right. I fucking love it. We did all the time. We get a video. I hope they talk fucking shit. Yeah. Yeah. Fuck you. Stick it up the rags. Yeah. If you're talking about you and doing something, it's good. Yeah. Yeah. Fuck the internet trolls. No, we love the internet trolls. You got a letter. You can't fight hate with hate. If you don't love them, man, then you fucking know all of the games. Exactly. Because the game is part of hate. Exactly. It really is, man. You know what I mean? So I, when I, when I first started doing it, I fucking was so, I brought, listen, I'm trying to tell you, I haven't told a lot. It's been on this fucking goddamn interview. I see my guy didn't phone on my chest, man. And when that shit buzz, I would go in the middle of the night, a bad comment. I know what I first started. I was so, I'm so passionate about what the fuck I was saying. No, but what I do, you know what I mean? So I was like, well, the fucker, I was like, do you know it? Cause I put no one knows. It's just a dumb one. I had to take care of the stockers when can I say about a few months ago, you went to jail again a couple. Yeah. I went to jail. We had some, we had some crazies following and I'm like, answering back these girls. And they're, they're pissed at you replying. Like, you just be like, thanks for hitting up the page. But day one girl was like, what? It was pretty funny. He's got a mega fan. I'm not going to say her name. You got a few, you got a few mega. I think I know who you're, you know who I'm talking about. Yeah, we're going to go there. But anyways, she's got any show that he's going to do. And it hasn't been that many yet. We're just starting a book shows, you know, and she's out the show and there's this other fan girl there. And that's another one you probably know. And she's like, hits up the page, hits up the page like three days after this, this festival or fair. You did like three shows, it was like three days of shows. And she's like, you know, Seth, I've lost all respect for you. You, I tried to take a picture with you. And that girl came up in the middle of it and like did it on purpose. I know for sure. So I'm not following you anymore. So I was like, okay, I'm not going to answer that. The next thing she is back. She's like, she's like, look, I'm not saying that I'm totally not going to follow you. Do you have any more extra large shirts of your shirt? And I'm just sitting there watching it happen. I mean, she went on and I could go on. But she went on and on talking to herself. And then once she got positive about I was like, thanks so much. You know, as she was like, cool, look forward to the next so that gives you ideas. Just all the whole rollercoaster. Oh, it was that I had, you know, I do a lot of social media. And I was like, I'll take over it. You know, I didn't really expect. I didn't know I was getting into it. Yeah. I was like, yeah, you know, you got a few comments here and there, you know, whatever. But it just started blowing up and like it was, it was pretty funny. Resonating. I'm pulling in those things. Oh, yeah. We are. We got some country fans. I was saying a new single. We just got a stocker fan. We got some stocker fan. Do you more like weird stoner hippies. But Yeah. Yeah. But yeah, it's, it's pretty interesting watching that. Pulled out, you know, yeah, man. It was crazy. Man, I went to jail just a few months ago. What the fuck you go to jail for? Nobody's called us talk about like this. No, no, no, listen, nobody's positive talk. Oh, it is fucking Danny's over here trying to find some negative. I just told him today. He goes, man, I got a fucking work. I got to do this. He's like, I don't even care. I'll drive there. I'm like, Seth, what did you just go to jail for? I don't give a fuck. I got to make it happen. Like, is that really worth it? Is that really worth all that shit? You know what I mean? No, like, you know, you're talking about action. Real action. I have my license. I'm so busy, man. I don't have time. And this is truth. I don't have time to do a fucking class, man. And I don't have time. Everything I'm doing to go sit somewhere for fucking 24 hours. Right. Two days, man. And take this class. And I'm going to have to take it, you know what I mean? But I don't drive. I don't drive. I don't drive no work. I mean, so I do what I got to do. I don't drive. So, you know, I went to jail because I fucking didn't have the license. I did the class. And I left the studio and I was way across town, man. And I was in somebody's car. And I was going to do my thing. And fucking caught Paul's me over, man. I'm like, fucking bitch, man. I got my set to anything he showed on. Just to the fucking photos. I'm like, I'm going to play it up to that, man. You know what I mean? I'm not fucking, you got something. Right. I mean, what the fuck? Right. Right. I'll sure dicks. You know, I'm not risk them. I like the real cops, but there's not many of y'all. All right. Yeah. All right. So, I love you guys, but fuck. So, he pulls me over. I pull into the seven Real cops, but there's not many of y'all. All right. Yeah. All right. So now it's human real. I love you guys, but fuck So he pulls me over I pull into the seven eleven. I'm like fuck man I open the door to put my fucking foot right on the door My god, this is gonna go bad. I already know it man He pulls up. He's like hey, listen to registration. I'm like all right fuck. I left my wallet bro He's I'm gonna get a pin and pad of your right back. I'm like all right. I'm like a bite It bite me time. You know me it bought me time, but I could just Think about what the fuck I'm gonna do so he came back never call a cop bro Part of it I did I can't help I call you I told on say bro listen man, fuck I Did I sort of God I told him he came back with a pad we've all done it and he started right my name. I was like s e I was like bro, this I'm just gonna be real. I'm like Look dude, I got to take a I got to take a class. I was like I fucking don't have a license I have to take a class. I was like so, you know fucking That's what it is you can look me up in the internet like church the car on the own draw is not drinking I'm not nothing look see the name look it up man. I'm about to go and chose that chick going on Can I have somebody come pick me up? You know, I mean he's like Cuz you're real me. I'm gonna let you go. I was like that bro. I was like my partner right there. He's like No Still resting on paper man. I was like what I was like come on man Fucking they took me in up taking me to jail man So I went to jail for a couple weeks man, and nobody knew nobody ever even knew that this is the first time anybody's ever known that You know, I mean because everybody thought I was just out doing I had the video drop and still this is the first person you called when you got like to No comment no comment No comment We don't have to say her name Oh shit, that's why we call him a jail She don't like me she tried to request me I didn't we need to get the the same Pete crowd up up on the country vibe Oh, yeah, we do we do We're doing what I want to Block parties right can we get them on a fucking block party a madby talk party A.G. Which is a you know, they do buyers for like Janice stuff Talking about doing a summer show at Janice for Seth. So yeah, we had one offer, but I think it we were already doing something So we just kind of waiting for that come we're using the same Same buyers for resonated just we already got that relationship. I kind of like Just get him the same. Yeah, you know, I honestly Buyers like a you mean like talent buyers, you know like so basically like what do you have a show like You have like somebody who thought the investors basically talent buyers so be it like if you have it If you want to put on a show and cost I don't know Yeah, you got to rent a place. Yeah. You're in place. You're a promoter. I mean it's a broader like they like we call talent buyers It's motors like the shun name. I feel like these things But yeah, they're not in the world and the town buyers by the talent they agree to a deal And then whatever they make on that deal they walk away with so in a small nutshell But yeah, we're looking at a summer summer late late summer day at Janice So we're gonna be doing something in the same piece. So let's get it. Oh, yeah Let's get it Rides for man. So when you release the next one's the next uh, oh Yeah options. I think yeah options man. I Think in the people expect that I have to release one here and Pied about two weeks. Okay, so I like to keep I keep relevant. So I feel like that's a lot of a lot Has to do with a lot of it's all about content. Yeah Following me man because I I steadily put every six weeks. I put on a new video Yeah, and I mean so I'll do a song do a video do a song every six weeks and it buys me time to make more music and it's like a weird balance between There's really no there's really no Way to do music man if that makes any sense man you just fucking do it like people will ask me like people that are There's no like like proven strategy. There's not a decent content. No, there's not man There's not what it is is you have to just fucking be the best that you can be and fucking just keep releasing content unless you're Gucci man then you could be locked up. You're a Gucci man that you can just do whatever You have clones and make music and the clones making music and fucking release matter releasing out every fucking week It doesn't matter. Yeah, I don't even know if it's Gucci anymore, but we're still rocking it right Definitely not having you yeah fuck so cool. So where can people like follow you like people that are watching this working? They're like fine. Hey, you guys can follow me at a on-going YouTube set the Anthony You can go on Facebook set the Anthony CM you can go on Instagram set the Anthony CM Don't follow me on snapchat because I really don't go on there man And I think it's kind of lame but I still do it when Stupid shit happens man. I feel like the stupid things happen. You put it on snapchat Yeah, it's not professional. So that's kind of personal dumb shit. I do But yeah, set the Anthony dot net you could purchase a hat shirts beach house phone cases fucking everything But though back book bags fucking Fucking whatever you know, I mean that's was bad. I sure yeah, that's uh, that's one. We just made for the last show We have all different cons. We have ones that have rough neck on the bag different logos and everything man So Definitely man. Hell yeah, dude. Thanks for coming out man. Definitely man. Come on. Great. Go big. Thanks. I love you guys St. Pete in the house