The joke and experience. I've heard you say that you believe that what psychedelics do is make the mind more fertile for these experiences. Yes, it could wait. Yes, exactly what I think. I think you're at that level where the ego control has dissolved to some degree and say it's like fertile ground. If you've, whatever, pre-trained, or if you're ready for a mystical experience, you're more likely to have it in that experience, in that state of mind. So the mind is actually restricting us in many ways through the ego from having these experiences. Yes, I think so. And what psychedelics do is release those boundaries. Yes, I think that due to the evolution of man, whom as appians, and taking the upright position, this is a theory I was introduced to in 1966. And actually, I think a lot of the details are probably wrong, but in concept I think is true, which is the ape standing upright. One thing people haven't taken into account is obviously there are hundreds of assets standing upright, free or ham, this is run faster, you see further all of that. But in that bright position, gravity is against the blood in the brain. It's in the brain that takes fluid volumes, blood in the cereals, one or two, which is water basically, which is made in the brain itself. So it has squatters, lights in the brain. So when you're in that great position, gravity is pulling the blood down. So I think probably with that position we lost a small proportion of our blood supply. I mean some animals, if you tie them up right, a dog, if it's tied up so you can't get down, it will start how they can go mad because it hasn't got the valves to keep the blood up. And we've obviously got a certain amount but maybe we lost some blood at that upright position. And as a compensation for that loss, I think we developed an internal mechanism more than any other animal has done it, which is to direct the blood where it most needs to go, obviously all animals do that. They have the part to send the blood where it's most important to survive or whatever. And I think that through the use of the conditioned sound, the word, we learn to control that process more than any other animal. And over the millennia we kind of build up our power to do that. So I think that's the secret of why humans, you know, we're talking, talking ape, got control of the whole game because of our creation of language which enabled us to do these incredible things we do. But it also has a disadvantage that our basic state is slightly lower in blood in the dominant organ. So we have to keep this mechanism of tight control where the blood is distributed and that is evolved with the ego which is essential. I mean, we wouldn't survive without the ego to kind of direct the blood where it's most needed. People who lose their ego and in the 60s when people took large doses of LSD as it was them every day. Sometimes they lost their ego, they slipped out and there was one occasion of someone who knew who was in the visa. He'd flipped out and he put the key in the lock to open the door, someone would say, good night to him, he put the key in the lock and left him. And then in the morning he was still there with the key in the door because the head hadn't told him, turn the key to the door. She said, wow, we need the words to keep us, you know, under control. So the words have made us what we are, this incredible animal who can have a nuclear war belonged or know the atoms in the body, all those brilliant things we do, which is amazing. But we're also obviously a very deeply-faulted animal at some point where, you know, neurotic, psychotic, psychot, you know, all of those things because of this shortage of blood and then the dependent on the meaning of the work. So if we have a terrible conditioning, a lot of people do, the separation from reality is in a sense in the meaning of the word. The danger of our society now, in a sense, is we're getting further and further away from nature. In a sense, and that in a way is why psychedelics can be a very useful medicine because they increase the connectivity with the senses, with the internal bodily senses and also the outside perceptual senses. So I actually think that we're entering a kind of new possible age, and that's why for far my call it the psychedelic age, because for the first time we've got or getting the knowledge by which we can actually understand the brain better and understand how we we can alter the volume of blood in the brain, which is giving the brain energy, the whole thing in the above energy. The more energy we have, the more parts of the brain can function simultaneously. And that obviously can be very creative, stimulating, empathic by just having more of the brain functioning. And so I think that the knowledge of psychedelics, and when I say psychedelics I don't actually mean necessarily psychedelics because as we all know, one can get these experiences and autonomously through exercise or holotropic breathing, a lot of topic breathing, exactly everything else. And all the spiritual training, all knew that, that's what they were doing in the spiritual disciplines, is teaching people how to control their internal ego and also their sense of consciousness. And I think at the center of the spiritual experience is forgetting higher and loosening the grip of the ego. So you're more in touch with nature. Do you think that in the absence of these psychedelics experiences, one of the problems with words is that we develop narratives and then we use our ego to reinforce these narratives and we sort of deny objective reality? Yes. I think more the word can become the reality. I mean in the creation of words which we all have and have to have and thankful to have, but nevertheless it does create a slightly different world. It's rather like the shadows and play to its fault and gets one's internal addition of the world, rather than the real experience of the world. And so I think it's good to be in contact with nature. And I think it's a dangerous path that we're taking now where it becomes more and more life-faced, the screen. But still that's the way we're going. And it has great advantages as well as dangers, kind of thing. But I do think that the knowledge of getting high has always been central to the human evolution. And at the earliest demonstrations of what we've got of the earliest demonstrations of human culture, say the caves in Shovey, do you know that? Yes. I think they've never been battered. I mean that art work, the brush to cover those animals, their lives, you can see the movement, no one ever did it better. And it's like 30 something thousand years old. It's 35, 40 something round there. So I can tell some respects and artists. I know those strokes. And some of those images, Jamie, because some of those images are here we go. Amazing stuff. They're just incredible. Yeah. The movement to that. Yeah, they caught it. Yeah. They did create a feeling of mood, but like the animals were running. Yeah. And the lines, I mean anyone who paints, I mean Picasso, I think said, without them, he would have never done what he did. Oh man. I can't remember quite. But my mother-in-law, isn't better. It gets us good, but not really. It's crazy because they're depicting rhinos too. Yeah. Really wild. Yeah. That was rhinos in France. Beautiful ones of horses and buffalos. And that's in the bowels of the earth they do. So it was obviously very spiritual, why go into the bowels of the earth? It's kind of magical, spiritual experience they're having. Yeah. I think without doubt, they were high. How they got there? Was it through singing or singing or was it through taking compounds? Funnily enough, I've recently been introduced to men, charming man, who's archaeologist in charge of Soushui. And I said, I'd love to be able to analyze and see if we can find out. Is there any remnants of the summer? Right. And he said, I was very welcome to go there. So I'm very excited about the possibility.