Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. The rolling. What's up? John Cena in the fucking house. It'll be so fair. Yeah, let's put these on for 10 more professional. What's up? Good to see you, man. Thanks so much for having me. My pleasure in here. And there's no way I'm having a pro wrestler on without Tony Hinchliff. Of course. It is the expert. He knows more about Pro Wrestling than I know about UFC. Yeah. Sometimes I translate little things here and that's cool. It's all right. He has to. He has to. And he's a giant fan of yours too. You know, also the giant fan of yours is Brian Simpson. Brian Simpson was going on last night about how intelligent you are. It was really interesting. You know, sure was me. Yeah, man. Well, you do speak fucking Mandarin, which is kind of crazy. Yeah. Yeah. How long did it take you to learn that? Man, I was doing that for quite a long time. I've since kind of kind of declined on the studies. Wonderful takeaway from the study of Mandarin. Just because you know a language doesn't mean you know the culture. So that was a fantastic experience with that. But I studied men for like a decade. And I would say like not even conversationally fluent. It was a really tough hill to climb for me. But it seems like a really big hill. Just it's just different. And even if you could just be a structure. You can read it. No, I didn't even bother to read. And like reading all the characters understanding everything I'd. How long did it take you to learn? Around 10 years. Wow. Yeah. And then like, I mean, I would dream in Mandarin and like have conversations and kick down in that. So it became like a like a second language. But you know, I lived in China for a little bit. I filmed a movie with Jackie Chan. So I was there for like six or seven months. I lived there in May we were in her Mongolia in Chuan Province. So like in China. Wow. And it was fun. Yeah. You were in Mongolia. Interm Mongolia. Yeah. What's the difference? I don't know. Because I never remember in Mongolia. But Interm Mongolia was a man. I was the only person that looked like me there. And everyone would say, look, it's big white guy. Hyundai Byron. Hyundai Byron. That would call me. Wow. Yeah. Wow. So what motivated you to learn that? It seems like such a task. Honestly, man, it was everything in my life seems to be wrestling related. It was wrestling related. Like WWE's reach spread everywhere. I mean, I've been able to lucky enough to perform everywhere from like Moscow, Philippines, South Africa, Bangor Main, every place in between, except China. China was like the one place it didn't understand what we did. So it's literally like it's a universal language because you can turn. It's like you have to see like you turn the volume down, but you can see like, oh, this is two guys, best guy wins. I get it. The Chinese didn't get it. So I figured it was like one of our superstars spoke the language. Maybe that would help break down the barrier. And we got in for your idea. It was my idea, but the WWE offers. And I think they still offer it. They offer a free second language program. So like when they rolled out the initiative of like financial advice and, you know, they'll pay for portions of your secondary education and free second language. This is like 2011, 2012 big talent meeting and like an auditorium. I'm one of the old guys at the time sitting in the front being like these kids don't know how good they have it. I should stand up and tell them to them like, no, fuck that. I'm actually going to lead by example and take a language. So I signed up right then then there for Chinese because I wanted to get us any China. Wow. And like I said, it worked, but it kind of only worked. And they I think I think actually right now China is experiencing what wrestling is to them because like there's I've read articles that there's promotions over there that are thriving. So like now they get it. Also they have their own promotion. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is a fairly recent thing. I think so. I like I just read recent articles that like pro wrestling is thriving in China and they have their own like their own way of doing it. Wow. Yeah. Wow. That's wild. It's wild how like expansive the pro wrestling businesses that they would be that open minded to say like let's let's give second language programs to the athletes. Well, you know, I just it's it's weird that the origins of the business are carnival related. It is like a carnival attraction. Yeah. It was like ruthlessly territorial. And they want to became national. I was still trying to find its way. It's almost like you see pro sports doing it. You know, the more a sport succeeds, the more benefits they offer to their competitors and athletes. So, you know, WWE kind of hit that stride. Yeah. It's just such a smart thing to do. Yeah. Will you give your channel give your talent the opportunities to gain knowledge and wisdom and the sad thing is I don't know how many people did it or do it still. Was there anybody other than you that you know of the two other people who? thought of you casting only who speaks I think four or five languages already. And he just wanted to take like a brush up course and not even like heart. Wow. That's it. Everybody else is like not going to do it too much work. Yeah. What was the not knowing the culture aspect? So man, I got I got put in a bit of a hotspot with I made a pack to myself when I was like, okay, I feel fluent. we would do these global press tours and I just happen to be on a global press tour. I'm like, you know what, I'm going to do 70% of my media in Mandarin like in dialogue. And I got to say I did it like I went over there spoke. People were taking off the translator headphones like life was good. Everything was great at the very end of the day. That's with all these press tours. You do like a bunch of prompt to reads. So I'm doing prompt to reads for everywhere. And it's like, hey, go this place and see this movie. And no, my bad. I didn't check the reads because it's like an end of a 10 hour day, you do a million of these things. And one of them said like, hey, Taiwan, see this. And the it was all in Mandarin and the opinion described Taiwan as a country. So be the first country to see this. Now over there, they they look through different lens. Like geopolitics are murky waters, man. And that's what when I learned of like, I just said it left. Everybody was cool. I did my thing. Like I read the prompt. It's like a Ron Bergeny moment. Like go fuck yourself saying anything. I was like the most offensive thing you'd say. So I'm like, man, you know, good job, John. You said you did 70% and people understood what you were talking about. And then they put that out. And everybody was like, what the fuck did you just say? We don't. That's not how we do it over here. And again, just because like my take on the right. Like my takeaway. And it was it was a pretty tense moment for me. Like I had to apologize to China and then apologize in the China. I pissed off my home country. I'm a patriot. I love the United States of America and everything it stands for. But like no one. It was never enough. Nobody was happy. Everybody was fucked up. And it was it was like murky waters for me personally. And it was weird. Like I'm the I think I might have been the only guy almost to get canceled for doing his homework. You know, I'm trying to like learn and try to do something. But the cool takeaway, you know, we can learn from every mistake. My mistake was just because you know the language doesn't mean, you know the culture. Did they even refer to as Taiwan? I think they refer to as Chinese Taipei, right? Man, what was in the I know what I read and. So that's again, I don't know enough depth to know that. And now like people like, oh man, can you can you speak manor for this? I just won't do it. It's a skill that I have and it's but it's a skill that's going to remain with me because it's I don't understand. I don't have the depth of field to know what to call that place in that region of the world. And I haven't done enough research. I don't have the wisdom and I don't have like the cultural fluency, you know, so it's a cool lesson. It sucked because I thought I was just trying to do something good. But it was it was a cool lesson. It was a really that big of a deal. Manor I thought like I was filming piece maker season one. And when they came out with all of this stuff, I went directly to James Gunham. So like, hey, man, if you have to fire me, I understand. Wow. And he's that serious. Yeah. And it wasn't even words that you wrote, someone out the WWE wrote it? That doesn't know. No, no, it was it was for the movie I was promoting. Right. So the movie, the people that made the movie wrote it. So I don't know like when you do these press tours, let's say, if I'm doing it for Warner Brothers, let's say, let's use it. Let's use a piece maker example. I'm doing a global piece maker tour. And we go into China, or we go into South America. You meet like the PR person there. And they have all the stuff you're supposed to do. And they curate your experience. And they hold your hand. You're like, okay, now we're going to go to this station. And by the way, this wants you to use some shout outs. So anytime I go anywhere globally now, as much as I want to thank fans for their attention. And you know, investing in the product. I really shy away from like speaking the language because I don't understand the cultural nuance. You know, I just want to be like, yo, thanks for watching what we do. And I love the fact that you're entertained. But I want to speak to you at a level that I understand that I'm fluent. Because your boots on the ground here every day. And I might say something that's a nice gesture, but completely fucking offend you. And that's not good. That's not good for anybody. So was the teleprompter in English and translate? It was in no, everything was in Mandarin. And in Chinese, they have the characters which are virtually impossible for me to learn. There's like an infinite number. But they also have what's called pin-yin, which is it's kind of spelled out in English with phonetics. So it has the four tones. So if you were to put something in front of me in pin-yin right now, I could definitely read it. And I got good at reading pin-yin. So I was like, man, I could, I could send all these messages in Mandarin. And more people will know about this movie. And more people will know about me. And more people will know about wrestling. And more people will be excited. Look good on paper. I just, my father was a bit weak. You know, I just, I doesn't even see my thought was your fault. Right. It's probably a PR assistant assistant that's typed, that's probably in charge of doing the grunt work of typing and all the different languages and the different countries like tedious. From what I know, I know I'm going to learn a lot about you guys in this episode. But from what I know about you, you're, you're into looking at looking things through different lenses and different perspectives. It also could have been somebody being like, I'm going to get this kid. But here's the thing I do appreciate you saying like, it's not your fault. That's not true. It was my fault. And I think that's when I can start to work on like, well, what did I learn from this? And I could easily blame a PR and assistant. I could say somebody had a target on my back, all that stuff. I fucked up. Did you suspect that somebody might have set you up? No, well, you're saying it like it's a possibility. Well, man, when it happened, every, every theory came like, here's the thing, the world doesn't revolve around me, but my little world, everybody was like, they fucked up. They did this on purpose. I was like, well, first of all, who's they? So I was able to kind of eliminate all that. And once I realized I could still go on working, I really made a lot of people angry and for that that I'm sorry. Like again, I was just trying to, that's crazy. Just by saying that Taiwan's a country. In, in Chinese though, right. You know, like those are murky waters to begin with, you know, like, I'm not even thoroughly fluent on the US policy. I think it's like, like a territorial ambiguity or something like that. Like it's, it's so weird. And it's, it's so fragile. And I, I, I got into some water, I shouldn't have been swimming in, but that's, that's on me. It's not, it was my fault. And, and I think that's important for me to bear the burden of that and be like, yo, what, how can I course correct? What did I learn? Who do I really, really genuinely have to apologize for offending the, the biggest thing that was a kick to the nuts is one like people states I got pissed off. Because you apologize. Yes. In, in Chinese. Right. And I understand it. I mean, completely like bowing down to the demand of this. That gosh, what a, what a shitty move by me. Like I just, I should have taken a breath again. What did I learn? Don't be reactive. Take a breath, find out what's going on. Find out the best path of action. Maybe give it a few days, maybe give it a hot second. Um, and then move forward. But immediately I was like, oh, they're mad. You want us to do this? Fine. No problem. I'll fix it right now. Man, not only did I not try to fix the hole in the boat, I sunk the Titanic. So it was, but again, it was a learning experience. Well, it speaks to your character that you don't blame anybody else. Because I blame everybody else. I'm like, who fucking wrote that? Don't you, don't you know what you're saying? Or were you making me say? Uh, the, the release you guys have for the show. I read it. And you might be the only person. So that was, that was, whoever handed it to me, that was what they said. Like I think you might be the only person who ever read it. Yeah. Man, if, if, if you're going to, if you're going to take liberties with me, at least I want to be able to read that you are. Right. You know what I'm saying? And I can't say I'm perfect with doing that. But like, I was handed a release. I'm like, I'm just going to glance this over for a hot. Oh, this says what I think it says. Okay, let's go. Trump didn't even read it just. To each their own. Yeah, no, it's very smart of you to read it. You know, who knows, you know, who knows? So this is Tony's just, this is the full trifecta. Now it's like if you've gotten all of your heroes on this podcast now, there's a couple more we can knock off. I have the progress in the world. There's a couple more. Todd, let's, if you don't mind, if I could. Please, I'll just talk. Pro wrestling heroes. Who do we need to knock off? Who do we need to? Well, I mean, in all reality, and it's a diabolical cause that he can, we kind of invite, you can invite anyone you want. Yeah. He just kind of got to get him the wish list. I mean, you got to, you got to start with the number one without a doubt. Vince McMahon, who started this gangster shit and spread it around. I would definitely have him as a little man. Yeah. He would be great. Yes. I, whatever magic you have out there and you have a lot of gravity. Do you think he'd be interested in doing it? Are you kidding me? I think he would love it. Really? I think he would love it. I don't know when the right time is, but man, don't, don't miss out in that. At least, at least send it out to the universe. Yeah. Well, I would definitely, Vince, if you're listening, Vince, if you're listening, let's go. Great. I think this experience would be a great one for you. Is he still involved? Is he out of the season? No, he's out. He's out. He's out totally. Yep. It seems like he's the guy that'll be out for a little while and then something will happen and bring him back in. No. Well, I don't know. Well, I don't know. Again, that's the way we were talking about like, why is your last event in this place? I'm like, man, because I don't choose the events. Like, I don't, all that stuff is so far above me, but I know now he's out. In my eyes, I'd like to think that like time heals everything and I believe in forgiveness. And I also believe in like, looking at the body of work, but I also, I also know there's a lot of fragile stuff going on there. I don't know. I don't know. Yeah. It's a hot subject. It is. It gets us into another Chinese type, pay into it. Just, well, no, no, man. I'm, again, I've learned to become a little bit more accountable for what I say. just how, just because I feel a certain way about a person doesn't exonerate them from being accountable for their actions. Right. And just because he did start quote unquote all this gangster shit, that doesn't, that doesn't mean it doesn't need to be accountable for its actions. Right. So let's, let's figure out what that means. And then figure out if we can, if we can move forward and, and bring that back in the fold or if it stays the way it is. Oh, he's like Tony, think he's coming back. I think you would come here. Yeah. I think he, you know, that's one of the more entertaining people of all time. He created the entire universe. You got to remember Hogan's Hogan, because of him, seeing a scene on his own. Because yeah, every single stone cold. He's like, that sounds good. Yeah, keep it going. We'll do the glass breaks thing and they'll throw you beers. I like it. Let's do it again next week. So everything that we think when he sits here, you got to do that impression. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Stone Cold's another one that hasn't been on. Seev would be great. I think you would, you would dig Steve. Oh, yeah. I'm sure. Yeah. He lives out here too, doesn't he? Yep. Does he? Well, actually, no, he's never ran out here. I think he does somewhere. I think he does. Yeah, but I think he's based on a somewhere else now in New Mexico or Arizona. He's on the, he like, he's like kind of cool and reclusive. He like doesn't really do a lot. It's amazing. He would be a good get. And I'm pretty sure I guarantee you would do it. Yeah. Steve, if you're lit, I know you're watching. Come on. Come on in. Yeah. Let's talk some rassel. Oh, man. I mean, everyone has him on the, you know, the Mount Rushmore. Triple H who runs it now. The Sun-in-Law, a Vince McMahon. Yeah. I mean, he runs the entire thing. I mean, you want answers to those high level questions. Yeah. There's your guy. Yeah. That's the guy you need to get in. A lot of the stuff you'll probably, you probably ask today. I mean, like that's way above my pay grade. This type of the year when life ramps up and demands more of your energy, more work, more plans with family and friends and holiday travel, all while it's getting darker and colder out, you can let it all drain your juice. Or you can get out ahead of it with AG1. AG1 is a daily health drink that can help you stay one scoop ahead of all the energy drains coming your way this season. Because the superfoods and B vitamins in every scoop of AG1 support steady energy production without the crash. In fact, just shaking up one scoop of AG1 and water covers your multivitamin, your pre and probiotics, antioxidants, superfoods and more. It's one simple step to start your day ahead of anything that might come your way. And that's why I partnered with them for years. And when you need energy support, AG1 delivers with superfoods and with B vitamins that help convert nutrients into energy for vigor and vitality. Subscribe today to get this clinically back formula in the flavor of your choice. Tropical, citrus, berry or original to help you stay one scoop ahead. AG1 has a special offer today. If you had to drink AG1.com slash Joe Rogan, you'll get the welcome kit, a morning person hat, a bottle of vitamin D3, K2 and an AG1 flavor sampler for free with your first subscription. That's over $100 in free gifts. Just head over to drink AG1.com slash Joe Rogan or visit the link in the description to get started. Well, you don't know the history. Tony at one point in time was offered a job with a WWE before he really made it. No way. Yeah, yeah. He was offered a job to write for the WWE because Tony was a giant pro wrestling fan. And you know, he'd already had a Netflix special. So he was known as a comic before that. Was it before the Netflix special? Yeah. The first one, the one that you released yourself? Yeah. Really. Yeah, it was only a couple years into me doing stand up like seven nights a week at the comedy store all the time. And somehow I ended up someone's like, Hey, I have a friend in WWE if you want to have a meeting with them and just talk and I went in with straight up ideas. This that the undertakers brother comes back again. This that the next like everything back and forth. I can't even remember any of them. It's been so long. I went in with the whole thing. This guy's like, Where the hell did you like what? Oh, this is crazy. You just like did this and like, yeah, I found out a couple days ago we were going to talk. So. But yeah, they offered it. But I would have had to move to Connecticut and take a train in New York every night to do go do stand up. And that would have just been exhausting and everything I heard because Betrice O'Neill, the late great Betrice O'Neill wrote for WWE for a while. They really? Yeah. Yeah, for like a couple of years I think. It would just wrote lines for them like what did he do? The whole shebang when you're a WWE writer, they they make you right. It's not like a cute job at all. No, there's a lot of there's a lot of television or there's a lot of content every week. Yeah. Right now I think they got they have three weekly shows. So that's 20. I think one of them is going back to three hours. 16. It's like it's like 50 segments of TV. Yeah. Every week. Yeah, but I remember when you were talking about it. Yeah. I was talking about potentially doing it. It was like, yeah, it was tricky. And I was like, dude, you do not want to live in Connecticut. No, that's the main thing. It was anywhere else other than Connecticut. It kind of made what have made more sense. It was in New York City. It would have been a no brainer. It was in LA definitely. But like fast forward now you're you're more and more involved. Yes. Well, this is the crazy thing. Like we had talked like during the old days, like we would talk in the green room. Like that would be your ultimate dream job. Yeah. Like to make it as a comedian and somehow be involved in the UFC the way I or excuse me in WWE the way I'm involved in the UFC, like very similar. Yeah. It's and look crazy. It's insane. No one tomorrow night. I'm going to be in the front row at the arena in my hometown. Are they here? Yeah. Oh man. Are you messing with me? Are you going to cause your music and I hit you know, not out. I'm not going to. This is what this is what they do by the way. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. And then they know they were going to be in town. He's correct. There's a lot of you mess with people. You're right. But then somebody like me will actually shoot you straight and be like, I'm not going to be there and I won't be there. And you'd be like, oh, now I'm just I'm building the equity for people to mess with people. I'm giving 20 mulligans out there tomorrow. No, not. I heard a great story. You'll probably love this. You might even know the story. But the undertaker, his wife and his podcast co-host went to WrestleMania. They're up in a fancy suite. This was, which one was it? The rock. I mean, our parents, did you? Yes, you were there. Right? That huge finish at WrestleMania. Yeah, like three years ago, it was just boom, boom, boom, boom. And all these legends were coming out this huge finish just like they can't even like follow it. The ultimate climax of a WrestleMania. And one wrestler comes out and erupts this huge main event. And then another one, then another one. Anyway, the undertaker is wife and his podcast co-host were up in the suite. Undertaker goes, I'm going to go use the restroom. They're like, he's been gone a while. The lights go out the belt tolls. They're watching from the suite. He's been gone for like 10 minutes, 20 minutes. He went and changed real quick and then now came out as the undertaker. Yeah, came out as the undertaker. They're in the suite like, oh, my God, it's the undertaker. They don't tell anybody. It's so old school and awesome that they keep secrets. It's so locked up that their own loved ones, his wife didn't even know. That's hilarious. Yes. That is so crazy. It's fun to be able to surprise the live audience. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, it's got to be a big part of it. How did you get involved in progressing? Were you a fan as a kid? And then I sure was. I think we have the same gravity of like, man, I was a super fan as a kid. But then I fell out of it, admittedly kind of when Hogan went to WCW. So like, I was in the wrestling and then I wasn't and then I got in the sports or whatever. And then I got back in the wrestling when everyone else did when like stone cold Steve Austin became big, the rock became big, the attitude era hit. And I was just working at that and got a job over at Gold's Gym Venice and like didn't know what I wanted to do with my life. I will do it. 21. Wow. 21. I moved out to California not to be famous or anything. My degree was in Canis. And I wanted to like, that was the center of the fitness universe in 99 2000. So like all equipment manufacturers are there. I'm like, man, I'll go get a job with hammer strength or a side back. So we're like, maybe golds or like put that piece of paper on the wall to like get a good paying job. It did not work. So I ended up like front desk, clean and toilet selling protein bars in that order. So don't have a bright protein bar. I'm just kidding. But no, I was kind of like a jack of all trades over there. A friend of mine, Chris Bell and Mark Bell. Oh, I know. Yeah, literally you were like, dude, you talk about WWF all the time. You know, we train down in Orange County. And at that time, Chris Bell was kind of like writing for this promotion. And like, would you want to do it? And I, man, I, that doesn't happen without them accidentally saying like, yo, we train to do this. His documentaries are fucking incredible. Big and stronger faster. And then the other one, the pill one, what was that one called? Magic pill. No, what was the one, the, the addiction one that Chris released? But bigger, stronger, faster is such a fucking great documentary. The Bell family. I've been friends with them for a long time. Great guys. Yeah. That, that documentary, like blew the lid off of like the reality of steroids, prescription thugs, prescription. That's another great one. Yeah. Crazy thing is he got addicted to pills while he was doing that because he had surgery while he was doing that and got addicted to pills while he's making a fucking documentary on people being addicted to pills. That's how potent pills are. A guy making a documentary about addiction, he just thinks, well, I'm just taking these because I got hip surgery and I'm in fucking agony and then gets hooked. Okay. That's how crazy it is. Yeah, they're strong. Yeah. I would be happy. Did you ever have an issue? No. No, as a matter of fact, I've, I've had people. have fusion in my neck, right peck, completely detached, reattached, both triceps reattached, both triceps scoped, nose relocated. Like I got, I probably, I'm in like 10 physical surgeries where they got to go and correct something. Never taken one pain pill. Wow. I have all the prescriptions in the bottom drawer of my house filled and it's weird because at every facility, the first thing they, the first hill they climb is pain management. Mm. You wake up from anesthesia. You're like gray and murky and I've been in a bunch of surgeries and a bunch of different facilities. The protocol is always the same. Do you want something for the pain? Here we got to make sure you take this with you because you're not in pain. Yeah. Like I understand because you, if you leave, if you're feeling okay, maybe you're high off adrenaline, I don't know. And then the operation sets in of like, holy fuck, this is a 10 out of 10. I can't, I need something. I get that. But I, I guess from falling down and hurting my body a lot, like I know my pain threshold. Yeah. And when I, the worst one was probably the, putting the whole pack back on and then attaching it. When I woke up, I was able to like mess around with a stress ball. I never took one pill. That's amazing. And I still have the, the full bottles of like summer labeled 2008 is when I have my first surgery and that they're just all there. Because a lot of people listen right now. You want to count them all? Yeah. That's still good. But yeah. The fun ever John Cena stores them. Yeah. It was weird because the medical staff couldn't believe it. Like they're like, you don't want anything. No, because man, it's a, I know how I am with this. It's, yeah, it's a fucking slippery road. And I would just, I mean, I don't know if it's all, all appeals all the time. I got my first knee surgery. I think in 93 or 94 and they gave me, I got an ACL reconstruction and they gave me Vicin and I think pretty sure it was Vicin. I took one, one day and I felt so stupid. I was lying in, on line on my couch watching TV and I felt so dumb and my knee still hurt. You know, it was just like it was distracting me from the fact that my knee hurt. But I'm like, I can't be this dumb. I'm dumb enough as it is. I can't add to my dumbness with pills. Like I just saw it coming. You know, I also I knew a bunch of guys who had pill problems. I wound up selling my pills to a friend of mine that would sell pills. That I should have taken your idea. Can you make me trash? I want me to a couple hundred bucks or something. I don't remember it was like in the 90s, but, but I remember just that one pill. And so then every surgery I've had ever since then, they always offered me stuff. But I never took anything. I got in my other ACL reconstructed in 2003. Never took anything. I got in my nose fixed and it's like 2008. I got my nose reconstructed. Deviated septum. The guy was insisting that I he gave me two prescriptions for pain medicine. And I was like, I don't want anything. I was like, is it going to get worse than this? He's like, it could get. I go right now. It feels like nothing. But if you've been again, like you, you've been beaten up so many times. Your body, you're so used to just being in pain. And I think for some people, just the daunting anxiety of pain itself is like they just want to pill. Or they even realize like, I could kind of just, yeah, it sucks. But it's not going to suck forever. It's going to heal. So let's just deal with the suck and just lay here. Put some ice on it or whatever and just relax. And along with that, it's kind of like your, your body's natural way of saying like, okay, maybe push a little bit more. Try to get a few more degrees of range of motion and physical therapy. Like if, if those senses are numbed. Right. And like shut off. Right. Because of all you, you do feel just like I don't want to do anything. You won't work. But in many cases, you won't work to do the work to get better. And like shut off. Right. First of all, you do feel just like I don't want to do anything. You won't work, but in many cases you won't work to do the work to get better. Right. Or you just numb. You don't know the messaging. You can't listen to your body. Yeah. Like if it's really, really in pain, maybe your body's trying to tell you something. I always assume that people feel pain differently. I mean, I just would imagine. Like people feel hot sauce differently. Like some people they can't have any spice. Some people fucking can have like, you know, death peppers and they're fine. So I'll throw that out to the group. Is pain a personal experience? I mean, there's no way I'm as tough as you guys. So yeah, it has to be. But I think in other dimensions you might be way tougher. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe. I think there's some. You don't know tell me. I can't imagine the dimension. I went and visited a firehouse the other day. And I was going down the pole, going, I'm like, you guys wouldn't do that. I would do that. So in that, in that aspect you're tougher than me. Yeah, you can take ridicule. And we can take ridicule really easily. But I don't know how would it feels like for other people. You know what I'm saying? I mean, I would assume that everybody feels the same. But you know one of the reasons why I think maybe it is like, it's different because my mom. My mom has a crazy tolerance to pain. Like my guy who, my stem cell guy in LA, my mom had a real knee issue. And he was treating her as well. And he goes, it's hilarious. Your mother's just like you. She just takes it. She doesn't even flinch. She's just sticking. Like that doesn't happen. Like 75 year old ladies. Like take a needle and shove it in their knee and push it. And she just doesn't move. And you know, she's like, oh, it wasn't painful. It was no big deal. It's like, you know, a lot of 75 year old ladies would be fucking sweating and freaking out and seeing the needle. Pretty sure I would be. Yeah. But I don't know. You know, I don't know what it feels like to other people. Like when I got my ACL, my right ACL reconstructed. It was a lot easier because it was a cadaver. And I'm recommended to anybody. The difference between a patella tendon graph for recovery and a cadaver recovery is literally like six months. The difference is really. The cadaver was so much quicker. Wow. Oh my God. Because the cadaver, they take it. I mean, it's all swollen and everything afterwards. But it's somebody else's tendon. They take in a killy's tendon off of a cadaver. So it's 150% stronger than an ACL. They fucking screw that sucker in place. Little tiny orthoscopic holes, not nearly as invasive. And then five days later, you know, Matt, Lichtenberg, I went to his party for his birthday party. Five days later, just walking around. And he was like, did you just have surgery? I was like, it's not that big a deal. It feels fine. You know, it was so much easier. The left one was brutal. Because they take a slice out of your patella tendon and then they could take a chunk out of your shin bone and a chunk out of your kneecap. And then they use those to screw this new tendon that they created into the shin bone and into your thigh bone. That was rough. That one was painful as fuck. And it took a long time before it felt normal. It took a long time before I could go down on one knee again. When was that? That was in the 90s. And then the other one was 2000 or early 2000s? 2000 like two-ish somewhere around two-three. I mean, 10 more years of performance surgeries, 10 more years of that. Yeah. I just think it's the difference. Because they still do that patella tendon graph. And I think George St. Pierre had it done that. I know a bunch of people that I'm friends with had it done that way. And I was like, oh, don't do that one. Do the cadaver. But people are worried, like, what if you get a AIDS? Like, you're not. I think Jesus Christ, I'm going to get AIDS from it. Stop. And it's also, it's like, you feel better before you are better, unfortunately, because the way the tendon works, so that when they replace a tendon with a cadaver, it's not like you have this guy's tendon in your body. What it is like, is that tendon is a scaffolding. And then your body repurliferates that with your own cells. So over the course of six months, my body had filled in all of what used to be a cadaver with my own cells. So you feel like it's better before it's better. So a lot of MMA fighters, they start training too quickly, and they blow it out again. Because it's still soft. That's always the concern. It's always the concern. And you feel good. And I can do this. Especially animals. You know, two girls are just used to pain and used to pushing, and they just pop it out again. I know multiple MMA fighters that have had knee surgery and then blew it out while they were recovering. And just a few months more. They could just, you know, all right, in patients you only get back in there. And then it's even worse, because you've got to drill into the same holes and pull it out and open you up. But it's more invasive surgery. They've got to remove the screws and fuck. Yeah, but I just, I don't think everybody feels pain the same. I think it's a genetic thing. It's just an assumption, obviously, because I don't feel what other people feel. But I think some people just any kind of pain is just they can't function. They're just in agony. I think those people are way more vulnerable to the pills. That's just my assumption. That's a decent perspective. I definitely, I would agree with pain is a personal experience. Like there are people who, I mean, I've seen people like, I can't believe you go through that. And then people will be like, but you get the shit kicked out of you. I can't believe you do that. It's all relative. I would be shit and cufflinks. If you get that stem cell needle out, I would be sweating right until the fucking final moment. Like some stuff I can't take. You know, it's like, I guess it is. It could be combined with like what we fear in life or maybe, maybe fear of hard work or fear of effort. Who knows? I don't know. I don't know. I think it's also being accustomed to pain. You know, so if you did you wrestle when you were younger? No, I played football. You played football. Well, that's just like that. And that you're always in pain. I mean, if you're playing football, you're always colliding with people. You've got to have shoulders, fuck with you, you're back, fuck with you. It's like, it's never ending. I've always said that there's something, there's some value into losing a fight. Oh yeah. I grew up with four brothers and we kicked the shit out of each other. And I was not always on the winning side. So very early on in my life as a young person. You know what it's like to lose a fight. Oh, it's very valuable. And I think that there's a lot maybe to do with the pain conversation there. If like just flat out getting your ass kicked and then being able to dust yourself off. I mean, I'll get you next time. You know, like it's not over. You know, we're brothers. We're going to fight again. You know, like, I was also knowing like why did he beat me? What can I do to beat him next time? You know, like if you don't have that in your life. Also, if you don't know what it feels like to get your ass kicked, you get a little mouthy. I mean, how many mouthy people do we know that have never been fucked up? And I think that's why. Like there's real consequences if it actually comes down. You start yelling and you get mouthy. If it actually comes down to it and we've all seen many of these videos on the internet where someone just don't they don't know what the fuck they're asking for or what they're getting into and then also they're getting hit. And man, I'm not perfect and there are days where I'm short of patience. But when it gets to that weird spot of like, yo, someone's going to get hit in the face. I always try to like lean on diplomacy. Always. Always. Let's not do that because that's fucking sucks. And I've got a lot of people say to you, but if I was you, I'd be fucking everybody up. That's dumb people always say that. Like it doesn't end with that. Then this guy gets his brother or he shoots you or he run you over the car. Or you think you're going to fuck somebody up and you get fucking handled. Right. Like you never know man. You never know anybody else's story. You never know. You never know. There's so many people out there that are trained today. It's so much different than when I was younger. Like you would assume that like I assume that a good solid 10% of all men you meet have martial arts skills now. Because of the UFC. Popularity of it. Yeah. Certainly in Western society. Yes. There's a gym. There's a gym every plaza. Also, there's so many kids that like watch UFC and then play practice with themselves. And you could learn a lot just doing that. Guys learn a lot just watching it on TV and then emulating it at home with their friends. And those who watch WWE because when those moments happen they try to do some crazy music. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. How many guys have fucking thrown their body onto a conference table? Because they thought it was the way you did it. Oh it's amazing. You know I mean the fucking sheer amount of punishment you guys put yourself through is staggering. I mean it really is staggering. But thank you very much. It's like a pro football player, pro hockey player UFC. I think the beautiful advantage that we have is that it's we can make choices on what we do. So when you're in UFC and they close the door, it's kind of fucking best person wins. You know it's survival when we're in WWE and we both step in the ring and they ring the bell, we're working together. We're working together to put on the best show for the audience. And in that process you can calculate the risks you want to take. And I think that's what allows somebody to be able to perform for 23 years. You know I don't know that that age old staff that everybody says about like the average NFL career is what two and a half years or three and a half. I don't know what the stat is on average UFC career. Like how long what's your window to be functionally profitable in UFC. But I know because our risks are calculated and we're working together rather than against each other. The math is way higher for you to have like a 10, 15, 20 year career in WWE. But that also is 10 more years have fallen down, 15 more years have fallen down. So yeah, it's weird like you can choreograph the risk but you have to do it time and time again. And the schedule in WWE just changed. Like to do 70 matches a year now in WWE is like man you're a workhorse. We used to do 220, 230. Which is so crazy. It's 220 days of trauma in a year. Because you're getting no matter what, you're getting some trauma. No matter what. I got it body slams you, something happened, you're colliding, you go off the ropes, you smash into each other. I get such a wrong feeling when first time was going to the ring for the first time. It's like, it's like a bouncy floor and they fall down once and like the wind's knocked out. I'm like my brain moved. Yeah, yeah. Now you gotta do that again and again. But it's weird. I've gotten to work with a lot of stand ups. And WWE is kind of changing. I would say it's on the progression of a stand up making it to just like a stadium tour. But man, when I performed my sweet spot. We ran very parallel lives. Like I've worked every city, Hampton Beach Casino ballroom to Madison Square Garden. Like to the Saitama Super Arena to AT&T Stadium to Bangor Main. Or to Valparaiso in Indiana. Like you go to all of these places. Yeah. And it's like Friday or one place, Saturday or another place, Sunday or another place, Monday or another place, Tuesday or another place. One day to drop your shit, one day to catch your flight out, do it again. Like it's kind of like touring stand ups in that regard. Very similar. Yeah. And you're responsible for your own trends. And I'm speaking from Mighty. I don't know how it is now because I got one left and then I'm done. But you're responsible for your own transportation, book and your own hotels. Like you were starting here, running here, good luck. Which is awesome because you create people are really independent when they go through that fire. And you weed out the people that don't want to be there. Yeah. Because they're just a sheer work, the sheer work. Like in those clubs and like making doing a tour. It's also the adrenaline. Like it's like what do you do after a night? Dude. Most jobs people can't wait to be done and then go home and relax and fall asleep. If you were you're doing stand up or obviously wrestling, you were just. You're done late at night and you're like, man, what the water rush? Yeah. Well, can I do better? This fucking killed in that. It's four in the morning. Yeah, you're buzzing. Yeah. You're buzzing. And it's also it's really hard to have any kind of a normal relationship because you're just constantly not home. You're constantly gone. Like even your friends. Like you really as a touring comic, the best thing that I ever did is start taking friends with me on the road. Yeah. Instead of just working with like random guys that I didn't know in different towns. Those are fun sometimes. Sometimes like you know two out of ten times you meet a new friend. Yeah. Eight out of ten times you were some annoying alcoholic. You fucking sucks. And there are no hang in there. They want to take you some place and you know you get in trouble. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that that's certainly the normal life aspect of it. It's also like at full tilt. It's a very absorbing thing. It's a very selfish thing. So I think not only you don't work regular office hours and you're a nomad of gypsy, but especially from a WWE perspective. You have to like you're a startup founder. You have to wake up thinking about it. You have to think about it all day. You have to go to sleep thinking about it. Wake up in the two hours of sleep. Did you get me like, I remember this line or maybe we can do this stunt or whatever. Right. And it's people who are in your sphere at least through my perspective and my journey. Man, if you were in my gravity from like 2002 to like 2019. I wasn't a part of a team. You did it my way. Like bus leaves a 10 if you're there at 10 on one, you are fucking left. Like we're doing this and we're training here and then we're doing this. But it's so it's so the end product is good. So like the dream job of like, man, I never, the six year old kid holding the paper belt can be an adult holding the real belt and get shackles for doing that. And I don't ever want to, I don't want to put that in jeopardy. So you fuckers are going to have to get in line and we're just going to have to go. Like you, you know, I, I, I was absent a lot in relationships. Because if it wasn't on my terms, it didn't exist. Mm. You know, because here you got, you catch lightning out of a jar. I'm a kid from West Newberry who's, you know, come from a family of five and we, there's always more broke. But man, we were a good level of broke. And then now like, hey, if you just work hard at this thing, you can kind of not ever be that again. All right, fuck this. I'm doing this thing all the time. But that comes with, hey, I'm getting married or like my grandfather died or I got a birthday coming up or like, hey man, you missed another Thanksgiving. You're damn right. It did because I'm doing the thing. Yeah. You know, so that it's all, for me at least it was, it was that as well of like laser focus. All things WWE. What's that in everything that you do where you want to really be successful? It takes saying yes to the thing means no to everything else. I had Jensen flying on the podcast here the day, who's the CEO of Nvidia. And he like, one of the biggest companies on planet Earth, huge company. Fuckin dude still to this day work seven days a week. And he was talking about when he goes on vacation, I go do go on vacation and just put it all down. He goes, no, I work. He goes even when I'm with my family, I have to work. I'm working. I'm working seven days a week. I don't take a day off. I love it. And he goes, and I'm terrified of failure. He goes, that's my motivation. My motivation is not I want to succeed. My motivation is fear of failure. Yeah. Every day I show up saying if I don't do this, we could fail. And I'm going to work seven days a week. Everybody thinks they want to be a CEO. You think you want to be a billionaire? Like, you want to do that? You want to do that? And when you're 60 years old, do you want to be working seven days a week? All day long from the moment you wake up, he wakes up at 4-3 in the morning. He says he answers thousands of emails a day. I'm like, what? How is that even fucking possible? Gets up at 4-3 in the morning, answers all these emails, works all day long, constantly problem solving, making AI chips fucking crazy, right? Yeah. But that's with everything. You want to be at the top of the heap? When you see someone on one way. Yeah. When you see something difficult, look easy. There's a bunch of 4-30 in the morning wake-ups that made that happen. You know. I think with everything in life, anything in life where you really want to excel at it, there's no shortcuts. Yeah. Doesn't exist. That weeds a lot of people out. It does. It does. And there's a lot of man armchair quarterback is the easiest and best position on the field. Yeah. I could do that. All I need to do is do this. Sure. Go right ahead. Yeah. Take you best shot. Yeah. Good luck. Yeah. It's interesting because it must weed out so many talented people. There's probably a lot of talented people that you've seen over the years that just didn't have that drive to constantly improve and succeed and really be thinking about what they're doing all the time. I like that statement because I think the talent is doing it all. You could have a... No, you didn't have one. You could smoke if you want. I don't care. We have fans in here. Yeah. That would fans suck out all the smoke. Okay. I think the statement of man so many talented people didn't make it. They may have... They may be an acrobat. Mm-hmm. They may be a fast talker. But that's not the only attribute that makes one special. You may be a great joke writer. But man, if you don't master stage presence, you may be a great joke writer with stage presence. But if you can't lug the tour. Yeah. You're not talented for it. Well, it's really the grind. It is. It's like everything. It's like everything. It's like everything. It's like everything. It's like everything. It's like everything. It's like everything. Yeah. So, one thing about WWE for all the arguments of like backstage political, everybody understands the sound of money. Mm-hmm. And no one refuses it. Like, I fucking hate this guy. But I gotta give him another match. It may not be, but I now have to give him a 10-year contract. But when they go out there, if the noise is there, even if the vase fucking hate you, you get another match. I'm, I'm proof positive of that meritocracy at work. Yeah. Like everybody fucking hated me. Why did they hate you? I was just real different. Like I, I was just really different. And so, I didn't rock, I didn't roughly feather as when I kind of entered the business, kept quiet, did my stuff. But I also didn't connect with the audience. And, and I don't know. Maybe you guys see this in stand-up or not. But then I got like a personality of like the white rap guy, like the white hip-hop guy. You know about that? But like, I'm, I fucking went, I fucking went all in. You know, at Urban Gear, like, and I'm a hip-hop head. So it's like, oh man, this is my sweet spot. This is the, the avenue. This isn't all of my personality, but this is one level that I can show that I think everyone will get. So if you go to Madison Square Garden, you get it. But if we go to Wheeling, West Virginia, you'll also get it. And you may like it in some places and hate it in some places, but everyone will get it. I will not be selling apathy. But in doing that, I never followed dress code. I was saying disrespectful shit about my peers. Like I kind of did it my own way. So I was, I was kind of ruffling some feathers, backstage or just, I was taking big swings. Because I was getting fucking fired anyway. The alternative was lose my job. So I was like, fuck it. I'm going down swinging. Yeah. And then the people behind the curtain were like, ah, the kid's disrespectful to the business. All the while I just want to keep my fucking job. You know, so the days behind the curtain weren't really invested, but they were also humble enough to be like, there's noise out there. Gotta give them another match. And one match at a time times 23 years of compounding interest. We're here. What did Vince think about your hip hop? He hated it and then loved it. And I think I'm thinking for somebody, but I think from his perspective is like when I hear somebody's idea for a personality. Man, I want to be a sports agent guy or whatever. Oh, yo, I have, I have the idea of what that is in my head. And if their projection of that idea, it doesn't match my projection that I did. I'm like, I hate it. But that doesn't mean it can't work. So I think what maybe what happened was my perspective of the white hip hop guy from the mean street of West Newberry. And Vince's perspective of John Cena, the rapper, we probably missed. Like he had an idea and I had an idea. And usually he will craft it to his vision. I gotta give him respect for allowing me to run with it. Well, it's probably that fear of fire being fired that like keeps you on the edge. Dude, that was it of like the Nvidia guy. I don't want to fail. Yeah. I got the sit down of like, hey, we're going to cut you. Cause it's not working. Like you're out there for your matches. You hear the same. It's not working. And there's no argument there. I'm like, fucking all right. I got to touch the sun. I got to make it. I got to play for the Yankees. I got my one at bat. I'm moving my grand. And then they heard me rap in the back of the bus. I was like, man, Stephanie, heard me rap in the back of the bus. Yeah. It was like, yo, you want to do that on TV? I'm like, lose my job or fucking rap? Yeah. Oh, let's go. Let's do this. Yeah. So it was Stephanie's idea. And it was a fucking accident dude. It was an accident. It was my final overseas tour for the WWE. And the boys just spend time like that's the one time they get the whole group together is overseas. Cause you don't want to be hurting cats like in Amsterdam or something. Everybody rides on the bus. You go from town to town. So like to pass the time, the boys just do whatever. And they were freestyle on the back of the bus. And I normally just fucking kept to myself. Cause I was raised in the environment of like, keep your ears open, keep your mouth shut. Don't do anything. Bless the broken too. I'm not sure if that's the only thing that I've ever seen. But I also didn't make any connections with people who were putting their lives on the line for me. You know, some of the guys you really beat the shit out of in the rings are like, your best friends. So I didn't have any of those connections. And I heard these guys wrap and I just remember playing roller coaster tycoon on my laptop. Full matching up, putting it away. I mean, like, I'm going to the back of the bus and just waited my turn and then filet like 12 guys. Yeah. And Stephanie was like, how the fuck did you remember? No, no, it's freestyle. You just make it up. And she's like, well, make up something about me. And we were boarding a plane. And I literally like, you lies the plane, the people getting on the plane. What she was wearing, what she was eating. She's like, would you do this on TV? And that's where we got a chance. Wow. And it wasn't like off to the moon. Like I got a shitty chance on a small spot. And that worked. So then I got moved to like the dog shit Saturday night program that nobody watches. The cool thing is no one's watching. So like I can do whatever I want it. So I started saying more racist shit and dressing more at landish and having more personality and like claiming ownership of the show. I call myself Mr. Saturday night. And it's the shitty show. You don't want to be Mr. Saturday night, but I did. And then that got another match and got another match and one by one to kind of brought me here. Wow. Just the fucking happy accident, man. That's crazy. All the way. And even when the bells were like, hey, you want the whole thing's a fucking accident. You want to start training? Fuck, yeah, sure. All right. Right. You want to start rapping? Yeah, fuck it sure. Let's do that. That's amazing. It's a happy accident. And for it to go all the way to last year's massive heel turn. Yeah. He went heel dude. That was this year by the way. Yeah. Yeah, that was this year. Yeah. It's been a great year. It's been a year. Yeah, that was. That was a mania. And man. One literally perhaps like other than maybe Hogan, right? The greatest heel turn in wrestling history when a good, good, good, good crowd pleasing guy goes bad, bad and dark. You had moments, the things you were saying, the way you were saying them. Epic iconic, iconic heel turn cold, dark. Working with the rock. He was in kahoots. That's the good guy. Cody. You do like seeing the people's faces. The fun thing is like stuff is so simple. But it's that if you take out the crowd in that situation and just put those three guys, it is really fucked up what we do. But when you add the audience in the back and all of their faces and what's going on, that's what makes it. Right. Even your face, you got like a mean guy face all of a sudden. It's like you're a different person. That was interesting. I was having a bad day. Well, this is also when you'd already done a bunch of acting. Oh, yes. This is this year. Yeah. Yeah. This is February this year. Yeah. How much of the creative control do you have over the aspects of that heel turn? Like for example, one thing that I thought was the coolest. I was in the front row of WrestleMania behind the Spanish announced table. So I'm directly across from the entrance, you know, the giant WrestleMania is a football stadium in Las Vegas. And there was no music and it was a black background. Yeah. Normally he's the most color with the most iconic loud wild music, no music, black background. And in white letters, it just said, Cena and you just walked out with literally the statement was I'm not here to entertain you people. Basically is what it felt like and I loved it. I mean, this is the main event of mania. You're so entertaining. I mean, I want an entertainment fuck. Yeah, I have a degree in pro wrestling, but my masters is in heel them like it's like the bad I just love a bad guy. And even ever since that bad guy turn, I feel like I feel like most bad guy fans do now newly connected with the back to the return of the good guy. Yeah, there it is. Oh, I mean, it was literally just I used to come out like a Tasmanian devil. Yeah, it's just just reverse it all. And it seems like nothing, but it's iconic. Just cold as ice. Everyone else for four hours coming out with colorful music and pie row and all this stuff. And there's the guy that normally did it the best and the biggest just really not giving a fuck and WrestleMania. If you're going to do it, like you give your best entrance for WrestleMania. And this was, I guess we were going for the shittiest one. But it just rang the opposite and simple and true. The octagon isn't just in Las Vegas anymore. It's right in your hands with Draft King Sportsbook, the official sports betting partner of UFC. Get ready because when Dwavash Willy and Jan face off again at UFC 323, every punch, every take down, every finish, it all has the potential to pay off in real time. New customers bet just $5. And if you're bet wins, you get paid $200 in bonus bets. And hey, Missouri, the weight is over. Draft King Sportsbook is now live in the show me state. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use promo code Rogan. That's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 200 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with Draft King's the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLER in New York called 8-7-7-8-Hopenwire. 4-6-7-3-6-9. In Connecticut, help is available for a problem gambling call 8-8-8-7-8-9-7-7-7-7. Or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhokasina when resorting Kansas passed through a per-way-dirtax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over. Agent eligibility varies by jurisdiction void in Ontario. Restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinnamon odds required. For additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. Limited time offer. For example, those details, that's mostly pitching to the creative team. For example, even just the white letters, the black entrance. How does that come together? So I think that's... And I've been lucky enough to take this perspective of not knowing everything and realizing that even with 23 years of fluency, I'm not the smartest guy in the room. I don't know the technology they have for what they can do. Now granted, a black LED board, I could probably come up with that. But what I like to do is lean on my resources. Like, hey, let's go to production and see what production is thinking. And I don't want to tell them what to do because I want to hear their ideas first. And production was like, what if we just went basic? I'm like, how basic can you go? What if we just blacked everything out? Yeah, but I know from what you guys have said, you also like to light the... No, no, what if we just black everything up? You guys would do that? Oh, that sucks. Yeah, let's do that. So it's not me with all of these things. I don't have enough depth of field to touch all the bases, but I will go to every department and say like, okay, entrance is a big part of what we do. What do we do for lighting? What do we do for production? Go to camera, like how do you guys want to shoot it? And then it trickles down when you talk to talent you're working with. How do we portray this message? And then of course it starts at the top with creatively, I want to make you a bad guy. So we're going to do that. Okay, sure, we're going to do that. How do you want to do that? do we portray this message? Uh, and then of course it starts at the top with creatively, I want to make you a bad guy. So we're going to do that. Okay, sure. We're going to do that. How do you want to do that? But it's, I think it's getting, we have a lot of talented people and just allowing them to do their job and let you know like, oh, I was kind of thinking this. And then tell them, yeah, that's a good idea. Let's do that. You know, that's amazing. Cause I don't know what I, I don't know what I miss if I'm making all the demands. To show you the contrast is a poem in that night came out to, I think it was 40 people on red, white and blue dirt bikes. All dressed like American people that they show you. And comes out elevated from inside of the stage, wearing the super gaudy mask that he has to take off fireworks, fireworks, fire, sparks, smoke, all of these different things. And he just comes out blank face. I just got my bunk sock on the back. Just ran up. There you go. It's so funny here in Tony talk about this because for people who don't know, the way Tony runs kill Tony is basically a version of a WWE event. I mean, it really is. Like when he does the arena shows, he has everything set up like a WWE event. Yeah. I mean, even the thing we did with Shane, which like Shane was playing, when Shane was playing Trump, but Trump and I were supposedly feuding online, Trump and said something about me online. And then Trump's talking shit like as Shane's talking shit. And then the music plays and I show up. All right. It's pure pro wrestling. Oh, yeah. It's pure pro wrestling. And MSG is on their feet shocked. You know, you're surprising this crowd that things through to us there for a comedy show. Well, there's the pay on all I guess that's what we're going to have tonight. But the surprises, the ups, the downs. And then he brings up Joey Diaz. So it's like, boom, boom, kind of like that big finish at many of that I was talking about. Yeah. Superstar bringing up a superstar, you know, music, music, smoke, fire. Yes. All these little things. The more you make it important, the more important it becomes. Yeah. Yeah. As when what we're saying is like when Trump was there, this was as Trump was running for president. Trump thought that I was endorsing RFK. So we got mad at me. So I said, I am here to endorse someone and I brought out Joey Diaz. I'm in jail. Which was great. Because he's a Joey Diaz. And again, reveal, but you get a different review. And everybody went nuts. And but it's like the audience, they're into it like they're into pro wrestling. They want all the heel turns. They want all the chaos. They want all the the the the pageant tree and the the fire and the explosions and all the shit. And yet you get any live audience. They're in all that like watch a college football game, watch a watch a soccer game. For Caesar or football, as they would say, like the fans. It's it's like a group think of energy. That's fucking nuts. Yeah. Like audiences wanted it doesn't matter where you're at. Like what man would come. It's just go out and light up a stage and they have that fucking stage presence and they just slay a set. The fucking audiences rolling in the aisles. And like they you you let the you let them in. And they they can help make a joke that might not hit the night before slay. Like it's it's all about the moment. It's all about being there and reading the people. And the fun thing about WWE is you can you can go out there with an idea. And in kind I can only imagine this is kind of like stand up where if you got your set and you tell the first joke to crickets, you may try another joke. And if that's crickets, you got a fucking pivot. Yeah. So we go out and do something and all man they're into it. Great. All right. We have them. We just got to maintain their attention until we get to act three essentially. But you hear fucking crickets. You're like, all right. We're switching it up fucking pivot right now. And you that's the beauty. And that's that's one of the things that I love the most is the it's not just me and the other person out there. Like the audience is the act every like that moment only means something. If you put a blue screen behind the people, it is super fucked up. Like what the fuck are they doing? And why does that mean anything? Right. But when you let the level of the audience and everybody's on their fee, they're no, like it's fucking everything. It's everything. That's why Tony is so interested in the coordination of it all and the setting and the sabotage and all the chaos that's involved and all of that. But these are these are human emotions that are universal. Everyone understands betrayal, jealousy, anger, disappointment, failure, excitement. Like these are universal things that you don't if we don't speak the same language, you still have felt these things. And you can watch that no one spoke in that clip. But you can watch that anywhere in the world. And that that you just got fucked over. Right. Oh, what's going to happen next? Like that's the beautiful appeal of it. Yeah. It's we don't hit too far above our way class. Like we we try to send large scale universal messages based on true real human emotion that we all know. Yeah. And up to that day, that moment. Like even that thing that we were just telling you about me bringing him coming out that being a reveal him bringing up Diaz was coordinated. Literally, I think 15 minutes before which is good. time. Literally me with a with a big piece of paper going, Hey Joe, what if we did this? He confirms it. So I go to hair and makeup work. They're finishing up Shane his Trump, which in itself is just hysterical. I pitch at the him. He loves it. I go to Diaz. I say, Rogan's going to bring you up. And the thing happens quick. Whereas with all the, you know, every form of entertainment that we're used to other than wrestling and like kind of, you know, Keltony in this instance, everything's so pre planned that if we over pre planned that we wouldn't have had the topical RFK endorsement because it was like news that that sure and so again, that inspiration, you know, totally comes from there because what else is doing that at MSG 10 minutes before the show reorganizing things. So now we have to production and go have Rogan's, uh, LED ready. And then Diaz in that order, you know, it's way to come from that. And when it goes right, there's not a better feeling than the whackily. I just get to sit back and watch. Yeah. But it's so funny that that connection with Pro Wrestling is really why you've made to kill Tony the way it is. Like without your love of Pro Wrestling, it would be such a different show. Like if it was just run like a traditional standup show, it's, there's so much else going on to make it the biggest show. Yeah. Well, it's long term storytelling. We had a guy on on Monday that had been doing it 14 years and man he just is timing was off. He struggled even after the minute I go, you've been doing it 14 years because yeah, man, I go, what do you, how do you make money? He goes, I do this. I go, you do this for a living. He goes, yeah, I go, you must have better material. I'm going to give you another shot. Do another minute. Here we go. Ladies and gentlemen, and I introduce him again, and he bombs again. And literally, I was talking with it about it with Stephanie after the show because she just happened to be at Kill Tony on Monday. And she goes, kind of guy like that. You know, what happens? What happens next? I go, hopefully, hopefully the guy gets pulled. Out of the bucket in a month or two has a great set puts it together. Realizes. I was timing was off. He wasn't taking a breath. He wasn't connecting with the crowd. He was just memorizing his stuff. And the story begins to be told about this guy. And sometimes it happens in reverse. Sometimes somebody starts off, you know, fire hot rocket strapped to the back. Yep. And then and that's kind of the sadder thing, right? Is starting hot and then never being able to touch that again. Have a moment like your first time. Well, it's like we were talking about people with talent. We all know someone who killed during open mic days that we're like, wow, this guy's going to be huge. They have like undeniable talent and they just can't manage it. They can't figure it out. They self sabotage. They get addicted to drugs or alcohol, whatever it is. There's so many things. Yeah. It's not just the ability to go out and do the task well. There's so many variables that will fuck you up. Yeah. Dude. You're right. So many so many gifted people have just just had that roadblock in front of me, which is why I think conversations with successful people are so important because you get to hear those stories. You get to hear like with Jensen the other day, he was talking about how Nvidia was basically bankrupt. They were they were on their way out and someone gave them a chance. Like some some one guy that was an investor gave them a chance and then they wound up becoming successful. And then there was this these moments and people need to know that you're going to have those hurdles. So you're going to have those roadblocks. So you're going to have to figure out how to adjust. It's not easy. None at no one who has been successful at anything will tell you the whole ride was easy. Yeah. But a lot of the times sometimes sometimes it'll be in it. I so I've been through like three generations of knowledge and learning, 23 years in the business at an operating at a high level. I have seen thousands and like it is the man, if you're a stud in Pee Wee Football League, then you go to this junior high school and then you're the number one player in college and then you're the number one number one player high school and then we're playing college. He got a spot in the NFL and then a year later you're going because the funnel just gets so thin. WWE has like 200 personnel in their NXT development program right now. Maybe 10 will make it maybe and other those 10 like really honestly maybe one will make it. And what the hope is is over a six year period of those classes of 200 that get matriculated probably every four months. So we're talking 6,000 people. I'm hoping one makes it. Wow. And in five or six years I need one because my top guy right now, my Roman Reigns and Cody Rhodes and and the Charlotte Flair's and Becky Lynch's of the world like they'll they'll last half a decade to draw. Maybe if we're lucky maybe we'll we'll get it more they can you know maybe parlay it into a decade or two. But that's an anomaly. You got to play the legit math of like after five years. I better have somebody in the next circle. So out of like five six thousand I just need one but it's still everybody's biting their fingernails and like we don't have the person yet. It's so many folks just don't make it. Just don't make it. Yeah that's that's the parallel to stand up. Yeah it's man so that you know there's so many people that we were talking last night in the ringroom thousands and when I see them like in the ring do stuff I'm like I could never do that but they just won't they just don't make it. It's just there's so many things that fuck people up so much self sabotage to so much inability to to stay the core. It's worse than me. Mm hmm you know I don't know. Yeah I don't know. Yeah happy accidents though fuck it. Well yeah happy accidents but not just that. It's you being able to stay on course and you've been able to recognize that you know okay this didn't work what do I do. You want me to rap okay I'll fucking rap like a lot of people would have been like I'm fucking rapping. That's beneath me. I'm here to be a wrestler. Yeah I'm not a gimmick. I'm not going to be a buffoon. Yeah I'll be a buffoon. Yeah I'll have to be a buffoon. It's not like that. It's part of the entertainment of it all even the cringe aspect of it for people like what is going on here. Yeah it's great. He loves that shit. Oh it's the best. The best. You know who my guy is right now. Dominic Mysterio. Love dog. Oh my god. So he's. Were you. I know you're here. I was going to you're in a pecco were you. No. Gosh we had fun over there. I bet. I was I caught a lot of it. Yeah man. That kid's good too. Like good human being. I happen to be in Salt Lake City doing a gig. I was doing stand up in one arena and the WWE happened to be in the other arena in Salt Lake City just a few weeks ago. And I'm like ah darn but I look it up and it's a 5pm taping of WWE. So I hit up my friends at WWE. I go I'm coming in and bringing my openers right. Anyway Dominic Mysterio is in a triple threat match and his whole thing is he's wrestling royalties, Rey Mysterio's son but he claims that he might be Eddie Guerrero's son because his father's you know one of the ultimate good guys of all time. So basically he takes on the traits of Eddie Guerrero whose whole thing was cheating and lying and stealing, breaking the rules in original ways all the time. And he's doing a triple threat match which means there's three guys at once right but if the if someone beats anybody you could lose your belt and his intercontinental champion I think it's intercontinental right is on the line and he gets thrown outside the ring. And I'm having fun right I go Dominic cheat do something right and he's kind on the other side of the thing and he lifts up his head looks at me and goes like that he gives a big boy and he goes back down again and I'm cracking up I go you see that I'm next to Paul these short I go did you just see him wing he goes yeah man what's he gonna do bro. But these two guys in the ring are wrestling and one of them has the other one in a submission and hold the camel clutch I can't remember who it was but anyway and I'm I literally even me watching since I was a kid and even though he just winked at me it was just enough time I forgot that Dominic was over there because this action in the ring is really happening something's about to happen and you hear the bell ring and I look over and there's Dominic with the hammer in his hand ringing the bell and the guy let's go with the submission and the referee goes what the hell and something I hadn't seen in 35 years of watching this thing he was he's innovative enough to find a brand new way to cheat in this place yeah a brand new way to cheat and the crowd everybody's cracking up it's a whole new right when you think you've seen it all this guy who you would love he's literally like built like me he flexes like Nate Diaz without flexing and he's just bragged though shits oh yeah he thinks he thinks he needs the one but the refs like now and oh my god I got to Dominic he just loves it yep there's our guy dirty dog yeah and the crowd just loves him that's all of us right though that's Maddie Edgar Joe Dorosa Paulie sure me he was Dorosa's first real wrestling and then he had the time of his life child like wonder I love getting people in their life for the first yes there's something funny about a pro wrestler it's not built too oh oh yeah and he's the champ all these other guys that guy penta he just went my ass dirty dog he just went my ass for real I just lost either kind of nail championship that's a bit covered in gold yeah probably what five nine hundred you know he's a tall drink of water he's taller than me but he's a hundred and seventy pounds so can wait yeah exactly yeah such a uniquely American form of art yeah it really is it's weird because in pockets of the world like it's Japan has their own style of doing it black America has their own style of doing it the UK has their own style of doing it but this yeah like the Japanese is very strong style with respect to martial art the English style is very like catches catch can a real like technical expose the Latin American style the Mexican style is high flying the the American offering of like steak sizzle apple pie ice cream fourth of July everything like huge and that's all vents right a lot of it so is it all ever one person right it's not a lot of it is a lot of it is but like promotions like world-class championship wrestling were would some of the first he used music vents was the first to be like rock and roll get over here and get on cable and let's let's blow this thing out I want to do it it's not just something we have in a local VFW with cigar smoke and guys taking side action on carnival tricks no this is a fucking thing and we are gonna make this a fucking thing yeah you know it's also a fucking thing where it's a lot of it is not televised because you just traveling around the country doing these shows yes so that that the business model is kind of changed where media content is king now so from what I understand from tk on I know their executives will correct me but from my perspective we have scaled back on the live event only offerings which helps you know lick the wounds it's weird it it like you don't bump enough or you don't bump as much but you kind of need to get in there and bump to get your callous and to get your wind and timing so it's it's kind of you get your signals crossed but anyhow um the content that is provided is always available for media or or 99% where it used to be the opposite you do like four live shows one TV tape so you'd have four live shows under your match you know you do you do like um Lafayette Little Rock Pensacola and then TV in Orlando you know and that would be the end of the run and then you do it again of like Bangor Portsmouth um Providence TV in Boston you know like and then you go for another week and go somewhere else but it's different now it's like every piece is televised for the media which is great because we get a lot out to our fans across the world but like I learned I learned how to fail and those non televised events hmm I could take big swings because it's like man if I'm on the middle of a card in in Valparaiso and I kind of fuck up in a gymnasium with 35 hundred people they might they might tell me to fuck off but there's also the last match that's gonna send them home happy so let's try this new weird thing and that's where like me being invisible starts you know it's just like oh I can try it who cares it's an environment where you don't want to fail and now it's we there's way more advantage on getting our content out there but production is super slick it's like really precise everyone's really good and um I don't know how many people go out there and just like like dumb like that was an example of swinging big yeah I'm gonna fake ring the bell right well people even get that who cares let's try it like he's he's the only one of those guys who will or very few of those guys will stand on an ideal like that where the other guys are like no I want to have a good choreographed performance because I want my stuff to look good because it's on television and going around the world hmm you know I loved the non televised events but there's just there's not there's not it's not a good business model so how does a young person coming up now learn how to fail that is I think a conundrum that we're facing because you you're failing in front of the world right you know um it's it's weird you can have you can it's like you work out your set but you can't do it on small clubs before you go to arena it's like you would work out your set at home and then you just play the into it though or you play Barclays Center like you don't have a small room to be like all right landed oh man I'm gonna rework that one you don't ever have that you just have this you put it together in your head you think it's okay and then you're out there so I don't know um I'm not saying it can't work I think it can because analytics show that it does work and we have a lot of people watching now but from my perspective I really enjoyed the carefree nature of just going out and being ready for anything and and it being okay if I I fucked up and I failed if I told some bad jokes I could come back you know that didn't work that didn't work and then you have a partner to be like oh and this didn't work but this slayed why don't you do this again like literally that's where this came from just fucking around at live events and oh my god there's noise I'll do it tomorrow night we're in a different town let's see if they can how did you come up with that was a dare my brother did happy fucking accident my brother dared me to do it like when we when I was in the middle of the the wrapping wormhole I made I'm applied to wrap right my own album so like in making yes this is this is amazing drink it in drink it in in making the album we would bring home all the tracks and like my little brother was our test audience and he would do this dance where he was like shake his head and keep his hand in front of him like that is man look at you like you won't do that on TV and again I was on the programs that no one was watching so it's like no one's watching anyway yeah fuck you I will do it on TV and I did it on some meaningless Saturday show and there's a little bit of noise so I took it with me on the road for the next week and did it on the live events that won't tell about this a little bit of noise okay like this is my thing though this is my thing and I just you can't see me in my guts now it's a thing yeah yeah yeah so it's I did it on a dare wow but like I also had I was in a place to be able to tell my brother okay I can waste two seconds on an inside joke between you and I that's the dare it's not going to ruin the match but if you're watching if you're the only one person watching velocity that night you'll be like inside joke got it all right let's like shouting out your gaming group like seven people get the joke but this is one of those things were kind of fit and it's stuck wow it's just so many of those things in your life so many of those like fortuitous moments well you know um admittedly I have an optimism bias I will admit that but life will will deal opportunity it's a matter of understanding that it's happening you know don't get in your own way yeah like say yeah come here sit with you guys this is a new experience for me uh like yeah let's do it okay great um men first wrestler to ever retire yes that's a good idea we're just gonna do it yeah but you'll never be able to come back yes but let's just do this thing like life is throwing me an opportunity to create a year's worth of programming narrative that I think will be interesting the alternatives to do what everybody else has done and maybe hang on too long people like man you should have left a few years ago now let's let's let's do this wrap let's do this do you want to train it involves you working at this shitty job where you're probably gonna I try to be a cop and fail that was gonna go down join the Marines that's lifelong employment I'm I'm really good with structure I dig uniform like I give me what to do and like a code of conduct live by I haven't feeling I would have fit in there great love being in shape they feed you over there like I think I would have done okay but life put an opportunity in front of me and I was stupid enough to say yes going out naked in the Oscars I was just on Jimmy Kimmel last night he's like man you want to do this bit like dude I am super tired I'm on I'm on a different coast he's like let me send you the bit and I read it I'm like yo fuck all right I'm gonna do it what you do it's shuffled out there with an index card over my dick oh that that thing yeah yeah but like man in a room full of not even peers or contemporaries like the pantheon of the professional goal that you try to read I don't know any these fucking people I don't belong in that room right he's like yeah man it's kind of walk out there naked it'll be a fun bit and he's right it would be a funny bit but I could have got in my own way of like now I got a fly I'm exhausted I'm gonna make a fool on myself I don't know any these people is my first impression I can I can sit on the couch like that's the easy part the tough part is like life has dealt you this opportunity fuck and say yes 15 minutes before the show when you get a good idea the easy thing to do is be like do the show the hard thing to do is be like yo let's let's fucking swing let's go for it yeah so it's it's not like I think those moments happen to a lot of us and it doesn't have to be a lottery ticket I granted holy hell I've been given a lot of lottery tickets but it could be something as simple as like yo you're in a crummy mood find a way to be kind like life just gave you an opportunity that person getting your coffee is like yo have a nice day you could stay crummy or you could be like fuck thank you very much appreciate that appreciate your time like that's an opportunity you know life is just a matter of like us reacting to what life throws at pivotal decisions and it doesn't need to be a world changing decision I think now I don't want to say nowadays I think we always think that like the decision needs to change the world no it's you just need to fucking commit and do something as a 12 year old I want to start working out and I liked it and I just fucking keep working out and now it now I can't live without it it's part of my life it's a fabric of my life but in working out I've learned structure and discipline accountability essentially budget if you take into much and you don't spend enough you're gonna have some excess like these lessons that opportunity can teach you if you allow it me fucking up the thing I spoke about at the beginning like the easiest thing to do is your fault but if I take it as an opportunity of like all right you missed what do we learn where's the game yeah you can move forward and I can move forward and wholeheartedly apologize to those I've hurt along the way and they don't need to forgive me that's on their terms I can't control that but man this the sleep is a little more sound at night knowing like in learning this lesson or having this opportunity fuck dude I kind of trampled on your shit I'm so sorry I got at such a shitty relationship with my dad and just recently we've meant defenses and these 80s I'm glad I've done this because I mean we don't last forever he's going we're all going in the dirt soon you know but I just wanted him to be something else I always wanted that motherfucker to change I wanted him to be something else and finally I got out of my own way the hard thing is meeting that guy where is that the hard thing is allowing him to be who he is take the weight off my backpack and say like you know I might have needed you to be this in my life but because you weren't man because of your absence in being the dad that I had in my mind I got all these fucking cool male mentors who kept who gave me a key to the gym at 15 and said you better fucking be here in the morning and my dude I still can feel the key in my hand from Dave Knock the the dean of students of coaching academy who bet on me he was like man if you get your grades from seized A's and you play two varsity sports this place cost in 94 this place cost 35 grand a year we will give you aid and you will have a place to learn and that allowed me to become an adult and allow me to the opportunity of being in a diverse group of students who men there's like royalty that goes to that school and then there's fucking poor kids my roommate was a basketball player from Compton and then we got kids it would generational wealth who their name and buildings after but when it's just like 450 kids in a social experiment money goes away and you just you you just kick it so I learned to be friends with everybody but I wouldn't have learned that in West Newbury where it's 99.9% white 1200 people in the small town no stoplights you either leave or you never leave like just little little things like that you know what I'm saying like mmm like man I should do this and deciding to meet my dad where he's at and like do that whatever I thought you were you're not you're just you and I love you for you and man what we said there's some shit that he'll say that's all fucked up you know he said some shit yesterday that like I don't think John's last opponent should be there and people listen to him because he's a wrestling fan he's like in the kind of like their weird subculture zeitgeist and I want to call my dad I'm in what the fuck are you doing but then like no he's doing what he does this is him this is the dad I this is the john scene I love this is this is the guy I can sit down with and and and part of that is being able to process all that but the opportunity I get from that I've learned about my father's story I've learned about what he wants to do with his life why he does what he does maybe what do you want it to do dreams he didn't have so I can gain wisdom from there but it's just that's the hard part it's like getting out of your own fucking way to do the thing you really want to do the easy thing to do is the holy grudge against my dad what I really wanted to do is tell my dad I love him and sit down and be like yo let's fucking break bread yeah talk about whatever you want and now we do that and it's great but that's like that's a small example of the easy thing to do is sit in the couch and say fuck it somebody else's fault right the tough thing to do is like life is handing me a moment right now and dude I don't bad a thousand I mean it's more like major league baseball I'm hoping 300 gives me the whole fame like if I can capitalize on 30% of the moments that life gives me and squander the I mean, it's more like major league baseball. I'm hoping 300 gives me in the hall of fame. Like if I can capitalize on 30% of the moments that life gives me and squander the other 70% I believe I will go into the ground being like, man, I earned life. If you can capitalize on 30% of the moments, you are in the 1% of human beings that have ever lived earned life. Yeah. So I'm just trying to get that. Make it to Cooperstown. Yeah, that's that's the reality. And then also the reality is if someone doesn't give you what you need, it gives you a desire to get what you need. So sometimes it's a gift to not have like doting parents. Like, yeah. Am I, oh my goodness. Like I said, I would never have gotten those. The beautiful guidance I got in life. I always had father figures because I was searching for it. And they found me and I was also savvy enough to be like, this guy needs to stick in my life for a little bit. It sucks and he fucking pushes me. But I got to keep this guy around. Like just weird stuff like that. I hear a lot of wrestlers a lot of times. What do you want to do here? I want to be champion. Okay. The math of that's really slim. I never wanted to be a fucking champion. I just wanted to wrestle. And if you're good, it'll take you places where one day you can hold one of those. But if you start with a goal of I want to hold one of those man, am I pigeon-holing my goal? What the fuck do you really want to do? I just wanted to wrestle. And if I got fired by WWE, I would try to go to Japan. I would try to go to Mexico. I would try to go to the UK. Fuck it. Because I just wanted to do it. But that also meant I would put my best foot forward and I wasn't shackled to. I need to be champion or I'm not validated. I'm not successful. You know what I'm saying? Just give me a chance to go out there and get the noise and whatever else falls into place. Fuck it. Cool. Because what I want to do is just go out there and be in the arena. It's funny because they talk about the noise the way we talk about the laughs. Yeah. It's the same thing. It's the same thing. Totally. It's the same thing. You know, and I don't need to be the most decorated person, but it's weird because they're not even trying. I have a resume that people will now measure up against like, oh, that's you got to win X amount to pass the hurdle. So it's weird. Like I didn't even try to do any of that. All I try to do is like, you'll just get me out there. And when you look at what I've done and you've followed a bit, like, it was weird. I was in the main event of WrestleMania this year. And to talk to people, they were like, oh, man, that's crazy. The last main event of WrestleMania was in was 2012. So you'd think that like, oh, John Cena, this guy's everything handed to me is always at the top. That was my first main event, WrestleMania appearance as an attraction in like 13 years. And in that span, I worked new wrestlers. I worked for lower level titles. I sat ringside and crushed three beers and then got fucking squashed by the undertaker as a fan. Yeah. Like I did all sorts of shit, you know, but because it was never about like, I'm not a success and last time in the main event of WrestleMania. No, that's just a position where the ton of stress just fucking get me out in the courts. Just get me in the arena. Had me in section one, shaking hands of people from Australia and I'll make it the best fucking time they ever had. It doesn't matter. I just get me out there. What I don't want to do is sit on the bench. You know, so how did you go from that into acting? Like what was your first? So originally it was a business choice, Vince opened WWE studios. And with the idea of if we make these guys movie stars, more people come to the arena. Now is a young 20 something on the road, people in January and every night. I'm like more people in the arena. That sounds fucking great. And his first movie was supposed to be with Steve Austin and the it fell through. They're about to shoot in two weeks. So movie pre-production is way longer than that. But he was like, you're going Australia to film this movie, the marine. And it was tough. It was tough. I went from arrive in a town at noon, work out, get a good meal in, crush the show, have some beers on the ride to the next town, fall asleep, do it all again. And it's like this whirlwind of electricity to, okay, you're in hair and make up at six o'clock. We're doing an explosion today. So the lights are going to be weird and we probably will get to you around five 30 PM. But you just said it's six in the morning. Yeah. So with the fuck you want me to do from here until five 30, you just hang up. And I couldn't like as a young 20 something, I wanted to be in the electricity. I couldn't handle the, the nature of the business. Yeah. And therefore my passion wasn't in it. I wasn't fully invested in it. I am, I am fucking here with you guys right now. We are talking about this. My, my mind isn't elsewhere on other shit. I want this to be what I want to give you all I got. So I'm here with you. I was never there in those movies. I was always back in fuck. Maybe if I had the feud with this guy or if I could have done this, I was never there. And you could see it in the performance. So I kind of got run out of the movie business. I did so many shitty movies in like 2009 10. My, my best friend agent Dan Bame at the time. I was like, man, we're never doing movies again, right? And you know, as an agent supposed to be the guy to pick you up. He looks and be dead. He goes, nope, we will find another way though. He was honest. We are never doing a run out of town, but we'll find another way. So we did. We did hosted some live shows, um, um, hosted some game shows, did little appearances here and there. And then, uh, Judd Apatow, named Schumer gave me a chance on, um, uh, God, Tranewreck. And it was a very small part, but again, like, just just get out and the arena and do your best. And, and look, I was in a fucking room with comics, like funny people. I don't belong there, but they, they created an environment where I wasn't judged. They only showed the good jokes that they didn't, they didn't show the fucking 20 takes. where I tried to tell jokes that sucked. The only ones who made the final cut, the ones that made people laugh. So they provided an opportunity for failure. And at that point, I've been playing the same characters in 2014, 15. I've been playing the same character on TV for 15 fucking years. And now I'm like, yo, I get to do something different. I can do this for 12 hours. You want me to sit? I go fucking read a book. I don't care. I'm in. So I accepted the patient process of movies. And then after that, I, I got a little bit of noise and train wreck and then Judd sent word to Tina Fey and Amy Poeer who were filming up the road and long. I don't know. Like, if you got a spot, you should hire the kid and they made me a drug dealer and they're thing. And then like things started roll downhill, but it's very, very small parts at a time. And here I am, that was 2015 here. I am a decade later. And I'm still trying to advance to fluency by no means. am I like, I'm the 17 time champ of the acting community. Those are the motherfuckers I was looking at when I was naked. You know, right. I'm aspiring to try to be that, but it's basically the pivot happened when I was like, yo, if you just invest in this, the hustle you and patients you put into wrestling, at least you know you gave it your all. You know, be coachable, be professional, be reliable, be interested and see where the chips fly and fucking say yes. Well, it's also you had the, the objectivity, like the introspective objectivity to look at your past performances and say, I wasn't really in there. It wasn't. And I got run out of town. Yeah. I lost the job. So like, here's that, here's that mulligan. What fuck I'm out? I'll never work in this town again. I will. All right. Let's go. Let's try. What else could go wrong? They've already fired me. Mm. You know, so again, an environment and no one does it alone. The people I was around, teen and Amy are the same way, like only show the funny shit, but try whatever you want. Like fail. It's okay. And just because you're around people who do comedy for a living, all we need is three seconds and we'll be patient enough to give you what you need to give us that three seconds. Mm. You know, yeah. It's, it's just such a fun story. You know, and there's so there's only a few guys that have managed to make that leap from WWE. Obviously the rock is the big one. Sure. You know, I mean, he's the biggest one. Yeah. Make that leap and now become a giant movie star. Well, I think it's a, I think it's a leap. A lot of people can make. It's not from from like a talent. We talk about like obstacles and like right on our own way. WWE is all consuming. And you got to remember like I was the biggest act. So at 220 shows a year, for me to be like, and he's six months off to film this action movie, that really fucks with the bottom line. Like, oh, yeah. So the answer is no. Right. You know, and, and, and now with less live events, it's still you, you want to be on television. It's like, okay, I need to somehow leverage my relevance with this to what it's going to do to film that in WWE. If you're not, I'm going to retire on the 13th. They will be moved on by the Royal Rumble. And that's, that is real facts. I will be forgotten. That is not a pleatist sympathy of like always, remember me by the Royal Rumble and the road dress man. Nobody gives a fuck because they're focusing on what the show is. That's like three weeks after I retire. Three weeks after I retire and nobody's gonna give a fuck. And that's not, I'm not saying like what I did is meaningless. I've lived the moments. They're great people move on. So when, if I'm a talent who's on TV and finally got one of those spots and edged my way in, do I? Is this the right time to leverage, taking myself off a TV to do four months on something that isn't going to come out for another 18 months. And then I got to go back to TV, hoping people still care that my, my ringwork is still polished that I still have my finger on the pulse. Like it's, it is, we can get in our own way sometimes. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. So I was just at the point in 15, 16, 17, where I was like, man, my body's kind of banged up. I'm a little older. I would like to take some time off and how I talked about like every five years you needed something on deck circle. So I'm, I'm running at the front for like 15. They needed somewhere in the other deck circle. And then they finally got some folks. So like, yeah, we got, we got folks. Yeah, go do the thing. It's fine. Go do it. So my, my passion for was ignited at the perfect time when, when the office side of it was like, that won't affect our bottom line too much. Go give this thing a try. So it, again, it just happy accident, man. And I'm grateful for it. So now you're in the situation, you're going to retire. Yep. And then you just going to go all in on acting now. So that's again, beyond my control. If I could, if I said the goal, though, is that what you would like? The goal is to live useful. That's it. The goal is to live useful and not lack like a depth of purpose in my life. You know, I can't control with the phone rings. And they say, you want the kid in the picture. That's way beyond me. What I can do is when someone bets on me, do my fucking damn this for every dollar. I want to give them 10 back. I want to show them that I want to show you your time as well spent today. I want to give you my heart and soul. And when I leave here, you may be like, no, my cup of tea, but the fucking kids are. You know, like, that's that's all I'm trying to do. So if I can do that, maybe I get another, maybe I get another match. Maybe I get another phone call. But I also realized my mortality in the retirement, like it's over, but also they'll come a day where y'all out there are like, yeah, the kid's not not cool anymore. I'm done. I'm on to the next shiny thing. I'm grateful for what I got. And I know I don't control how many times the phone rings. I just want to, I never want to phone it in. Right. And when my time is up, it's over with me. And I like, I'll, I'll do the rest of whatever life is. So I think about that. Like what the rest of life is. Do you have other interests? Sure do. Sure do. Um, love messing around with music. I never read as a kid. So I'm reading more than I ever have. Um, love cars. Love, I'd love to just drive the like, just being in a car and driving, not track stuff just like going on long drives. Love that. I see a bunch of sticks. I love an occasional stick with some conversation. Uh, I love boy that I miss out on loving connections in my life. So I'm like, I have them now and they're fucking so cool. So if, if a day is just spent with friends or a week or like, man, with WWE, I've been around the world like 12 times. I haven't seen shit. I've seen the inside of arenas, a hotel bar and a fucking airport. Yeah. I want to know what Tokyo is all about. I've been there like 20 times. I've seen shit. You know, like, uh, and I don't know if I'll ever get tired of that. Like, um, I always have a curious nature on to, to what's next. I don't know what that'll be, but I never want to wake up and be like, man, life's taken forever. You know what I'm saying? I think there's always something to do with the day. So I don't, I don't know. Would I love to continue to tell stories and get paid for it? Fuck, that's a great gig. But it's also beyond my control. So instead of being like, I'm going all in on acting and I want to do this. And one day I want to win an Oscar. And when I've seen that approach is bad, I'm just saying my approach is like, man, when they do call, be grateful and don't be grateful in the easy times. Be grateful when they ask you to work a 60 hour day or be grateful on that press tour when you have to read off the, or when you get to read off the prom tour and you're doing 86 reads and the reads are so you can dress up in the costume and all that other shit. Like that's, that's kind of more where I'm at. That's a great approach to life. How did you develop this philosophy? Is this, dude, I'm not supposed to be here. Like I'm from fucking West Newbury, Massachusetts. I'm not supposed to be here. And that's another thing. There's not a day that doesn't go by where I look at someone I love and connect with and be like, man, what a life. I understand how lucky I am. And I understand I have been awarded more opportunity than one human being should get. And it's, it's, um, from what I've tried to boil down to it, the best way to honor that opportunity is to do your best to try to live a good life. And a good life is it's, that's almost like pain. Everybody's perspective of a good life is different. I've come up with core values and I try to live by those. I'm human, I'm perfect. But like again, if when I go into the dirt, I feel as if I didn't waste it and I don't mean grind like the whole boy from Nvidia, that's, that's a grind. And I think a lot of him, there's fear there, but also a lot of, a lot of that effort he loves. And that's what, that's what an ideal life to him is about. And if he goes in the ground working 70 hours a week, he'll go in with a smile on his face. You know, I just want to go in when it's my time. I want to know that I honored the luck I was given by not fucking squandering it, by not wasting it. And that doesn't mean grind to a monetary number. It just means live a fulfilled life where the sleep is sound, the love is real. And every day you're driven with curiosity and purpose. And I don't know what the fuck that is. And it could change. Man, I thought I was born to be a WWE superstar. And then the elbows start hurting a little bit. And you're like, oh, man, I'm born to be a storyteller. And then you realize it like, I'm not in control of any of that shit. That's his luck. That's somebody being like, I liked him in this. Put him in that. Yes, no problem. I think he fact you're talking about here is gratitude. I was born to honor the luck that I've been given and just try to do my best to live a full life. Like that's it. Yeah. And that having gratitude about the life that you live and being happy. Got it so hard, but so important. And it's tough when you use that work because it's such a, I know, it's such a new age. You think outside the box, like not man, like it's a real word though. Real thanks. Yes. It's hard. Yeah. Because you have to be thankful for the suck for the pain. You have to be thankful for the lesson for the journey. Like, and these are, again, these are all like slangy hashtagy terms. I don't know what the fuck else to call it. So I'm just calling it what it is. That they've been co-opted by people that just sort of bullshit and use those words, but the reality of those words is strong. It's very powerful. It's like grind. Grime is another hashtag. Or, you know, but like, there is, there is some realism to it. But that, that from what I've figured it out thus far, that's my path. And when the facts change, so does my opinion. So we can come back here in a few years and I'd be on some other shit. But right now, that's kind of where I'm at. Well, it's such a, that the gratitude word has been really co-opted by goofy people. Unfortunately, but it doesn't mean you shouldn't use it. That's a real word. And if, if the word makes you feel weird, come up with your own word. Right. Thanks. Yeah. Whatever. Having thanks. Because I'm, I'm with you there. Yeah. Some words make me feel gross. Yeah. Just about how, overuse they've been, but like I, I can't stray away from that one. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we talk about gratitude all the time. We're, we're always like talking about how we're living the dream. Yeah. Like just being happy. We do. Just shouldn't shoot. I know. People pay attention. I know. I feel like I was doing a lot. A lot of people. If you're still with us, I can't believe it. This is great. Yeah. I was thinking, I'm not going to my buddy the other day, Peter Shore, the owner of the comedy store. And I was telling him about how just a few weeks ago, because I'm now that I have a place that I like and a car that I like and a job and everything, everything's finally it appears how I have always considered what the dream is that I was saying to my buddy the other day who I came up with who I really started with. And I'm talking about like 14, 16 hour days at the comedy store. I'd answer the phone at 11 a.m. Because back then they didn't even have a website. Hello, we want to, you want to take it's time. blah, blah, blah. Work all night, put on the t-shirt at 8 p.m. tear tickets and check IDs until 2 30 in the morning. So I would hit, I would hit over time by like Wednesday or Thursday, but they couldn't pay over time because the comedy store in 2007 was half to quarter empty. Anyway, so they would cut my hours and I was paying $400 a month to sleep on my buddy's couch in his living room. And he had a bedroom and my other buddy, Maddie, had a bedroom. But Sandy was like, you know, he was like, the apartment was registered in his name. And I mean, terrible couch, terrible setup. I'd have to go through one of their bedrooms to go to the bathroom. So if you have to pee in the middle of the night, you're kind of tiptoe in through, you know, what you're going to say, make noise. Yeah. Don't know what you're going to see. Whatever. And I was talking to Matt a month or so ago. And I go, I think I still owe Sandy a little bit of rent money because I just simply didn't have it. But then isn't that crazy? He goes, you do. I he mentioned it. That's time. So you're talking about how successful you are. There's an accountant right there. So I've been modem out of nowhere. I haven't even, we haven't even talked since pre pandemic. He's got a family. I'm out here this that I've been modem a thousand bucks out of nowhere. And I go 2007 rent money as the, as the memo part of it. And he hits me up saying thanks and we're communicating. And then I remembered that at one point I couldn't even afford the $400 a month for the couch. And there was another comedian that was a door guy at the store that did up the 400 a month because he was getting help from his parents. So I got downgraded to a bean bag for like a month or so. It was sweet. It was fun. Oh, just horrendous. Exactly. It's so bad for two months just in pain all the time. But doing what I loved and so much of what you're saying about enjoying the process and joy what you're doing because I really did back then. And I think about that now more. I've been thinking about that bean bag and that couch and that living or more than ever the last few months. You know, it's like that's talking about gratitude. It's like those are the things that that's who you are is enjoying that process. Yeah. And making the best out of it. And in my case of a similar story and from what I'm hearing from you is like you, you want it to be there. You, you were not going to give up the bean bag. Oh, yeah. There's, there's a lot of folks out there who are put behind the eight ball and really have to dig themselves out of a trench. When I moved out to Venice and I was working at gold, I was sleeping in the parking lot in my 91 continental. Everybody's like, oh man, you were homeless. I'm like, no, no choice. It was my choice. Yeah. I didn't want to leave. My old man had a room for me. Nobody ever leaves West Nuber. My dad was like, yo, come back. You got a roof over your head. You get some fucked up job over here. You don't have to pay rent. So I had choice. I stayed in the car because I wanted to. Yeah. Life was great. I got to see like the bodybuilders of the 2000s. I got to train at the gym and shower at the gym. And the rock came through is like a old picture of me in the rock somewhere. Where I mean my gold gym club store shirt. And he's fucking doing this one. Like I got to see all these people. And it was fucking cool. And I wouldn't have left if they took the car away. And I got to sleep in the parking lot. Like I was by choice. You slept on the beanbag because you wanted to be there. And the fun fact is that that's that's that's this is me in the background. Right there. No, no, keep that. Oh, I'm taking the phones off. I'm going at it. That's me right there. He had just taken a photo with me. That's me. Wow. That's DJ. Wow. That's crazy. That's 1999. Wow. Yeah. Fucking rock was white hot. Selling out every place. Probably staple center and home coming in and press some weights. Wow. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. What a, what a, that's who like, that's where the perspective is exists. Yeah. Because I shouldn't have even been in the fucking club store selling candy bars. I should be, you know, in, in, in West Newbury doing what everyone else does. Like that's the, that's the tail. You know, and I'm not. So I'm grateful for it. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of people out there on bean bags right now. Listen to this. You need to hear. Stay on the bean bag. Stay on that bean bag. 24 hours. Who knows? 24 more hours. Some can happen. Yeah. And the, this success will be so much sweeter. All so much sweeter if you do it that way. I mean, if you were a trust fund kid and you had plenty of money and your parents gave you a hundred grand a year to go up and pursue your dreams and they paid for your apartment and man, you know, I don't want to fucking anybody's flex. You're right. But at the same time, if, if you understand that, right, if you understand I was put on the board ahead of everybody else, I was born on third base. That's, again, that should be on your control. Right. But I think you need some failure to understand that. So if you're grateful for what you have, you will swing and miss and, and be accountable. Right. Cause you can't really control what you have. You can't control where you start. Right. You can control your start. You control where you're going. So if for how you respond along the way. Yeah. And, and the kind of person you are to somebody was born on third base, I think also will dictate your perception from the, from the eyes of others. If you feel you are greater than fuck, we're all human beings dog. Like nobody greater than nobody. Right. You know, everybody's out there struggling. And all of us, especially in this area of the, the pale blue dot, we all believe in capitalism. So, so the fact that you were born on third base means everybody's doing their job and the whole system's working. Like you can't think you're, when you start getting like, I, I never use this word. I feel bad even saying it deserve. When you start doing the deserve mentality about deserve this, fuck it. What the fuck do you deserve? Yeah. That's crazy. You know, have you earned this? Have you earned it? And if you feel as if you haven't, what steps steps are you going to take to earn it? If you're born on third and you feel bad about it, take some steps to feel good about it. I don't know what that is. But if you're born on third and you feel you deserve it, for me, that's fucking sprinting through a mind field dog. Yeah, that's not a good path. And I don't, I don't ever, I don't know. I don't want to focus on many of you terms like a hundred thousand and a 10 million or a million into a billion. That's good investing. That's, I mean, that's the system you, you, you learned how to work the system. It's just in the process. If you think, you think you're better than yeah, murky waters, man. And in my perspective, well, it's just a terrible perspective anyway. Like you're just like, because it's all right, so I'll kind of frugese. Like this is paper I'll use or whatever. It's digital ones and zeros. Like, all right, if it melts down, are you really better than anybody? You know it. A lot of times it's also a defense mechanism. You know, you pretend that you deserve it. You pretend you're better than other people. Because maybe you don't feel enough for again, everybody's walking through their old mile, but like I don't feel validated. Or I want attention or I don't know. I don't know. Man. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. It was crazy hanging out with stuff. McMahon and how human she was and hilarious and human. I was telling her because I was telling her like, man, you know, I always wanted to be a pro wrestler when I was a kid. And then I realized I wasn't going to be tall enough and I wasn't going to be big enough. And then lately I've been meeting these guys and they're not that huge. And when I tell them that they go, look at me, you know, Sammy Zane, hilarious guy, literally told me that he's like, you could have done it. I'm like, yeah, I guess I could actually done it. You could probably still do it. And I was telling you stuff that. She goes, you can do a little something. I can hit a super kick on anybody at any time from any. With super kick. It's Shawn Michaels. Like a finishing move. It's like a fucking, you would literally, you would faint from laughter because you actually not a fucking kick through a wall. But it's a, it's a kick and the goal is not to hit the game. Right. Exactly. Come to the trail close. And she's so cool. She goes, oh, that'd be funny. If next time, you know, I'm with Triple H, you just super kick me out of nowhere. I'll sell it. I'll fall down the whole thing. I'm like, I don't know. Stuff. But it is crazy. There we go. There it is. Perfect. Yeah. Man, this is your honor. Okay. So a guy flies through the air and you kind of catch him. That's just one example. Like that, that's a really good example right here. But it could be from standing anywhere. It's just pretty much that high, that high. Do you can do that? I can do that. I can do flexible like that. I'm like, well, I at least I think I am. I don't know. We'll see. I wasn't throwing a, I was throwing a rocket, the tree the other day for the first time in forever. And I'm not coming up about 15 feet short of it. There it is. There it is. That's what she looks like. Yeah. Whoa. That looks real. Yeah. That's really it. That's on there. Two of the best right there. It's on there. Yep. You really got that kind of flexibility? Yep. I just slap your leg at the same time and it makes everybody actually think that you did it. I did it to somebody you'd be like, dude, you just fucking kicked them because it's slap the leg. It's like stomped around when you punch. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's magic in the business, man. Yeah. There it is. I want to see you out there. I wrestled with my pillow for like eight hours a day. as a kid. I would do the entrances. I would record off of the cassette player. Remember how you used it afterwards? Dude, I had a whole league in our basement. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't need the pillows because I had four brothers. We had belts, a league, personas, like, and in one persona, I would get my ass kicked all the time. And then there was one persona that could not fucking lose. We kept standings and stuff. Yeah. Yeah. It's I don't know, man. I don't know. That's a very brothers and sisters were all much older, but we had a music class teacher in my grade school that didn't give a fuck about his job. He would just sit in the corner and play piano the whole time and let the kids do whatever we wanted. And again, we had entrance music. We were all different people all the time. We'd run it back again. The entire 45 minutes jumping off of desks, cabinets, chairs. It's crazy how many injuries didn't happen. It's amazing how resilient kids can be when we were that. Because energy of youth, just bulletproof. God. It doesn't make sense how arms and legs and heads and necks weren't broken. It's also don't weigh that much back then. Yeah. That's your part. It's so full energy. Man, I can tell I'm getting old because I can be like, is that chair okay? I'm going to be sitting for a while. Am I going to be right? It's going to be good. Oh, man, this bed's going to kill me. Yeah. It's laying down like this. The bean bag. Oh, it's been four hours in that thing. It's a cart me off. I think I just sleep on the ground rather than the bean bag. Yeah. Yeah. Back then it seemed like the better option. It was the better option. Yeah. Probably. That's hilarious though. Yeah. Have you talked to them about possibly doing something? I mean, no, not exactly. At one point there was a little chatter, but come on, dude. I think you come up with a roll. So rumbles right around the corner. I have big shoes to fill over. 30 entrance when you need bodies. Yeah. I show speed did a good job about man. And he got drilled out of his boots. He took this. when he's when he's bodies yeah i show speed did a good job but man he got drilled out of his boots he took the streamer famous stream internet guy he took what's called a bump from hell he got speared at the was that the rumble yeah yeah he was yeah he's got a game he does some wild shit he does he got in the cage with Dan the hangman hooker yeah and he's like he's game for anything yeah he has like a kinesthetic awareness like he's obviously an athlete yeah and he's brave like that look at this shit watches mother just leave screen say it oh man oh my god i can't fake that oh my god but like you also have to the reason that looks so good a lot of that is because of brawn but also a lot of that is because of i show speed he committed to the fall and really tried to fall with snap and with quickness like he's he's good man he really is good and like you said like i've seen a lot of other stuff he does he does well he'll get in there mess around yeah well he really sparred with Dan hooker and Dan beat the shit out of him but he hung in there yeah yeah it's just crazy enough to try you know it's also interesting these youtube guys they're just becoming famous and there was no avenue for them before you know that they would have had to have been cast in a tv show yeah become something a limited spot yeah and now they're doing it completely on their own and becoming huge i mean he's got like 50 million instagram followers or something crazy yeah and and a bunch of content and a bunch of avenue to match that and like and always working always doing something put some stuff out there those guys hustle yeah it's all the content creators out there people don't understand the hours that they're they they may end up getting some financial reward but when you break it down to hourly wage they're working 24 hours a day seven days a week like they don't stop because it's a lot of the content they make will have short shelf life it's not they're not they're not essentially putting gone with the wind out in the universe like it's like you got you only as good as your next one not the your last one or the one you did it's like you're only as good as what you're doing in five minutes from now and if you drop off the map someone will replace you oh my god yeah there's so many fucking streamers there's so many people that are doing content they they work hard they do they work hard and even even the ones where it seems like a man to a but perspective of like i don't understand this there's still the effort that goes into that and it's not just what you saw it's like okay you gotta have a repeat performance then then you gotta keep coming and keep coming and keep coming like i do a movie and like i said it's out in 18 months in 18 months they've already put out 10 000 videos right it's it's bananas it is interesting that nobody saw that comment too nobody ever thought that that was gonna be a thing i just think it's because we get so used to stuff we get so used to consuming in a certain way when something is new for us it's like oh man i don't know if that's gonna take off but there are young people who are experiencing everything at the same time i mean like no this is cool right it's way easier to do this also he's really young and when you start young there's not a lot of expectations on you no you can kind of just do whatever you want and if it works great young and courageous yeah like good to go for it yeah yeah that's it's it's also a great example for other people that they're thinking like i'm kind of entertaining i just don't have an avenue let me just start making videos you got a phone yeah you got a chance and that crazy yeah it's all you have to do is have a phone it's nice you see the videos where he was uh sprinting with uh Ashton Forbes you know that the super jacked guy that does that morning routine that everybody made fun of because he has this like morning routine where he dunks his face on water and then someone hands him his gold watch and he puts it out it's like really kind of silly yeah you know and he had a whole series of races with him because he couldn't believe that this youtuber guy could beat him because he's like this fucking super jacked ripped guy who a lot of his online content is him running and he just looks like a force of nature and i show speed beat him like three times in these races but he didn't want to believe that he lost so we wanted to do it again let's do it again let's do it again and i show speed talking shit to him he did it again sorry yeah it's very funny it's very funny because when you look at the guy like this guy looks like he can run like a horse and i show speed is actually faster than them i think he's printed an actual Olympic sprinter i mean he started fucking around a little bit but he held his own that's crazy yeah that's crazy he was like right there with an Olympic sprinter that's nuts he won the gold the guy that he raised really that's he's like right next to him that's crazy like and he's not even fucking training like that guy is imagine if he was like that fucking guy if he wanted to like fully invest himself into sprinting a mat he's only what 20 20 years old that's why really imagine if that kid fully invested in that and then became an Olympic gold medalist as well so that's that's where that's where my mind goes as well it seems like you can but also why why not because it'll make it streams even bigger will it i don't know i mean or will sprinting against the gold medalist getting in the cage with a fighter getting in the ring with champion going to that guy's house and and best thing you may just don't think like he should keep doing that he shouldn't he shouldn't go into one he hit the lane he's in i think he's doing pretty well right it's almost better losing to the fastest metal i buy that much or like so i can tell by watching that you like i love potential and you see that you're like oh my god potential right i could he could win it all it's fine in video with him sprinting against that ashden guy because it's good like wild for what this guy's got the world by the nuts right if you should do what he's doing exactly i only know him from that appearance at the royal rumble like he got booked on the rumble because he has a big following i'm watching the rumble i go who's this i show speed guy i go wow that kid took a hell of a bump now i know him this ashden forbs guy no look at the way this guy's built oh my he's talking oh man he felt he's yelling 40 million people set right the number of views in the corner 40 million unbelievable wow oh man look at that wow yeah there is a bunch of times and the other did didn't that other guy he played football right not in the NFL but i think like college football are look at this fucking size of them too the other guys fucking super jacked like that's this whole thing is online content is him running being super jacked it is to deal with i show speed talking shit to him and he's saying like really some of this the first one i slipped second one you barely beat me that's running again why gotta beat you three times see when i see that right let's go again that's hilarious so i see this and be like this kid should be a wrestler right because he is athletic and he can talk shit and back it up my god this kid would he would be a 20 time champion whatever no he should do this are they running barefoot on the fucking concrete so oh really okay that's pretty close yeah but he started before yeah started before me it still won't like he should he should be doing that yeah but like you see the sprinting potential i see ww potential he should do neither he should just do that right and just already just have a crush he just crush it it probably want him to do it again oh my i think he did a thing he just went to like the performance center yeah and like yeah he's really good really good it's got great instincts he's got great timing that's amazing yeah and he's only 20 yeah there's no like this is like full multi camera really good shooting then he's speed versus pros i think because he's kind of doing that i do you just yeah like where he goes he goes to people's like the x4 he's 6.2 million subscribers on youtube that's i oh yes i think i think like he should just do that you know whatever you ever he's doing it i mean he's obviously doing it does he have a team behind him that's i'm heading to show shit no probably all of you guys learning how to do flips oh that's crazy so he's really in it yeah and i think it's just like short for a few days and then go on to the next discipline wow so he does everything smart very smart it's been all summer going to a city every day everything was live stream for like 24 hours straight they'd go to a city show up what's the coolest thing to do in the city and do it like that's like what kind of shit was he doing to go to the fair right all rides trial the games bunch of kids fall around next day they were here in Austin going to terry black's i think he went and did stand up with mark norman and like in new york city that's cool that's cool man that's wild that he's so young too only 20 yeah that talented and just just brave and courageous and going for it like that's regardless of what you and i think she's doing exactly what you should be doing you know you should just keep doing that and obviously not getting in his own way no right now all the things you're saying like capitalizing on every opportunity yet to be told yeah story it's still gonna what it's still gonna a little life left oh yeah yeah yeah yeah a lot of life left yeah yeah but we'll see he's doing he's doing great so far yeah amazing um i think we were wrapped this up this fucking awesome podcast i really enjoyed it thank you very much it is um it is a real big opportunity for you to have me on here because uh the the the ww folks that you have had i think i'm still i don't like it one date let left but i still think i'm the active one i hope uh this experience has been good for you guys how's it amazing i hope you have more of the the guys and gals from us in on your show absolutely everyone of them's got a great story absolutely absolutely and i think your philosophy is contagious and i think it's really good for people to hear and i think there's a lot of young people out there that are really going to benefit from a lot of the things you said because i think it's rock solid that means a lot coming from you thank you so much i appreciate it tell me you're the man awesome thank you guys appreciate it just call it bye everybody to call out there