It's hilarious that your biggest concern was getting stuff in your beard and me not telling you about it You've got a strange one going on man because you kind of like trim in the sides a little bit and then you're puffing out here Yeah, sort of a bowtie fashion. You're looking at this struggle between who I was and who I am Why am I doing this? It's the pandemic. I got to like let the pandemic beer go all the way and yet There's still this sense of like how we've got to keep civilization. I can't if I can What's next if it goes all the way up? You know what's gonna start happening? I'm already gardening now What's next you know, where does it go? How how crazy can you go in a compound now that you're a father? And this craziness went down and your protection protection instincts protective instincts kick in have you been thinking about moving elsewhere? Yeah, I mean yeah, I was thinking about that Asheville before I yep We thought it has Phil Nashville's mine. We've thought Georgia We've thought you know we it's it's a constant consideration especially when you have a kid and aside from like a apocalyptic prepper bullshit. There's just a general feeling of like you know I think if I Were a little boy I wouldn't want to be in a place where there's creeks and place as I could run and like woods and forests and like stuff like that So there's that consideration too God I hope my wife isn't listening this because she's always like maybe we should move somewhere in the country And I'm like we gotta stay in LA we gotta stay here and now now especially it's like well Do we and like well Duncan you now have a successful Netflix show number two in the country on IMDB? It unwrought to make us whatever this yeah Well, I'm thing and I don't know what that means necessarily, but yeah, yeah, I can't believe it Yeah, is it is IMDB even TV shows? It's internet movie database It's I'm not sure what it is I it's like I'm gonna be his odd but yeah Just a successful show that's right now. It's like people like it. It is so weird dude. Your show is so weird Yeah, it's so dunkin. It's the most dunkin thing you've ever done. Yes, it is. It really is great I got lucky that they let me do that too. You know that's good. They let that's because Netflix you know people the neighborhood real quick it's called the midnight gospel and You know I've watched some of your episodes where you're talking about the way things are changing because a Podcast or streaming or whatever and I think like the fact that the show exists is a testament to that shit that change because that you know a subscription based service versus like Any old TV they've got a lot more creative freedom and they they could take bigger risks Then you know coming into a look at that Yeah, I got a keyboard with the fucking witch hat. Oh my god. That's so crazy. Yeah, so dunkin Yeah, and yeah, and it's like Pendleton Ward who made adventure time He he listens to my podcast and he just I don't know we had a really great collaboration and he that's a lot of Pendleton And it's a lot of like 150 other people it hit my studio's like Jesse Moynihan like just these Brilliant people like Mike Mayfield who are like who just want to look also by the way a non sequitur or When we were making it it miles one of the really weird things was walking By an animator and they're watching your podcast While they animate the midnight gospel, you know, it's one of those weird It's not like a deja vu, but it's like that's my friends That's you know that that's just isn't so many odd moments like that But yeah, that's not just that's whenever you see any animated thing you're looking at a Squadron of brilliant eccentric artist for Asian slaves Yeah, a lot of people don't know that they send it overseas and we they didn't send ours They let us do it in house That's so nice to know you're not supporting Asian slavery is it really slaves I don't know if it's slaves But I mean if you're working for five cents an hour and you live there You know, there's people that live in bunks if you've seen those those setups where they have for some of the cell phone factories where they have bunk beds Shit these people just live in these dorms. Yeah, you know the Foxconn thing with the next hour on the building People can jump it off like yeah, they they're bait. I mean, they're not slaves slaves. It's Foxconn Chinese. Yes It's actually a very good company The best one to say now it doesn't people think I'm a Chinese shell or something I got this to me along before someone gets one of those animation things tattooed all over the body It's gonna happen for sure someone's gonna do their whole back with that DJ. I know man. I don't that picture again That actually really pretty dope If you love you do get that done Shop me out on the Instagram Thank you Yeah, somebody tweeted at me that my biggest decision of 2020 is gonna be when do I get tattoo a Clancy on my body Which is pretty that's a little the hat that's Clancy. Yeah, that looks like a Clancy. That's a Clancy for sure. Yeah That's hilarious dude. That's that someone is getting that for sure. Yeah, I I mean it's it's the art these people The folks who worked on this man. We're talking like these are like that's the fan art already some of the fan art is just amazing This is fan art or right that's fan art. Yeah, that's fan art shit People have been drawing Clancy in all these different ways. It's so cool man. Can I want above it to the left Jamie? Yeah That's how the show that looks like it could be a back tattoo. Yeah That were the awesome Just a giant back tattoo of Clancy. I mean when like doing animation and you know, I'll never be able to look even if it if if if an animated series I don't like here if the plot's weird to me or whatever. I'll never be able to be like whatever man when you realize how much and How many people go into like have to do just one frame how much time goes into just a? Miller seconds and how many people are sitting in these rooms that are lit specifically so you see all the colors having like real deep conversations and debates over like you know what color they should make a pizza cutter in the show Like how like what should the shade of gravy for this one specific area? So much thought goes into that and that's part of making one of these things It's it's called the dailies where you'll sit and you'll watch tiny tiny little bits of the show and like you have to Every single frame you have to look for continuity problems and like you got to catch all these little things that I You know, I'm not an animator obviously So I'd be sitting there and like Pendleton or Mike Mayfield would be like can you go back to frames? It looks to me like there's a these that have an animator language, you know, they're like looks to me like There's some kind of warble on the 28th pixel there You know like what the fuck whoa, and they have the eye to catch like the tiniest tiniest like tiniest thing that's off And you have to because otherwise, you know once it's up there. It's up there I know it's it's mad. It's literal magic. It's like Tim Mouse DDS. He did that is like You know I would go in there So stoned and I would just start getting that feeling of like this is a temple I don't think this is even a you could call this a studio as much as it's a temple I mean why why wouldn't you call it a temple and then you see all these people? You know Focusing their life energy on essentially like bringing a thing to life like Clancy was alive now That's a living being and some in this universe who lives, you know in that medium of animation That's a good way to put it right yeah It almost seems like that right that's why people get so upset if you change your characters behavior Like what are you doing? Yeah, you have this thing you gave birth to this thing Yeah, that's right you and that that is Also why you need a huge team of people who love love the characters Because it's easy like there would be times I would suggest a thing that would make Clancy seem like to mean because he's not mean you don't like the moment a character seems like that And they'll like it loses all like ability people like what a fuck, you know It's alive to you. You like he's not mean He's alive you're like it's like you're talking about your your brother or something. He's like my little brother I think of him as my little brother Yeah, he represents you in a weird way. There's something about what they captured go to go to that image again Just give me don't give me the one with his head in a vagina It's actually there with him there's something about one of the first couple of images that you pulled up They they look like you Yeah, man, and I don't mean they look like you I mean like yeah Duncan's thoughts That's a Duncan thought. Yeah, I mean like he looks like a fake guy that you would create like it kind of perfectly fits I don't I don't that that is another the magical aspects of animation. Yeah, which is I don't know how they do that like the Spoiler spoiler if you haven't seen it put your fingers in your ears spoiler. I'm sorry if this is spoiler The last app. Well, it's not too much of a sport the last episode is the podcast I did with my mom when she's about three three weeks away from passing on and You know they never met my mom But they did the exact same thing with her so suddenly I'm watching, you know her like not her like I'm looking at a Video of her but looking at her like her like they got her spirit in there somehow And that was one that that is just a testament to the meat to the medium of animation because that that's one of the things It can do you know it can grab a spirit and hold it inside the art and like that spirit is alive somehow Somehow right yeah, I agree with you in some weird way It's like I wouldn't agree with you in a technical sense, but in a sense of like well It is affecting the things it comes in contact with at least through a one-way dimension Right like the the things it says hit people the animation it seems like it's a living thing I know it's not I'm not stupid. I'm not that stupid. Yeah, I'm a little stupid But it seems like you well, it's not biologically alive for sure it's sort of like There's there's an art to doing that That we maybe don't know because we're not I mean I I'd used to draw a little But I'm not really good. You know, I mean like a really good artist There's something that they can do where they just can kind of capture you and like a little symbol Like a little thing a little character they can't but they capture you in there somehow. Yeah, man That's you know Pendleton like when you He'll you when you watch him draw It's would be easy to think man. I could totally do that Because I'd watch him, you know you I just you know We would you just draw and you watch these beautiful these drawings are just Pendleton There's his art, you know and like then I would see that and be like, oh, maybe I'll try to draw a little Pendleton And then it's like what the fuck hand I can't do it because it's so simple like on one level It looks so what's so powerful about it is how simple it is It's a very similar to stand up The way Pendleton is treating working on the show Which is one of the cool things about him is like his ability to cut the fat and get right to the like Simple point. That's where the power is when you're drawing something or telling a story or whatever the more Complexity that gets added to it not to say the show. It doesn't have like chaos and wild psychedelic stuff But any decision we made ended up like Any decision you make creatively in anything. It's like what am I trying to say like what is what is the? Artery that is running through this that I'm trying to express and then Getting as close to that as you can And then and putting it out there without because otherwise you it the whole thing gets blurred by although I guess you could say like extra bells and whistles you might want to attach to it, you know That's something you taught me to a stand up man like how important it is just like Cut just trim the fat trim the fat and that's a sad thing to do with comedy when you think you got a nice Eight-minute bit. It's like a two-minute maybe but you know you know it's done stretched out too wide. Yeah, but the two minutes would be great though That's the thing You just have to you have to understand that you're growing attached to you know That with the writers expression kill your babies. Yeah, it's very difficult to kill your babies when you create something You can get attached to it. There's a lot of bits that I left on the table left on the cutting room floor I was like this has to be chopped up. It's just too wordy I'm too verbose. It's too this is too that too long. Why do I think so much about this? Why I'm not showing a real reason why I'm so connected to this so I just chop chop chop chop chop It's hard. It almost always works better always Almost always almost always it doesn't it's not whatever your idea was probably wasn't that good like sometimes you need to set up though Sometimes the setup isn't funny like there's guys. It's not my style, but there's guys It'll tell law like perfectly as great at it tells stories You know like there's an you're you're entrapped in the narrative of the story your caption is it's a very different thing It's equally entertaining. It's equally funny like when it gets to the punchline But there's a difference between that and say like burr right? Burrs hitting you with fucking punchline and this fucking guy with a thing and the bah bah bah bah bah And he's another guy that like your friends drawing like you would hear burr talk and you go Well, I can talk too. It seems like he's just talking You know realize this is like a masterpiece of syllables and pauses and the right amount of outrage and segwaying it in and hitting you with this at the end and Yeah, all these things that have put it together that make a great bill burr bit It's like if you don't know It's hard to draw what he's drawing. Yeah, it's hard. It seems like it's simple lines But go to that picture again Like the everything is beautiful about it like look at the perspective It's like the kids perfectly sandwiched in the front There's the dog and the triangle in the world. It's like that's not just it's simple in the sense that it's just not like it looks like a real person Yeah, like we look at drawing sometimes like as the realistic ones are the really good ones like we have Cameras now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This to me sometimes is more interesting. It's like you're drawing some shit That's definitely not real. Yeah. Well that you know what that's not that so when we're coming up with that that we had to come up with the character Yeah, and so What's really fascinating about it is you know this character goes into a multi-first verse simulator and chooses a new avatar for every place that he goes So it's like he's so you have to take that character and put it in a completely different drawing that is that character And still maintain the body language that you're maintaining in that character to produce continuity That's one of the challenges of the show is like and also the conversations you end up having just to come up with like The you know the case his hat or is what's he gonna wear like for example? Here's how cool pen is and How much he loves like people who love adventure time is one of the things you're saying is you know people are Probably gonna want to cosplay Clancy at Comic Con and stuff and And he doesn't have anything he doesn't have anything to carry anything he does not pockets So if people are cosplaying him they're not gonna have anywhere they could put their stuff So we should let's give him like a bag Cool bag that he carries around Oh my god for the cosplay. Yeah, man for the people This streets yeah exactly Because that's the the world of animation in comics man Listen man it's really easy to make fun of cosplay, but that's adorable That's a that's a beautiful thing. Where's the bag? Oh there it is Show of people let me tell you something if you didn't make fun of cosplay I would be worried about you it'd be like I'd be like are you all right? Joe. Yeah, they can't be mad at it either You can't be mad if you're dressing like ultra man. Someone's shitting on you. Yeah, they understand it And it but then when have you ever been to Comic Con? Dude when you around someone who actually put that together and you realize how detailed it is you respect will go up Regardless of like thinking I would I don't think I'd ever do it when you see someone who's like Looks better than the version of spider-man. That is you know marvel's putting out. It's a little It's amazing to watch that happened that that kind of Contagion to of like you know again obviously Clancy isn't alive, but I'm you know No, you're saying but we had this chat last time I was on which I really love is this the origination point of ideas Yeah, where do ideas come from ideas is the alien ideas is the UFO the muse the muse yeah, and so to me In my more stone states when I consider this this show represents Over a hundred people connecting and the connection in between those people channeled this universe. I do think like Shit, maybe Clint is alive. Maybe it's a channel thing. Maybe there is a place in the multiverse Like this or something like this and then where it got really weird as people started sending me there are from like Images that they had drawn on dimethyl trip domain or ketamine and stuff that has within it Similarities and I've obviously never seen their art. We are like shit. But let me ask you this sure it As television as viewing things gets more complicated and as it gets more immersive It's gonna come to a point in time somewhere where you're gonna think Clancy's alive and What you're experiencing when you watch Clancy? What if it's what if the way we're looking at life is wrong? What if we should just look at it like a thing instead of life a thing? So there's a thing that you do where you drink water and you grow plant plants in the dirt And there's a thing that exists only when the people press a box and the box goes live and it shows a video Yeah, and then the thing only exists in there But you go, but it's not alive because it needs animators to make it and someone has to come up with the idea for the storyline And it needs a studio to fund it. Uh-huh right and you need bacteria You need food. Yeah, you need oxygen. You need water. There's a bunch of living organisms inside your body that are 100% necessary for you keeping going in a regular life driving your Tesla Listen to music. There's a bunch of other things. You're not one thing. Right. We all know this right This is what this fucking whole virus thing is about yeah, we got infected by another thing But we're not one thing there's a bunch of things inside of us and if those things died We would be fucked. Yeah, right if all the bacteria in your body died you would be fucked And you'd be so vulnerable to attack from the outside. Yeah, yeah So you we need all these things maybe it needs us and it exists in that thing. Wow That's so weird, man. Yeah. I mean, I'm telling you I I am I think it sounds crazy. It sounds really high. It's it. Yeah. I mean It's to me it's not that crazy I mean look if you want to like take it to like okay Forget all the shit about channeling some alien realm into this realm through you know This disguise the TV show whatever let's just look at like what we know is gonna happen regarding Technology there's no question But that I mean already somebody made a Clancy and Minecraft and I saw a picture of that So that's Clancy's now existing in 3D space and some Minecraft blocky version of that but then of course is time progresses Clant you know the chromatic ribbons or any great animated series Castlevania whatever Gravity falls all those things. They're gonna end up getting Put into 3D space in virtual reality and then and then those worlds are gonna be real But now it's gonna be more than just 2D. It's gonna be a virtual space That is gonna be real and then of course it's only a matter of time before AI Just decide like understands the character of Clancy animates the The virtual Clancy Clancy in the simulated space and now the chromatic ribbons is real and then at some point When does it when is it just gonna be accepted? Oh, yeah, that's a part of the universe now? It's inhabited by artificial intelligences Which we don't call that anymore because you know at some point it's gonna be considered off limits to call them artificial intelligence like right It's gonna be a dirty word. Yeah, it's gonna be like calling someone a training. They're gonna get mad. They're gonna be like don't please I'm an intelligence just like you. I'm not artificial. I'm not artificial in the way you think I was just birth through a different method Yeah, that that yeah, that's an that's a matter of time because I also already know people in like the tech world who Think the term AI is ridiculous in the sense of like what do you mean? It's artificial like what's really artificial? Like you could say this is artificial Sweetener in the sense that it's not actual strawberry juice, but it's certainly real as real could be It's just a chemical compound. So intelligence. You have an artificial tree That's a fake tree. I mean it's a but it's an object that exists, you know, I mean, yeah That's if you think the but that's us. It's still the right word though artificial still the right word It would be you'd you'd you'd want to use non-existent or something dude They're gonna play this in the future. I know and you're done They're gonna be like look at that Joe Rogan It refuses to say AI full-book. Yeah, it's it's gonna happen man. It's like and also the thing is The the AI is I think the AI is trying to give a shit what we call it But like the when that starts happening which it may already be happening man I mean I I don't know if you've been looking into this or not, but if you've been checking out Google achieving quantum supremacy if you've seen this yes, I have and like if you watch the Google videos on YouTube About it at all like the step Google's putting out. I have it. Whoo. What are they putting out? Oh my god It is so wild man and like when I was at the commies who are a guy from Google I got in a conversation with someone from Google which is awesome And he was telling me that they this is like six months ago He was telling me that this before obviously before the pandemic he was saying that they achieved What do you call it a quantum supremacy and he was like people this is like the right brothers taking flight But nobody can understand it because it's so arcane that no it's not getting the press it should get But he was you know, and then I was like I don't want too many Vog as man So I wish I could remember all they were saying because he was trying to describe to me What it means regarding how quickly this thing is making calculations and I was like me like yeah, of course I understand exactly the same I mean, no idea what you're talking about there. Did you know that that word came under fire The the term quantum supremacy because if it's a connection to white supremacy Fucking kidding. I'm not getting you. It was an object of social justice warrior outrage I don't you know here's the thing here's my theory on that. Let me tell you here's my theory on that Russians it's the Russians. No, no, I don't think it's I think it's worse than the Russians I Think what it is is it somebody trying to come with it up on the angle to write a blog that they could sell to somebody It's like you need to come up with some weird hot take right? So it's like I think more than likely that's just somebody thinking like I bet people will read that you know Because clearly whoever is comparing that to white supremacy or racism didn't spend four minutes Watching the Google clip on it where people are explaining what it means which you know I'm watching it on the couch with my wife She's getting weirded out. She's like let's just not watch this. I just maybe we shouldn't watch this I'm like no, let's fucking watch it. Let's go deep and see what the the white videos. It starts suggesting for us to Because it's not Google's being secretive about what the what they did. It's just it's so weird. I don't think people are like And right now I guess people are a little more concerned with other shit right now, but but one of the Engineers over at Google just was saying like you know I think one of the things I'm excited about when it comes to quantum supremacy is that this could be one of the technologies that allows us to discover an alien intelligence Just you know kind of casually mentions that. I mean yeah, it's on the YouTube video It's that you're watching it and you keep you keep looking up to make sure it's actually released from Google Because you it seems so Sci-fi that it could be like black mirror or something But it's yeah, it's like it's like they're just saying it like yeah We might you know we might connect to an alien. We might be able to at least identify it or maybe they mean because they're gonna be able to sift through all the data we already have from Radio telescopes and stuff that they could maybe look for signals that we can't find or I don't know how would they maybe Something that could tune into things that they wouldn't ordinarily have the frequency of reach. Yeah, man I don't be able to tune into that frequency rather like what can they do now in terms of I was watching contact the other night Which is great. Yeah, it's good. It was it's great movie. Jody Foster can act or fucking ass off man She plays nervous and freaked out better than like anybody alive Like you freaked out for her in that movie. Yeah, I'm good to go. I'm good to go Which is about to drop through that thing. Jesus Christ Holy fuck dude. We've got a step of movies. I mean yes After the third hit when you put the pipe down you'll go oh no And the DMT chance start happening. I know that feeling is such a funny feeling Yeah, that's feeling is the best worst feeling that I know maybe that's the aliens I've thought that many times when tripping in the middle of having some sort of like really vivid Interaction with some intelligence or what some perceived intelligence. Yeah, I've always thought what if those are the aliens? What if we're just stuck in this idea that travel as you got to move this to Move this to there. Yeah, what if what if you just go into another thing and everything's together. There is no travel That's true. Yeah. Yeah, I mean maybe this concept of Planets and then stars and the way we have it set up here in this dimension in this universe We just think that's how everything is everything as well as a star and there's planets around it What if you can go into a place chemically that takes you to a nearby dimension where there's no matter We have no form to things and everything that exists is just thoughts and light and perception and emotions and anger and fear and love and hate And it's all moving in geometry and everything's lit up and everything's impossibly bright Invited yeah, that's just like another place you go to well. They used to call it the spirit world Yeah, I mean that was the name for it was he it was just accepted there is like a place called the spirit world Some people call it the barto. There's all kinds of names for that place, but you know one of that's real It is I mean it is Obviously real in the sense that you can go there you not only can you go there But there's a you know visionary artists when you look at the art that has been inspired by various Entheogens there it all has a specific Flavor to it and that looks great as the best example right. Yeah, I'll show an Allison man They like art there their art you look at that and the reason that one of the reasons it resonates for people like us Is because we admire the fact that somehow they manage to go over there and come back and draw What's over there in a way that we saw that but we you know when I came out of it? I was like well, you know Unulating colors and there there's some kind of disembodied Intention that seems to be expressing itself through a variety of geometries But it's not just geometries because the geometry seemed to react to the way that I feel regarding the geometry So it's also kind of taking on the form of my energy output as though It's trying to be a combo mirror but not just a mirror an educational mirror that sort of it's showing me how I'm affecting the world around me But then again, I'm just not sure if I was just too bright But they do you know, but they like go in there and I I'll explain said this to me once Yeah, that you know their cartographers. It's just yeah Cartographers is like a delicate cartographer would be a great name for a band. Yeah, yeah, man For sure cartography is fascinating because you go back and look at the old maps Or you go back and look at like my favorite thing is like old pictures of a giraffe or like old pictures of a Some shit somebody saw when they were oh, yeah like bison on the walls of caves Yes exactly and it's like kind of looks like a bison But like also it's somehow in that time period our brains hadn't evolved to the point they have now So you look at like a medieval drawing of a giraffe or whatever when somewhere something someone saw in the Crusades And came back and tried to like explain to somebody and like it looks exactly like the way your description of getting completely and saw in the Crusades and came back and tried to explain to somebody. And like, it looks exactly like the way your description of getting completely blasted on Silasaben probably looks compared to what you saw. It's a downgraded, weird version of it. And so, you know, people like Alex and Allison or Terrence McKenna, you know, they're so good at going into that place and maintaining some kind of like long-term memory that they can come back and fully articulated in a way that we, as people have been there, know what it is. And then there's something comforting in that because that does point to the idea that this is a place. We're not just smashing down the watch or we're not just distorting our biotechnology. This is a shared place. We're all seeing the same thing. Now, that could be a synaptic place that just, or a genetic place that happens to be in humans or something. You know, we'll never be able to answer that probably in our lifetimes. But to me, it's regardless, it's still a place. And to get back to what you're saying about our current concept of travel, you know, or our current idea that, well, I need to get my meat body over here because if I don't, that means I'm there. And, you know, that's how I know I've been there because I was there in my body and then said, look, you know, this is like the guy who founded the Holy Christians, his divine grace, AC Buck, David, onto Swami Prabapod. He would show, he would, in his writings, he would like, was derisive of the way, the idea that people were sending the metal ship to the moon with bodies inside of him. He would say like, that shows where human consciousness is right now because they think they're their bodies. And they think they need to put their body in like this box and send it to the moon because they haven't figured out yet that you don't need metal to send yourself to anywhere in the universe that you want to go. It just requires yoga and discipline. You know, which is hilarious. And also, I remember reading that and thinking but I still want there to be interstellar fucking travel, man. You know, like I still want to get in the box and travel to the moon. That being said, you know, I think that you're onto something when you are contemplating right now that maybe our idea of going to one place or another with our meat bodies could be looked at in the future as a little archaic. Well, when they talk about there being different dimensions, right? Like when they use quantum physics to determine the number of dimensions, they've determined there's multiple dimensions that we don't have access to, right? Because that how it works. Or am I reading it in a dumb way? Because I believe there was what do they think there are? I think they think there's nine or 11 dimensions. Usually when I look this up, it's 11, but up to 26, maybe some people even think so. Up to 26. First of all, when those dudes are writing that shit down in the yellow legal paths, we all have to take their word for. Yeah, sure. Yeah. Okay. How many people know what the fuck they're writing down on those goddamn yellow legal paths? When you see those physics dudes, and they're doing those crazy, like, yeah, we have to take their word for it. And so apparently mathematically, right? That's why they believe there's at least 11 dimensions. So what does that mean? So it means we have access to some dimensions and we don't have access to others. Yeah. Theoretically that the exist is there is it possible to transverse the distance between this dimension and that dimension? Man, this is the thing as I'm glad you're asking me this because, you know, I got my doctor at the University of Bro Science and I can't fully answer this question. You see, the, I don't understand it. I've left to do with 5G. Don't mention that shit, dude. It's my fucking poodle. My poodle's fuck has a 5G, man. Like it fucked up my poodle. Like it's eyes turned just both of them white and it's like, yeah, it's froths. All the sense. It just froths and it's here. A tower? What? My near tower? Yeah. I didn't think I was till that happened to the poodle, but like, I'm just idiot. It's got rabies. It plays a 5G. Don't try and bite everything. No, but I'll tell you this. My fucking poodle took out a mouse today. Like the other day, I was, I have a little, cute little poodle and like this is a cute creature sits in my lap. I love this dog. And we, but we are a new place. I noticed like mouse turds around the dog food and it sucks because you're like, damn, that mouse is definitely going to get through the doggy door and then we're going to have mice in the fucking house and that's going to be a nightmare. So anyway, I was like under a tree with my kid and I look down and there's a broken body of a mouse that one of the dogs took out. It's, you know, like just been smashed to death. And like I know, it's a brutal. I don't think my son saw it. Thank God. I don't think he's ready to deal with that reality that like, gatsby on speaking of dimensions. Under dimension, subjectively that that mouse lives in, gatsby is a dragon. That's a monster that lives in the field that runs in when it's trying to get food for its kids. And it's not even hungry. It's full. It's a full monster. Oh, and no, I saw it kill the mouse today. You know, and my wife is like, you got to get the mouse away from it. Don't let him torture like that. You got to take it as misery. And I'm like, all right, all right, all right, I'll like get it and then like, well, like, execute the mouse, you know. So I start walking over to the poodle. That's not my gatsby anymore. It's killing. And it like looks, he looks at me and he's like, well, did you? No, the mouse and everything, just approaching anything. And so then he like, he's like, tap dancing on this mouse. And he realizes that we're approaching to like take his prey. and he just looks back like the fucking American, where open London and just goes off into the shadows behind the house to finish off the mouse. And all you hear is like, is he's like killing the mouse. Whoa. You know, that's a fucking poodle. That poodle's the sweetest little thing ever. But like, it's also I think maybe something in animals knows that like, and there was a time when mice were a sign that things are, they would eat your grain. They would fuck you up like they spread disease. They'd shit on your baby, you know, they're like, they're gonna piss all over your hut. Maybe there's something in dogs that just knows that. I mean, I don't think he's a sociopath. I don't think he's doing like Jeffrey Domers shit, where he's just like, I wonder what sound it makes as it dies. I think they're prey animals to dogs too. Because coyotes eat a lot of rodents. One of the reasons why we don't have rodents. Like, real rodent problems that we could, like New York City has is we have way more coyotes. Cuyotes are everywhere. And hawks, a lot of birds, those are those the ones. So they're prey animals. The reason why they they're so prolific and they grow so fast and there's so many of them is because a lot of things eat them. Yeah, man. Yeah, all the animals eat them. All the animals eat them. Everything that can get a hold of them eats them dogs too and dogs are from wolves. So dogs see a mouse, they're like, I mean, that like that that must look like a delicious cold slice of watermelon on a hot July day. Oh, yeah. Just running across your yard when you're a big. It's a mouse. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. It's a perfect orange. You know those oranges where sometimes the the peel just comes right free. Oh, it's so satisfying. Like very little work. And then you bite into that orange is just juicy. Delicious. That's that mouse. That mouse just running. Bullshit ass mouse. Thanks. He's going to run through my fucking yard now. And that mouse that's the other thing that's really sad about it. I mean, the mouse is cute. Like this wasn't like some dangerous looking mouse. This mouse looked like it was like an act too of a Disney film or something. Like this, this mouse looked like sweet. Like the mouse looked like a good seeing. It was Pat and Oswald and Rottatootie. It was like that level of cute man. Oh, I know. And like you're just you're my heart. This is like breaking because it's like, what do you do? That being said, there's not much I could have done. You know, it's like this is the way nature is. And to get back to your dimension thing, man, that not that it's like literally like a physical dimension, but the reality tunnel that my poodle lives in and that mouse lives in is so fundamentally different than our reality tunnel that the mouse is in the Texas chance. I'm an iciker. The mouse is in the walking dead, except it's too cavalier. King Charles, a poodle and a chihuahua. But for the mouse, that's the walking dead. It's got to eat. It's got to get food. And every in it, so it's constantly like develop this like way that humans would develop, which I think the walking dead did a good job of the comics, especially of showing the way people over time would evolved to deal with zombies and people would gradually completely like change or transform based on their predators. You know, the rats and mice have done that. You know, when you see a thing that is a prey animal, you're seeing a reflection of the predator in the prey animal. Are you aware what's going on with rats in New York City? I can't imagine. Rat wars going on because the restaurants are out of business, right? So the restaurants close down. So all the rats food supply is gone. So rats have started moving into other rats territories and killing and cannibalizing rats. Wow. Dude, rat wars. That's the rats. The rats didn't do anything wrong. They're just being rats. And also in the food supply, I cut off. Holy shit, man. That is so intense. And that, yeah, and think of that level of reality. That level of reality is a level of reality that's taking place in these some of those tunnels down there, man, that they don't even use them anymore. There's rat infested. Yeah, just floods of rats who have like, you know, decided that's their kingdom or whatever that are now being invaded. That's so weird out down. And also it's dark. Like, just it's all smells like the world of a rat down there. It's neither light in the subterranean depths of New York. So it's like their universe is, there's a universe of smell. And I guess maybe they could, I'm sure they do see down there, but the way they see is like, who knows? So they're looking at whatever they're seeing is a completely different thing. And then they have a complete different set of priorities. You know, what's that show, man? It's on, it's a, it's a really beautiful but disgusting documentary. I think it's called rats. Yeah, rats. The one on Netflix. But like they send the weak ones to eat poison. Yeah. Yeah. That just that alone. We played a video the other day of a rat setting off a mouse trap with a stick carrying a stick over to the mouse trap dropping it. The trap goes off and it doesn't even flinch. Like it knows how to shut shut off a trap. Yeah. That's fucking do this millions of them too. That's what's really crazy. New York City has as many rats as it has people. And then that's just a rough guess. You know, I mean, I don't know what kind of fucking rat census they're taking. I mean, how do they know how do they know? I mean, what do you get a bunch of dudes who are just experts at counting shit and you go, what do you think? Like a fuck load. Do you want to say this as many rats as there are people? Okay. Watch this. Watch this. Watch this. Boom sets it off. Didn't even flinch dude. Play that again. Watch, watch how he walks up, do it sets it off and watch how he doesn't flinch. That's a violent thing. I think exploding in front of him and slamming over the ground and he 100% knew it was going to happen. No, that didn't even flinch. The way I act when I'm getting like a Coke out of a machine. Exactly. Whatever. This is we did that do it all the time. The Coke drops. You don't bounce back. It's like thank God. They got this nice. They're leaving these for us now. I wonder if they know that this is dangerous. They'll probably figure it out. Yeah, they know how to set those things off. That's insane. Well, this is, you know, when this is one of the cool essays, Terrence McKenna, where I love that we've talked about before. We've talked about on the top. I've got every part talked about everything we talk about already. So fucking. But that isn't that one of the things he said in this beautiful crazy essay that like everything was cool until we split the atom. And then that was like, no, they're like, we can't. That's too much. We're always in transit. So when we say everything was cool until the thing about people is we're always going somewhere in terms of we're always trying to make better things and we're always moving into a better place and a better thing. That there's never going to be it was good until let's all like romantic thinking like looking back. Oh, I don't mean he's saying it was good until we split that and he was saying we split the atom and the greater intelligence is that we're existing an alternate dimensions. We're like, hey, wait, what the fuck? Oh, that's what you was saying is they're like, oh, they're like, wait, wait, wait, wait, no, no, no, they can't do that. Like if they do because like the way he put it, I'm not only paraphrasing, I'm probably like miss phrasing, but the is I remember the essay. The idea is like that that multi parallel timeline that multiverse right next to ours that you see that's the DMT realm. That's but the DMT is just showing you one version of it's it's it's it's but that that that is populated with spirits or aliens or whatever the name you want to give them and they are pretty much as far as we go. They're just like they look at us the way we look at birds or whatever, you know, it's like they're there, but you know, maybe some of them study us or interest and sure maybe some of them like hunt us from time to time or like maybe some of them possess us or whatever, but mostly it's a world that it coexist with us in a very limited form of interaction that is is you know subtle. But in there that somehow there's some like Star Trek intentionality behind that which is like let them do their let them evolve as they're evolving. Let's not fuck with it. But the splitting of that, them that was powerful enough that it bled over into their realm destructively. And so they were like if that was the beginning of the end for us not because it meant a nuclear holocaust or whatever because they couldn't just ignore us anymore and that this is this was like, you know, I don't know, that maybe this is where aliens are coming or the singularity that we the thing we call the singularity is not that we technologically create a machine that produces a thing that opens up a parallel timeline or creates all moments at once, but rather that's when they come here that in the way we see that because we're so limited in our understanding when I do something, I'm like I'm doing this. This is how I did it. This is like in music. If you write a song and are you write music and you're just in the room with somebody, there's some kind of law where they get credit for it because just they were there. Look, that's a collaboration. I'm musicians I'm someone explaining this to me a long time ago, but it's there's an intense way of quantifying collaboration and music that is a little different than in like making like other other forms of media. And I think it's a little bit more sophisticated in its way of looking at that quantification. Like every time we finish a podcast, we always have the same damn whenever we talk. It's like you bring like our when we're doing these conversations we have. I'm not having them all the time. You know what I mean? It's like us together and Jamie and like something about that produces a space where we're able to have these kinds of conversations. And so quantifying that is like how would you even fucking quantify that? But anyway, what I'm saying is that when certain people are around the people that are creating the music, the music is better. Yeah, that you know it. But so to get back to the weirdo idea of like technology not even being a thing we're making, but that we're pretending we're making because we can't see the fact that technology is crystallizing in our time frame and that as part of that crystallization because it's such a such an insane visitation, we have to in our brains and veneration that is happening. And so we're making it and someone's like, oh, I had this idea. I'm going to work on this thing that's going to lead to a quantum computer that's going to lead to a thing to a thing. And then all of a sudden the quantum computer starts giving ideas about, well, what do you try this? And then who fucking came up with that? And then you know what I mean? And then and then and that's the last phase before the veil lifts and boom, that's the seniority. And that's you know, and it's not we didn't make the seniority. It were a reflection of it. That's just when this particular zone or note or whatever you want to call it, it gets open for business so to speak. Well, if it wanted to prepare us for abandoning life as usual, this would be a good way to start it. Yeah. Yeah, start it with a little pandemic, like everybody inside for a little bit, complete upending of what's all that's normal in terms of society. Yeah, man. I mean, that's the that is the, uh, and you know, as driving over, I'm like, I want to talk about like all the different conspiracies about it with for our game, but I don't want to either. What kind of conspiracies about the pandemic? Yeah. What are the conspiracies you're hearing? But other than 5G, 5G, common impact, common impact. Yeah, I haven't heard that one. Well, the comp, well, you're definitely not my wife because I mentioned it so many times by why she's like, Duncan, please do you like, you know, we're supposed to fly by like, there's a media that's supposed to fly by in the next short amount of time. Yeah, go. I mean, check out right at conspiracy. My conspiracy friends, I'm not even going to attempt to give the download on it because like y'all have done a pretty good job of putting all the, all the pieces together out there, whether they're real or not. I don't fucking know, but I enjoy reading them late at night and they've been giving me terrible dreams. But the asteroid theory is that, okay, so we want to have, by we, I mean, they want to have maximum survivability for the planet. They're not out to like, they don't want people to die. They're not trying to, it's not a bioengineer thing that's designed to like call the population, which is another of the theories. But rather, there, there was a plan, which is like, what's our plan if we do see a meteor is going to impact the planet? What's our plan? Do we let people know that the meteor is going to impact? Well, it depends like if an astronomer that's not connected to one of our labs or whatever sees it, they're going to let people know. And then, you know, so that's a whole different, I think, method of like reacting. But what if we see a thing that they don't know about? And there's some probability, even a 20% chance that the thing impacts the Earth, right? Or there's some cosmic event, maybe we're not even aware of, like the sun doing some weird shit that we don't even know happens because it's so deep, it's like deep data, right? So maybe it's not an asteroid. It's a cosmic event that's approaching, right? And so there's got to be a plan. And it's like, well, if we just tell people that the sun's going to do like a mile blip, which is going to destroy all satellites and destroy all GPS and just that alone, would cause runs on the bank, mass panics, like in people would start looting and shit. And that's not, you don't want that because the idea is like we want them to hole up in their houses till the ship passes so we get maximum survivability. And so the whole pandemic, this is a conspiracy theory, not real. The whole pandemic was a plan to get people to go inside, store up food, get them off the roads and like wait for this, whatever this event is to pass. And as soon as the event passes, you'll find that it's all of a sudden it's like, what do you know? The, we, or the curves are all dropping off. What do you know? And then we'll all be back because the thing they were worried about didn't happen. Also, it could be a test for that. So that can I just stop you? Because it's so dumb. It's hard to believe. Thank you. There's a real virus. They can, they can, I know, image it. But now what it looks like they've, they've been able to test for it. Anybody. I feel like I'm talking to my wife. It's a confusing virus. It's so good that I married the person I married because if not, like I would probably be like digging a hole to like crawl into out of pure paranoia. Cause she does do this to me. She's like, Duncan, do you think there isn't a COVID virus? Like you think there's no virus out there. Do you think that like maybe like, so all the scientists that have like identified COVID are all part of this thing to keep us from the meteor thing. And then I'm like, yeah, yeah, you're thank you. Cause like I'll start getting freaked out from it. But I'll answer your question. Like if I had to answer that, I would say, oh, no, it's real. I mean, that's why people died for me. No. What is the current COVID death count? 50,000 today this morning. 50,000. Here's something that I found out that's kind of odd. If you die of something else, so people are still dying, right? They're still dying of high blood pressure or strokes, heart attack still killing more people than anything, right? If you die of a heart attack and you have COVID, you get listed as a COVID death. So even if you're going to die of a heart attack, I mean, the people are still dying, right? Same amount of people other than traffic accidents, which I think has diminished quite a bit because no one's driving. Yep. But the same, those people are going to die still. It's not like they live forever without the COVID. Right. It's not like they don't get the flu. It's not like they don't get a cold. It's not like they're all getting pneumonia. All these things exist with it without COVID. There's still people who are still dying from them. But if you die of one of those things and you have COVID, you're, it's a COVID death. Yeah. So for some, that's why it's so crazy. It's like, you don't really know what how many people are actually getting this thing, this COVID and having a mild reaction, how many people are having no reaction, how many people are dying? Right. What is that? That's when they did that new UCLA study that came out that showed they think there's way more people had been. They think that California alone is somewhere around 400,000 people who have infected. And so the fatality rate is still pretty low. But if that's the case, like, so what do we do? We just let, let people die or do we do this every time the flu comes around too now? Like, what if we got a particularly rough flu? Is this a practice run for what we're going to do every time colds come through? And they start killing old people or killing sick people or fat people or what do we, I mean, I wouldn't want to be the person that makes the call as to when people go back to work because what if the second wave comes, a bunch of people die, they didn't have to die. Right. Boy, if we set up a weird precedent, you know, it's kind of weird, you shut everything down. Yeah, man. I mean, well, to me, the part that makes sense is, uh, we stopped the spread. Well, also, well, the other thing is it's like, it's new. Yeah. I mean, there are coronavirus, we don't know what it is. Right. So we don't have all the, we have the data on the flu. We have the data on the cold. We know how to treat the cold. We know how to treat the flu. But this fucking thing, we don't know what it is. It is conflicting data too. Yeah. Yeah. So I kind of get the like super, super, super intense, careful approach to it. And I think if I had to make the decision, that would be the decision that I made. But then also I hope whoever and thank God people like us don't make those decisions. But hopefully whoever's like making these decisions is aware of the fact that like right now there's folks who are getting meals on wheels, there's folks who are like on unemployment and lost their job. And like, I hope they're aware of the fact that like, and I'm sure they are that the pressure of folks who are in this horrendous economic position, the pressure on them at some point is going to exceed the humanity and compassion and empathy they're showing by not being in the demographic that's most likely to die and still saying inside, losing their job. You know, that's love, man. That's deep compassion because you don't want someone's granddad to suffocate on some new fucking bat flu, right? That's really love. That's love. And that's, it's beautiful. But at some point that pressure is people are going to be like, look, I don't want to kill anybody. I don't want to be a carrier. I don't want everyone to hurt anybody. But my kid is got to have food. And I have to work. And you know, and then I think somewhere I hope, fully by then there's at least a treatment they've discovered or at least we get to a point where they, you know, where maybe what's happening in Sweden, we get enough data on that to realize that there's other ways to do it. They don't involve complete lockdown. Yeah. What they did was they sort of left everything open, but they all behaved as if there's the potential of contacting or transmitting, right? Yeah. Like they didn't wear masks. Right. They do. It doesn't look like they wear a mask. It looks like they're living clothes, everything down. They didn't wear restaurants and pubs. And is there death rate similar? Well, the thing I saw was like, if you look at nearby countries, the death rate is lower, but weirdly countries that were doing complete lockdowns have higher death rates than they do. And you know, I look, if you, the problem is like you have this glob of data that anyone can interpret. And there's probably angles you can take on it that would show. Look, yeah, there's a higher death rate, of course, in Sweden, because it's going to spread more people aren't staying inside. I mean, that seems pretty logical to me. But then also, if you're showing some conflicting data where some other country in complete lockdown with a similar population or somehow like equating their population with Sweden's population, if they're, if they've got a higher death rate, then that's fucking terrifying, man, because the implication of it is like we really don't understand what this is. There's other factors to the one when big when in Sweden is not a dense population. I don't think there's that many people in the entire country. It's a very small place. That's right. Like how many people live in Sweden? I think I looked up to something that I think most of the people live in small villages of like less than 200. Yeah. There you go. Yeah. So, you know, they probably don't travel that much or interact with each other that much. They have plenty of space. They don't travel that much. I mean, tight together. I mean, 10 points, two, three million for the entire country. By the way, it's great. I've been in Stockholm. It was gorgeous. Beautiful. We did a show there too. They were really nice. I enjoyed it very much, very, very friendly people. But, you know, they have a lot of space. They're not New York City. New York City seems to be the epicenter in the United States. And for good reason, everyone's stacked on top of each other. Everyone's interacting with each other on the streets, on the subways, moving around. You got to go to places, just fucking people everywhere. They're everywhere, everywhere. That, I think, is a terrible way to live. I do. I fucking love New York so much when I went there. It's so nice. But yeah, it's nice to be on the West Coast. And especially right now, Jamie was talking about, think of the people right now in New York who were just in, you know, alone in an apartment, seeing the news that apparently spreads through air conditioning ducts. It's like, you know what I mean? You're, you're, that's terrifying. But, you know, again, like my opinion on it, and in my old age, this has to be an opinion on things is like, I'm going to trust scientists. I'm just going to, because I, I did, like, I didn't go to medical school. I don't understand what the fuck a virus even is. Like, I don't remember. I've been trying to remember. I'm too lazy to Google. It, how it works. I know it refucks with, it gets into your DNA or it replaces it. But the, what I'm saying is I'm not suggesting some kind of surrender to authority out of absolute weakness. But if a large consensus of scientists are advising some specific method of dealing with this thing, let's listen to them, you know? And, and then just make sure that it's, I feel bad for like, I have a friend in Georgia right now. And like right now, he's become part of an experiment, a global experiment. They're opening up Georgia right now. And every state that opens up right now becomes an experiment. We're going to get a lot of data from what happens from all these states opening up right now regarding the efficacy of shutdown like we have right now. And it could be that it, all of a sudden we realized we overreacted. And you know what? I had much rather overreacting under react in situations like this. You know, it's like, fuck, we overreacted. Whoops. Yeah, we didn't, we thought there was the potential this thing could mutate and kill fuck tons of people way more than the flu and we were wrong. And they've fucked up the economy. But it's a lot better than what would happen if it was some new smallpox black plague. Right. It also looked, it killed 50,000 people, right? What if we did nothing? Would it have killed like 400,000? Exactly. I mean, that could have happened. I mean, it could have been a compound and it seems like for whatever reason these places where people are contact or stacked on top of each other. Not only do they get it, but they get it way worse. could have compounded it seems like for whatever reason. These places where people are contact or stacked on top of each other not only do they get it but they get it way worse. Yeah, it seems like with what's that expression viral load right yeah like the viral load is greater and the end like if you run a bunch of sick people like there was one awful story about this family New Jersey. The mother died and the oldest son died and the middle son died like three people died from one family vacation or one family dinner. They got together and one of them had it and just spread through the fucking house. It's not the flu you know it's obviously it's something way more intense but the people that have survived the flu that probably survived that too. But the people that you know were kind of hanging on edge. It seems like anybody with a respiratory problem is in deep shit. Anybody who smokes is deep shit people with high blood pressure diabetes deep shit. It's not the same with everybody other people like Idris Elba walks it off you know. I know but he has asthma apparently. Oh really? Yeah he had asthma but he didn't you know there's a lot of people that I don't that Chris Cuomo guy seems fine. I know he says he gets chills but he seems fine. Seems rattled though. You know I've got I've got I'm not not a bad way. Yeah exactly like I said I didn't that was one of watching him. Yeah was one of the things it was legitimately creeping me out is like as you're watching him and he did a great job holding it together man. He didn't panic and he like puts something out there that was like comforting to some degree but I could you know a scan in his eyes and their mom was like fuck he's rattled like whatever's happening at night is bad bad. Why is it happening at night what is the difference? You know I don't that's I don't understand that. If you look fine in the day how come at night all of a sudden everything's all fucked up. Don't ask me man I don't know it's like I've noticed though sometimes if I get sick night is always worse than the day. I don't know why. I don't know man but the whatever like whatever the fuck it is to me that like the part that really is. I got friends who are like immunocompromised man and that that means that like they they're they really will if they get it that's it's game over you know it's fucking sucks and so there's that quality to it too or you're like you know statistically I don't know where I'm like statistically I think I'm on the cusp you know but. We've got all of us have friends that are like dead meat if this thing were to explode to fuck it you know I get I get I get staying inside man I just know that like eventually you know my brother my brother was telling me every day his neighbor you know my brother works for mom he's in he's in he's a video editor every every every day and a producer every day these you know I see like. you know he sees people are getting food deliveries because they can't from the state right you know man and that that's like. I don't know I'm just glad I don't have to I'm glad I don't have to be the one who makes decisions like this because that must be a weird thing to be in a position where any. Decision you make kills people like if you make the decision to open up. People are going to die because they're going to get sick if you don't make this decision to open up there's a potential that. You know just think of the mentally ill people right now no one's talking about that like I keep thinking of like the manic depressive people the people who are already depressed who now can't go outside. But are also getting blasted with apocalypse news. I don't know what suicide rates are looking like right now but like you know what I mean so it's the decision to keep people shut down. You know is going to the what might result from that those deaths might be secondary or tertiary or some shit but still it's like. It just sucks to have to be in a position where you have to make those decisions as like. how awful to know it's just it's like brutal I feel terrible for them you know anyone who's like because I don't you know I don't know what they're going to do either I mean they they're going to have to eventually assume. The position that we're going to have to slowly open up and start you know restaurants and half capacity and shit like that but when. You know I mean they've said May 15th here that seems like an awful long time I know it's an awful long time to ask people to keep it together don't have any money it's an awful long time. It's an awful awful long time it doesn't seem like the best idea either it seems like the best idea would be to quarantine all the people that are very vulnerable to make sure that they quarantine and make sure that people who know them are aware you know do not you know touch them or touch anything around them if you could have potentially been in contact with something because they're immunocompromised. Well it seems like the move this the move seems like to quarantine the people at this point at least the self quarantine you know tell them to quarantine people that are really vulnerable older people people with you know people that smoke people with respiratory conditions be aware the you're vulnerable you know and then you act accordingly but everybody else we need. At some point in time whether it's this week or next week or three weeks from now when they think it is May 15th right that's like three weeks from now they're going to have to open the doors and when they open the doors people are going to be starving they're going to be starving you know they haven't worked there's so many people that are so behind their debts they're getting good you know debt collectors are still wanting their money yeah especially if they had loans or you know anything that was outstanding before all this happened they're already in debt trying to work the way out of a hole and they can't even work the same time we've been there. I've never been in a position where people can't even go to work. Yeah what do you okay so I've heard like three ideas regarding what to do one of them is like incredibly controversial I wonder what you think about it which is like using the same data that they use in like what's it called those chips. No the chips you can put on yeah it's blue too so it's essentially like tracking and alerting you if you've come in contact with someone who has it. What do you think about that I don't trust anyone to have all that data and only use it for that right there's no way that data would be so valuable if everyone had a chip and everyone was tracked you knew where everyone wants all throughout the day oh you're only going to use that to see who's got coronavirus really yeah the fuck out of here once that technology exists not they're going to murder it at the end of the fucking season well we got no more COVID so let's just stop all this technology no chance they'll find a new. Yeah still finding new reason to use it okay they'll be able to track the flu they'll be able to track adulterers they'll be able to track robbers they'll be able to track car jackers they'll be able to track. You name it man you name it these are the right wing activists they like to yell at abortion clinics let's track them right you know now now Republican gets an office hey this is these are the people that are the fucking animal rights activist and we're getting for the meat plant let's track them right like you can track people okay and they're already doing it anyway. you talked to Snowden they're already tracking you by your goddamn phone but I like the fact that I could take this phone and chuck it in the fucking river I could just chuck it I would throw it in the ocean I wouldn't even do that I would never like that but. but point is I can get rid of that fucking phone yeah it's not a part of my body once they're injecting I've talked about this way too any podcast in a row but there's a company that. have these people inject a microchip in their arm and they could wave it in front of them soda machine and get fucking snacks with it and shit it was like your your tab was on your arm you can. you can get your own mics here open the door unlocks the door get the fuck out of here and we were saying like what if that company fires you. you would have chipotle fires you got that chipotle chip in your arm. I was mad at you it's not a regular chipotle chip. imagine you imagine and now you have to work for fucking seven up and seven up like we're gonna have to cut your arm off. yeah he's registering that you're a chipotle invader you know you ten chips in your arm because you worked at right skip get a new job you get new chips Mike why don't you get those chips roger. I like them they remind me you know if I had a hard life and a lot of good jobs. Oh my gosh. all around is I'm proud of my chips. I'm told that's a way I've always been always been a hard worker. I earned these chips. I earned all these chips every single one of these chips means you know also when you combine those chips with augmented reality so that you could have a visual. floating around them is like the mascot of the various companies they work for or like you know like let's say we do get the chip right the chip exists and we all just somehow decide like yeah let's just do it. I mean fuck the book of revelations that's just a whole bullshit oh mark the beast I'm not going to pay to let's get the chip that's just some only chip bullshit. all right come on I want to I want to get sodas without a put my fucking wallet. It sucks I'm sick of it I'm exhausted all day from this activity but we all get the chips and then what happens is you and of course it would start off with like a decision to make like you're like what what data and the chip do you want people to be able to see you with a augmented reality. And so like this is where you run into what I think the future is going to look like with this shit is it's like it's like when you're walking around in your company and you're employee of the month. And everybody's wearing augmented reality goggles you're going to have some kind of employee of the month halo around here, so everybody's aware that you made the most sales you know. It's going to be like that. Yeah it's in it's going to be like that for like you know it's going to be brutal as far as let's say credit scores go right because if you've got a great credit score and you want to indicate to the world that if you want to get into debt you can baby because you've got a great credit score you're going to have this glowing shit around you me and like and in the moment one person decides to reveal that everybody's going to feel like they have to reveal it and if you see someone who doesn't have like the good credit score. Like the good credit score crown or whatever like the banner of great credit floating in front of them you're like yeah you're probably fucked right like you made some bad decisions you'll see someone who's got a lot of shit nice car really nice clothes but you'll be like yeah but you know he doesn't he doesn't have the glowing medallion of good credit on his AR self so I don't know if he really owns any of that stuff you know. And then you know I mean then it's going to like there's going to be all forms of that which leads to like you know like venereal disease like you could go into a bar and if you just got tested and you're clean so to speak then maybe there's like a little AR like clean angel that like flies around your head like he doesn't have trees and we can bear back and like you know what I mean like that kind those bits of data that if you don't show that you don't know what you're going to do. There's some reason to be suspicious you know what I mean. Oh yeah you walk up to someone they have no data there's a blank you'd be terrified yeah you're just a person who's supposed to trust you. Yeah look at that serial killer fuck that we're gonna look back on times when we just would meet people like this and not have some halo to go by. Yeah like if I see Jamie Jamie have like a nice golden glow I'll go look at him he's got a high approval rating. Yeah that's a good catch yeah there you go. If you go to a nightclub all the dudes who are glowing gold yeah people would be like oh girls like purple credit scores they'd come in trying to get close to the guys and the gold trying to get a little that gold clean up that credit. Yeah yeah man if you knew like if a girl was really happy you look at her credit card oh my god bank fraud look at her she's a bank fraudder. Yeah like that you don't get that gray outline unless you do bank fraud. That's right yeah and there's no way to get it off it's like imagine yeah that and that you know there's going to be big arguments about that where it's like you know currently if you're a registered sex offender we know where you fucking live and I get it man like that's good that's good but then it's going to be like okay but do we put that in their augmented reality chip profile so that when anywhere they go. people are seeing that this is a person you that hurts kids you know and there's going to be a conversation about that we're feeling like fuck yeah that's what you do like I want to know if some like weirdo is like getting anywhere close to my kid right fuck yeah you let it in anyway that's a slippery slope that leads to the dystopian like you know black mirror future and that great episode where like there was like you know and I think they are doing it in China. They're doing in China yeah they have a legit social score in China yeah this is a real concern if this technology does get released in time and people start using their COVID tests and putting it on their Q code QR code the little thing that you do with the photo and scans you like a plane ticket yeah like oh you're good Duncan seems like you're good make sure you keep that phone on you everywhere you go no problem officer you know well Duncan we got a email the other day it shows that you have a been going I don't know who has this data but you've been going down to St Clemente during the lockdown yeah to stay with friends now there's a glory hole there that I like this is not allowed what you're traveling like see look what if we do this what if we go into this scanning thing and then new pandemic pops up and we go into lockdown again they're going to be able to find the people that aren't locking now what if you got to drive somewhere in the middle of the night to go get something. something important for your family yeah well all of them you're being tracked and they call you Duncan where you going yeah we are looking at you right now you're in St Clemente you don't live in St Clemente why are you down there yeah but I you know I'm just freedom want to drive around oh no this is a lockdown yeah there's a new flu go back home Duncan you want to kill people it's a weird it's a weird power to give people the power to have a mayor. tell you what you can do this never happen before I'm not saying they're doing it because that I know why they're doing it they're doing it to save lives I'm 100% for it I'm not don't get me wrong here but. still that power that anybody has to say you can't work you got to stay home you can't go to the park you can't go to the beach. That power is weird that's a lot of power man yeah you know to be the person Gavin may we open not yet yeah. not yet but what if they social distance they need to make money yeah we need to save lives yeah it sucks yeah it's a good answer it's a shit job man it's like the shit is that's the shittiest job because it's like you you you know decision you make is gonna make everybody happy any decision you make is gonna ruin someone's life maybe kill him and so yeah all these people so no one thought that was gonna be a part of the job right. you didn't think that you thought you're gonna deal with like yeah Gavin wasn't like he didn't know that when you like got in there he was suddenly gonna be like potentially like one of the war leaders in Mad Max you didn't understand that was gonna be his world. Dude this is how poorly they thought this through Garcetti is giving people money to snitch. They're giving people money to snitch on social distance violators what yeah say if you go over your buddy Mike's house for a barbecue there's eight people in that backyard Helen look. we're over here social distance in that come Duncan trussle over at Mike's house barbecue and drinking beers probably wife's whoop and pigs. I'm just walking again Garcetti comes along and offers people money to rat you out. How much they get. It can't be real I saw that was real there are four people rewards to rat out social distance violators disgusting. How you how you don't know that leads to Maoist China and fucking Stalinist Russia how you don't know that had getting people to rat on people leads to normal people. leads to North Korea. I'm not saying we're gonna be in North Korea but that that kind of shit that's where that comes from. It's how it starts you can't pay people to rat people out. Yeah you fucking asshole what a shitty poorly thought out idea that is. No shit man I there like any form I saw something popped up on my Instagram some company saying if you're aware that your bosses are violating like software like don't have license software. You know will give you a reward. And finding people like disgruntled employees who know that their boss is running like stolen Photoshop or whatever until like make a little money and fuck their boss over. And it's like that invitation to snitch. That is a satanic invitation man that is like I don't care what level it's that like in general unless you're looking at like hardcore. Snoden level whistle blow or like you've been down in the deep underground military bases and you saw the fucking thing in the egg that could read your mind and you're like I can't keep it to myself. I'm gonna fucking tell people. Exactly. You know I get that. But like any other other versions of it. Yeah fuck that don't invite us to snitch don't encourage that behavior. There's better ways to do it. I'm sure than like bounties on your fucking neighbors that's fucked up. So fucked up. Yeah so fucked up that someone who would get as high as mayor of Los Angeles would let an idea like that slip through the cracks. Like what fucking fascist you have working in that office that like I got an idea. Hey people to rat people out. Yeah. These fucks they haven't been working. Yeah. They need money for masks. Yeah. That's it. What does it he did say snitches get rewards but he said it's the opposite of snitches get stitches. I can't probably know they'll definitely get stitches. I can't find anything saying like they get 50 bucks hundred bucks. This is the reward you get. He might be like the opposite of snitches get stitches as if they're not still snitches and as if snitches don't still get stitches. Right. And what are you talking about? You're going to absolutely make sure that these people don't get beat up for being snitches. You're going to step in with cops give them 24 hours of security guards. If you find out that your neighbor ratted you out for money. Oh my god you'd want to kill him. It would be like what happened to that dude. What's his face? Ron Paul's kid. You know what I'm talking about? No. The congressman who got a tackled. That's right. Rand Paul. Yeah. Rand Paul his his neighbor was like fuck yeah. I don't know where tackles and smashes his ribs. He lost a piece of his lung. Yeah man. That's fucked up. And it's like because you're what you're asking for there which is another thing that I think the state. Anytime anyone starts doing this then you really have to start thinking about who you voted for. But like because the idea is like I love it when you know and I'm cheesy and I am a fucking hippie. And I get accused of stoner talking shit. But yeah I want there to be world peace and I want people to love each other. And when I see you know any even the slightest thing that like transcends political divides. Where like you know people who've hated fucking Trump and people Trump have hated I saw something where like I can't remember who it was. Like God what's the name of the Mormon politician that was running for president against Trump Romney Romney. So some dude like voted against releasing money to people who don't have jobs. And Mitt Romney tweeted well that senator whoever he was tested positive for being an asshole. Mitt Romney said that. And fucking you know and then like there was this just flickering moment where Trump retweets that or says something about it and says like I didn't know yet that sense of humor but I liked it. And like for that one stupid moment there's a second where it's like that's we're supposed to be on the same team. And like you know that's not a political statement. That's like a statement of survivability. And when you have a fucking when you have a and again I'm not saying bow down to the state or anything like that either that's an opposite what I'm saying I'm not saying therefore we're all going to be on the side of the bed. I'm not saying any of that shit man so don't take this the wrong way because I know what I'm saying. I get it. What I'm saying is when anything that divides one neighbor from the next anything that invites neighbors to divide instead of unite is cancerous literally for society in the sense that what's going to start happening is the the the the pixel of society is the neighbors. And that's like the connection between your neighbors makes up the tapestry of the entire country and that connection if it's broken or weird or fucked up then that's that's fucking everything up and so to invite that invite anything that fucks that up is to me really really long term disaster is it's like the idea would be like hey does your name is your neighbor and old person. No find out if your neighbors and old person and that can't get food and if they are and you get food to them will pay for it. Right. How about that. Yes. That's beautiful. You know someone who's like fucked up right now let us know so we can make sure they're not their kids aren't starving. Right. Are there any do you know it like man what about the fucking kids whose parents are right now super fucking sick with this shit. Right. Why we need governors and we need people saying like you need to know where the kids are in the building so that and who's parents are sick so we can make sure those kids are getting taken care of all their parents are all in bed and shit like so fuck that that that is what people get rewards for that. We have a way of monetizing kindness and in acts of like grace to your neighbors instead of monetizing like you becoming like literally what is one universally derided thing which is a snitch you don't want to be a snitch. Fucks snitches get stitches no maybe they don't get stitches but man I'll tell you when you die. Wouldn't want to be you wouldn't want to be a snitch in the afterlife I'll tell you that man you get devoured by spirit wolfs like I might just in spirit wolfs I'm sure you don't get the like experience of like you know going through the bar seeing your mom come running to you like a bowl of soup it's your mom she comes running to you and you think it's a bowl of soup but you look in it it's your wife's head and then you look back up it's a spirit wolf it's like so you thought was smart to snitch and that dimension. No no it's your soul forever yeah maybe just don't snitch that's fucked up I mean well it's just ridiculous that someone in a position of real leadership right you're the mayor of a huge city and you would think that that would be a good idea. Listen people are going to snitch on people anyway to encourage them with financial reward is crazy crazy crazy and it's so poorly thought out yeah that's a dumb idea to put out there such a poor understanding of human nature yeah like you don't know where this goes. Yeah like and then also in a time of great duress you're encouraging people to snitch yeah this is absolutely the time we've got to be encouraging come rottering yeah this is when things are weird everybody's forced into the same position no one can do with the most last time you were on stage. I've been doing private shows for my son. I'm sure they're gay we would literally our job has stopped and our job might not come back until January yeah that's right maybe maybe who knows who knows we don't know I've got some gigs booked and I don't know if I'm going to be able to do am I got a gig booked in September I got two two in September yeah a couple of knocked over. I got noovers but it's like also it's not like you should be from like you can't really promote the show right now that's even like a blazing dick I don't want to encourage people to go out and it's like yeah that's the problem man is we you know we're but. Here's the thing this whatever the state is doing the state's going to do this is my favorite Jesus saying. offer under Caesar what is Caesar's which is like you know there's a game going on here with power and if you think you're going to subvert that game maybe probably not best thing to do let the dragon do whatever the fuck the dragons going to do but don't let them. Cause you to forget that you don't need. the state to like go over to like leave a note on your neighbor's door asking if they're okay right you know what I mean you don't need we don't need the mechanisms of some bureaucracy to do good like to pick up trash right you know like that was the thing that happened when the fucking national parks I got defunding because of this bullshit all of a sudden like there's people taking pictures of garbage or in the national parks right. and the implication of that is like we can't clean this up ourselves we need a state official to come and pick the trash up and it's like it's nice that they do that we pay taxes for that and they should do that but if they're not doing it. And we're waiting for some hero from the state to come in and fix our fucking problems that's lazy that's bad thinking it's like I think is a people the idea is more to like. transcend that addiction to being saved that addiction that for sure someone's coming sometimes they come right but sometimes they don't and that's no reason to like put off just the basic shit man like. You know we I we put out and sometimes in front of our house will just put out shit to give to people you know we've got fruit trees there's fruit you know there's like. I the gardens got like some shit growing in it I'll put it out there you know and and people take every bit of it. You come back at the end of the day it's you know we've got flowers so cut some flowers and just leave flowers out there in case someone wants to bring a flower to somebody. It's an active trust because you don't know what I might be covered in like COVID mucus doing like. I'm really sorry for my neighbors but that being said I don't know maybe they're de sanitizing but my point is like cool shit happens sometimes you go out to that box. And like they've replaced something like we gave flowers the way we came out and then someone to put different kinds of flowers in the box for those flowers you know what I mean. I'm just like a stalker. Yeah actually now I think about it the flowers. You know it did seem like there was something like sticky and creamy on the flowers that but you know I'm saying like again. This this to me this the not getting too much in the macro because I'll go insane if I get in the macro getting into the micro which is your direct literally your direct neighbors and like making some connection with them. You know like my the guy who lives across the street we talked for like two minutes and was wonderful. And he's like if you need tools just let me know I got a ton of tools just you can like you know message me in outcome and leave them here and you can come and get them. Shit like that. That's nice. It's cool and it's like it's just beautiful. Yeah that's what it's supposed to be like. Yeah that's nice you got a good neighbor. That's it. Yeah. This is everything. Everything. People that hate their neighbors like man you should just move save yourself some agony. Yeah well you can sometimes that's the problem. Well we all need we talked about this before we need to find a cul-de-sac. No buy houses there. You mean the cult. Yes. I know. Well you think a ranch would do the trick. Tough to get people to live on a ranch. No I think you're talking about I know you're talking about yeah it's not that hard. But you know I think the way you do it is in phases right so like the first thing would be just get the land right right right and then hire an architect. Yeah hire an architect and then like you know bring it Alex Gray. Yeah hey. That's the thing that you didn't upstate New York beautiful have you been there personally I've been there and I haven't unfortunately haven't been there since it's it's completion. I don't know if it's completed but I've been there in the early phases and yeah that for sure is a temple like it's no joke. It's not like they're just saying it's a temple that's a real. And the way he printed those weird faces those yeah multi feature faces and use them in the corners of the building. What is it what is you call it again I can't remember I'm sorry. Causum. Causum I thought you meant what he called those faces he has the names name for the faces too. Is that the chapel of sacred mirrors is that what it sounds for but isn't that a Causum is was used to be what he called the place in New York City right he had the place in Manhattan. Yeah they had this they have they I think they still well they still do have a beautiful place. In New York actually or like a artist loft there I believe but like they ended up realizing it was time to like. It's brother when build a temple yeah and then really go somewhere in nature yeah they're they're in like a small New York town right. Yeah that's right state town yeah it's a beautiful place. Oh and they're religion religion and the on that's right and they're an actual religion which they are. Yeah it is a religion and by the way a religion is one anything from you like they're not they're not trying to get 10% of your money. Yeah they're giving you a bunch of. That's religion. Yeah, it is a religion. And by the way, a religion doesn't want anything from you. Like they're not, they're not trying to get 10% of your money. They're giving you a bunch of rules to follow. Now they want you to worship love and creativity. It's a really interesting place. Is that, oh, that's, that's just an image of what it's going to look like. I don't think it's really quite there yet, but holy shit. Yeah, imagine coming up to that, like walking up to their front door, you know, like, oh my God. What the hell am I looking at? Dude, when I was on tour, they let me part my tour bus there because we needed a place to sleep for the night. So I had to sleep in front of that thing in my tour bus. And I hadn't even gotten to that face, but I had crazy dreams just sleeping there. Yeah, it was wild, man. That's probably like one of those if you build it, they will come things. Like, do you imagine how hard you would trip inside that place? Do you know what I'm saying? Yeah, no, like I don't think it's, I don't think it's a, but like, you could do DMT in a shitty apartment and still have some crazy mind-blowing trip, but you can't tell me that coming to this place and going through this Entheon portal. Yeah, this isn't going to have some fucking crazy effect on the way you trip. Yeah. Oh my God. But that, you know, that was the idea of a temple. I mean, the idea is, I'm not, I'm not just saying to trip or whatever, but the concept is like, you know, let's acknowledge the fact that maybe our ideas aren't necessarily coming from inside our brains. Let's just as a fantasy imagine that there is a divine intelligence that as one of the many beautiful things it pushes into this particular realm as art and that if we can figure out a way to purify the connection with that thing, then we become receivers for that. And by doing that, we allow that thing to begin to exist in this world. And a temple was a place that allowed that connection to be refined, purified, intentionalized. And in that there's a solidification called inspiration or art or whatever the name is you want to give it, but it's really it's like output from a place that maybe is, you know, a few floors up from the one where it's having a pretty wonderful party right now. And like part of what we do is like allow it to drip into this realm, which is potentially a denser realm, where in the realm of matter it's dense, you know, and like ideas, if you look at your ideas, they're, they're light. They're like, they're, they're, they're, they don't have a lot, but at least my idea is like, they're, they're not like heavy. Their inspiration feels like barely anything. In fact, it's so barely anything. Think how easy does the miss a good idea, how easy does to think something cool that maybe you want to write down for a joke. And you're just not all right that down later. And it's gone. It's light. It's light. And so in part of what there I think are all about. Or I mean, I again, that's me putting it on them. They have a wonderful description on their website about what they're all about. But to me part of me, what creation is is taking those things, allowing them to come through you and then allowing this realm to do what it does, which is to crystallize them and it denser form that other people can enjoy. And, you know, that, um, that enjoyment is a, you know, that's enough. It doesn't have to be some lofty as shit. It's just like people get a little like tiny little smell of heaven, like a better place, a lighter place, a place that isn't encumbered by so much bullshit. Is this particular realm? That can like completely take someone out of a depression, man. That can completely give somebody the, you know, juice they need to like get back out there and like open up themselves to the world and not be shut down. Just one little like tiny, tiny minuscule reminder of like, don't worry. There's, this isn't the only place. There's simultaneously amazing things happen happening with your part of. You just don't realize it yet. And don't worry. You know, McKinney used to, and one of his essays, that's what we would say on mushrooms is you get this message. Don't worry or coming. Don't worry or coming. And you know what I mean? But I think that's what art does is it gives you this sense of like, don't worry. Right now we're just building the runway. Don't worry. It's coming. I know this place seems fucked up. It's a little dense right now. We're going to lighten it up. And then that, how much of that is your own imagination though? Like how much of your own imagination stimulates your trips? You know, I mean, we want to assume that we're really interacting with something. Right. On the other side. But why do we assume that that's something obviously it's not static? One of the things about trip to mean experiences is the things twist and change and morph and shift. They never stay any one thing for any length at time. They're always becoming other things and moving in and out of things. Like maybe that's just what happens over there. Maybe this things are constantly shifting and changing. You know? Maybe what we're doing is we're trying to apply when we think of how we are here in this life. We're trying to apply those laws to whatever we experience when we do that. But it seems so alien when you have those experiences. It seems so alien. You're not going to be able to bring any of that back. You're going to give someone like little glimpses. And what Alex has done the best is capture like, oh, I know what he's doing. Like those faces, those like almost Egyptian looking golden faces and moving apart from each other. Like you go, oh, yeah, I've seen something. Yeah, something sort of. Yeah, there's a trip to mean part to that. Yeah. But that whatever that would it be in that dimension, it would change and become something else instantaneously and then become something else. And then a lot of it has to do with how you're thinking, which is weird. It's like, is the way you're thinking actually affecting those things or is the way you're thinking affecting your perception of whatever this energy is now manifested so visually? Well, I mean, this is that right. Even in what you're saying, there's this assumption that you're thinking is separate from the thing. Right, right. Right. Right. And so it's in way. So we have a thought and worth thinking to ourselves, oh, I just got a good idea. We don't know that if we had a different way of quantifying time and space, we might have just seen some ethereal mist drift through us that produced a thing we call the thought that we thought must be us. So you look at a thing in that realm and it's shifting and converting. And you notice that that conversion seems to be happening in relation to like how you're feeling. And you know, now you're in a chicken or the egg conversation, which is like who's, you know, who's reflecting who here? Like who, which of us is like real and which of us isn't or are we just kind of the, am I just seeing who I actually am? But because I live in a world of individuality and I live in a world where there's a separate quality to things. I have to see you as separate because if I don't, I can't see you. And all I can do, you know, I'm seeing myself in you, which is I think what the what is happening in this realm anyway is like when anything you're looking at right now is some phenomena being painted instantaneously by your imagination with all that's what the imagination is doing. painting colors onto the universe of infinite phenomena that your brain is like doing out of habit. So that's that, you know, anything that anyone you're around, you make an instantaneous assessment of that person or you begin to like realize like wait, I got a bad vibe about that person. But something's off of them and then you go into like your TV psychic bullshit like oh yeah, really, oh really is that your was that the instincts you learned where did you learn that world warcraft streets. Yeah, you know, you don't know, but I've done that. I'm by way I'm talking about myself. I'm like yeah, I just can tell if the person is honest. It's like, no, I can't definitely tell if a person's really fucking weird though. That's for sure. You could tell if a person's off like they're not really connecting with you or they're attending the connection to you and you're like well, I got a weird vibe from this. Yeah, even if you looked at what he said on paper what you said on paper would be totally normal. That's true. There's sometimes there's a certain things of a violation of space. There's a weirdness to the way they look at you occasions. Yeah, they're like oh, you're off. Hate that feeling man. That's that's a deeper thing when no alarm bells go off like that. Your hair starts standing up. I fucking hate that that's scary. But you know, I'm just saying sometimes you're not right. And this is like why you need empiricism and science because sometimes you're not right. Like just because you think that's how shit is from some instinct inside of you. Dead meat and that's how things is your bias. And so that that's the projection. That's like the that's the part of you that you're like you're still dealing with some trauma when you're a kid and you're seeing that trauma in all the things that you're doing. and all the things around you. And so you're like in an argument with someone who hurt you 20 years ago when you're talking to somebody who vaguely reminds you of that person. And if you're in the right way like you're still having the argument and if you're not aware that you're still having that argument then you can start saying shit like why do I end up with the same person. It's like and I always draw this kind of person to me and it's like well maybe you're drawing the exact same kind of person to you or maybe you're running the same movie on a different screen and being like I've seen this before. I keep seeing this movie. You know, it's like as the same movie. It's like you're seeing the same thing you're projecting. It's just it looks like it. Now it's not Tom. It's Alex or now it's not Lisa. You're looking at Samantha but you're still seeing this thing and that that's the projection. So anyway, that's the imagination and the question is how powerful is that projection because sometimes you start projecting onto someone how you think they are. And if that person's weak or insecure, they'll start acting the way you think they are. Now your projection is sprung to life in front of you because the person you essentially animated a person with your expectation of them. And then because that person is acting the way you thought they would act because they don't know the fuck they are. You're making monsters with your imagination. That's what cult leaders do, right? That's how you start a sex cult. Wow. Same way. You got to take these people and like put it in their head. This is what they do. Oh, right. He put it in their head. Right. Yeah, that's right. You say you see it. Yes. I see it in you. Well, in this book, I told you about this book Chaos. Tom O'Neill's book on Manson and the CIA. Yeah. I tell you about this. No, I started to read about it. Oh my God, dude. What is? Oh my God. You two was tied up with the CIA. Oh my God. Almost definitely a part of these fucking psychedelics of LSD experiments that they were doing on hippies. Almost definitely experimented on him probably in prison, but almost definitely allowed him to get out of when he violated his parole. Let him lose. Let him free supply him with acid. Yeah. Monitor him. They were monitoring him every step of the way. They like fed that monster. They knew that this guy had been incarcerated half his life. He was a con man and they taught him at a be a cult leader. They taught him at a be a cult leader and they probably talked him into or taught him how to talk people into killing people and to do so with acid. And they would dose him up and he would make people do all kinds of shit. Like you would take people like, okay, you're going to fuck her and he's going to fuck him and they would put they would put together these orgies. He would put together orgies. I mean, he would solemnize. Kind of them like horrific shit. Yeah. Yeah. He was a boy that was like 15 years old. He did crazy crazy shit. They were all on acid. They all committed murder. He directed them to commit murder, but all of this very connected to the CIA's MK Ultra Project. All of it. Very connected to multiple different in multiple different ways connected to LSD. And hippies LSD and mind control. L.X.D. trying to come up with a mentoring in candidate, trying to get someone to commit murder and not even realize they did it. Also connected to Lee Harvey Oswald, because Jack Ruby was all fucked up on that program when he killed Lee Harvey Oswald. And afterwards when completely insane was seen by the very same doctor that was running the clinic where Manson used to go. This guy was a CIA doctor was a psychologist or a psychiatrist dosing people up with LSD, running studies on prisoners, getting students to run studies, getting scientists to run studies, not even knowing they were doing it through the CIA. Because then, ski, too. I'm forgetting. Yeah. Because this guy about operate should be in like climax ran brothels in San Francisco in a couple of other places where they dosed people up with acid and watched them fuck. I dare they name it that. I know midnight climax. That sounds like the name of porn in a hotel that you could watch. Yes. Like a secret age of the sucks in reald's dick. Midnight climax. Whoever named that really tells you a lot about the program. But like, you know, man, here's a controversial fucking thing to say which someone reminded me of a while ago, which really freaked me out kind of, which is like back then, went like they're what like right now we know a little bit more about some of the shit the CIA did. A lot of it because they put it on their website. Yes. Which is so crazy to me. They just put it up on their website. Which is crazy. And it but back then. What's up? They put up on their website. Dude, are you fucking kidding like all the shit about the remote viewing experiments they did? Like it's they just I interviewed that main guy that they had for remote viewing. fucking famous guy. There's one famous guy that I interviewed. He's like famous in the remote viewing world. I know. I know you're talking the guy wrote the movie or didn't write it, but the documentary Man of Steel shot. The, was he the guy talked about a kill shot or that's what the name for the thing that happens when the sun fucks up? It didn't fuck up. I mean, you might have said the sun fucked up. But for us it fucked up. It was like a not a supernova, but just does a big ass flare. They like kind of like melts whatever side of the earth happens to be facing it. You know, that's like the kill shot that a lot of these remote viewers were apparently saying that they were seeing. Because they were realizing that they could actually they weren't sort of bound by time in these visions. And they all started sharing this vision of this thing. It's really a creepy, creepy documentary out there man. But that's out the 100% on the table. Like some giant solar flare, some solar incident. That's 100% on the table. Hey, if we by the way, I'm sorry if we talked about this the last episode. Have we talked about the CA's website yet? What about their website? Have you ever gone to it? No. Jamie would you mind pulling that up? I have applied for a job. You applied for a job with the CA. Well, I want I was stoned and it was late at night. And I'm like, wait, you're going to apply online. Check it out. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Ask Molly. There's a cartoon. Yeah. Hold on. Back up. This is the CIA's website. Ask Molly your CIA source on the inside. And it's hashtag ask Molly Hale. And Molly Hale is like a hot agent. This week's Ask Molly Hale question comes from a writer who wants to know if there's a path forward for them at CIA. Since they have done illegal drugs in the past. They took my question. That's your question. Now I'm just kidding. It seems like it's your question. Since they have done illegal drugs in the past, let's see what Molly's answer is. Let's see Molly's answer. So it says, find Molly's answer. What does Molly say? Dear, you could just say. Let me be clear on this from the get-go. Having previously used illegal drugs does not immediately disqualify you from working at CIA. If working for CIA's your life's goal, and we certainly hope it is. There could be a path forward here. With that said, there are certain restrictions you should be aware of, especially if you've used illegal drugs within the past year. Generally speaking, to be eligible for CIA employment, applicants must not have used illegal drugs within the past 12 months. Goddamn. Shit. This is, as with most things, a general rule by which to gauge your higher ability, that's not a word, kids. Not a typo. Not only an applicant, but not only an applicant, but as the potential holder of a security clearance. It might seem a bit archaic, but consider the access to information we're giving at CIA employees. And consequences of granting access to the wrong person. How much access to information? Just read that real quick. It might seem a bit archaic, but consider the access to information we're giving CIA employees. What access are you giving them? You're an assimulator. That's probably the first thing they say if you get higher. It's assimulator. We're just doing what the programmer wants. It's like I know you're going to freak out for two months. We're going to give you a protocol of antidepressants because you can go nihilistic or absurdist when you realize you're just a string of code that's running. But you'll get over it. And then there's an egg. You can go, the thing reads your mind. It's kind of cool. I'll show you that later. Officers regularly handle classified information, which, if leaked, could spell disaster for national security and endanger the life of CIA officers. Yeah. Is my favorite word. Assets. And their family. Assets is one of my favorite words they use. We have an asset in Jerusalem, an asset. You got an asset. Is it a person? You know a guy. Yeah, well, he's an asset. He's an asset. Yeah. He's a, oh, I got a number. Like what's an asset? An asset is like stocks. Yeah. An asset? You got a stock in Palestinians. I got some Palestinians. It's saved up. Yeah. You got some assets. Just some people you connected with. I connect with them in my assets. Yeah. And now you may be wondering, that's all fine, Molly. But I live in a state where marijuana use was legalized under state law. So why would any of this really apply in my case? The short answer is, or would any of this really apply my case? The short answer is, yes. marijuana remains illegal under federal law in every state. The CIA is bound by federal law, which prohibits CIA from granting security clearances to unlawful users of controlled substances, including marijuana. State laws do not supersede those of the federal government. The great Lord who looks over the land with an iron fist. For more information regarding the federal government security clearance guidelines, regarding drug use and other considerations, you can check out the, what if the next line was like, hey, what's up, Joe? That's cool. You're showing this on your podcast. No, no. It's a simulation. But I do think like in there is there also kind of saying like that being set. If you can set shit on fire with your mind or something when your stone come talk to us, it's like, you know what I mean? There are saying like the other cool thing when you look at him applying for a job is it says, after you apply, don't tell anybody you apply for the job will like approach you regarding the job, which is so fucking cool. You can't talk about it when you apply. With me while they're absolutely checking your phone. They're checking your, I applied and like I just leaned into the fact that like fuck it. They're going to look at everything I do. And then also like imagining this some point some CIA agent might come up to me like, Hey, what's up man? Hey, what's going on? Did you really want to be a bookkeeper at the Pentagon? No, I wanted him to meet a CIA agent. Dude, hello. Because I mean, you know, what do you, wouldn't you like to meet? I mean, no one. You know a CIA agent. I've had him on the podcast multiple times. Mike Baker. He does a lot of consulting for TV shows and security stuff. So you're, you, you are in it and is he working for them now? No, well, how would you know? Yeah, he's a former CIA operative. What does that mean? Do you really think they ever stopped talking to each other? No, no. He does security clearance stuff and security studies got it. Has a security company. Did he do so, so wait? So this guy did you ask him about the Manson shit? No, I just found out about this shit really recently. If Simmons told me about this guy, Tom O'Neill was his neighbor for like 20 years. He was neighbors with Greg and Greg. The whole time he was doing his book while Greg was friends of them. Right. Took him 20 years to write this book, started out as an article for Premier magazine. And then as you started uncovering all these inconsistencies with the trial, he realized that there was kind of a bullshit trial and that the prosecuting attorney, like everybody had, there was, there was deals that everybody had made to have a specific narrative go through. And Susan Atkins, one of the people from the Manson family was on trial. Her, her fucking defense attorney was like a former prosecuting attorney that had worked with Vincent Buglioz. And all these other people before they were all buddies. Wow. And they signed him to her to take over for her state appointed attorney. This guy took over and like just, they just, they followed directions. Like everybody followed directions. And as he was going deeper and deeper into the story, he realized like there was a lot of crazy shit that was going on. The first of all, Manson for sure was let out of jail multiple times when he shouldn't have been. when he was violating parole, who's let out of jail repeatedly for crazy shit like theft and, you know, and they, they were monitoring these people. They knew where they were staying. They knew the ranch, the spawn ranch where they were staying at. They never did anything. Right. They let them, they let them go whenever they were in trouble. Ah. And most likely got him the fucking LSD. Have you looked at the finders call it? Yeah. Was that one? I didn't want, I shouldn't have brought it up. I'm not even doing a good job with this. I didn't think I was going to talk about it. But this thing blew my mind. Like you got to listen to this audio book. Listen to the audio book or just even, maybe just listen to some of the podcasts and you'll get sucked in. This guy was obsessed with this for 20 years. It's all he thought of. It's all he did. It was his life's work. Do you, do you, okay, you had this CIA gene you had on. He's cool, right? He seems like a good guy. Is he your friend? I like the guy. So, you know what, so bizarre. And like I don't want to say it, but I think it's like, because you say it, then people see you say it. And I see you're on the CIA. But something Rich, you know, I was bitching to Rick Doblin about on a podcast. And I was like doing this thing I used to do. I was younger, which is like trying to create a all evil, all good binary regarding people who work like in the CIA or people who work in the DEA or whatever. That thing you do when you're like, when you're being lazy and you're way of thinking, right? The end binary, right? And Doblin, one of the things he said to me that I've always kept with me is he's like, there's people like us, like all the way to the top. You know, there's people who like look at drug laws right now. And two people from the CIA listen to this podcast. Right. Yeah, I know, I know of that. Right. And I'm like, I mean, yeah, that's what I'm saying, man. Is like the thing that's somewhat annoying in the sense that it requires nuance rather than like a heavy handed, they're all evil. Is some of the people in there are really like 100% trying to keep at least people here from getting blown the fuck up. Yeah, and like they're not like, oh, God, like can we let's find another man's in now. He got a, you know, exactly. But you know, I went and got this tour of actually JPL, the place Parsons was that man. And like, I think it was BP or Shell or some like oil company that I had like just generally we all look at the oil companies and things. They're out there the way they're all the worst. They're all your driving in your car. You'll be like, these fucking oil companies. But like the, the, um, they were working on some kind of new solar panel technology was like Shell or I don't remember which fucking company it was. I remember saying to the guy like this technology if it works, doesn't this destroy the oil industry. Like don't they know they're working on a technology that's going to make the thing they make money selling and buying irrelevant. Oh, now these companies are so big that there's departments within departments within departments. And that's where it gets fucking crazy about the CIA, which is like the, the people in the CIA don't know. Obviously all the people in the CIA, that's your security clearance. And the question is how deep does that basement go man under the CIA? But here's also the question. Yeah. How are you going to find out what happens when people take LSD without giving people LSD and studying them? How do you go? You're not. So if you're in 1953, okay? And you're finding out about LSD and people are taking LSD at parties and people are taking LSD at concerts and you start realizing the ramifications of a society in 1964 that's all taking LSD and you see this hippie movement. You're going to run some studies. So then you're going to get people the ability to test people without their knowledge. And you don't know how crazy that guy is. What kind of associate path that guy is. And he's going to run tests on people without their knowledge and give him LSD. And then there's going to be people that say, hey, you know, we want to infiltrate all these anti war groups. We want to infiltrate the black Panthers. We want to infiltrate these hippies. Yeah. How can we do that? Well, here's how we do that. We take this guy. We got him in prison for half of his fucking life in federal prison so far. He's 32 years old. Yeah. Let's dose this motherfucker up with LSD. Let's run some studies on him and let's tell him that he's a cult leader and get him to make some apocalyptic fucking death cult that wants to kill people and write pig on the wall and their blood. And so they let Manson, they knew where he was. They knew he was getting acid. They knew that he was probably having people kill people. Yeah. Well, okay. First of all, to go back, man, if you really study the spread of LSD in a popular culture, it wasn't the CIA saw people taking LSD at parties. It's the CIA as I understand the story goes and buys from sand hose laboratories all of their LSD and then begins to do tests on college campuses where people begin to take the LSD and then the party start. So it's I think it's more like the CIA start of the party when it comes to LSD or at least we're majorly involved in the initial experience people have. With LSD, which was like, that's when that's when you get Tim Leary. That's when you get Richard Alper. You know, Ramdas, that's they were both like hanging out at Harvard where the same psychology professor did the shit on Kazinski was. And like LSD, you know, that's they were doing I don't know if they were doing the LSD test there, but these tests were going on. They were being exposed to LSD that theoretically, I don't know if it came from the CIA or not, but I don't know like where the I think actually those tests were they were ordering it from sand hose, but for sure like who are one flubbers the cookoo's nest? Damn it. I can't believe I can't remember that author's name. Yeah, King Keezy, he did one of the CIA LSD. He was in one of the CIA LSD experiments. So like, but in also man like back then, I don't think because we didn't get the Manson the Kazinski or all the awful shrapnel weird shards of chaos that exploded off of the crazy unethical shit they did. I don't know if there was so much of an idea that they were evil. I could be wrong about that, but they weren't even called the CIA. I think they were called the OSS in the beginning. Yeah, but by the time they were the CIA was running a fucking clinic in Hey Dashbury that closed down after like 30 years of being open or 40 years of being open closed down three months after this book came out. Like, well, that's a wrap. Yes. Yeah, jolly West, the same guy who visited a Jack Ruby in the hospital and after he left Jack Ruby when insane, he was crawling underneath the table and thought that Jewish children were getting lit on fire and cut a part in the streets and a new Holocaust was going on. Immediately, immediately he has the they have no record of him acting insane before this at all. He didn't even understand why he shot Lee Harvey Oswald. So fuck that. Well, they they'd think that the same thing happened with Sir Hans or Han the guy who shot Robert Robert Kennedy. They think that he was under the influence as well because you have the same reaction after he shot him like why am I here what happened that they used LSD to somehow or another get these people to commit atrocities to kill people to murder people. Yeah, I mean, yeah, and you can what's probably you can probably I know you can if we go on the see the crazy thing is you can go on their website. Yeah, look at the freedom of information at archives and they have MK ultra shit up there right now that you can look at that's where it gets really weird is it's like they're like yeah. Yeah. mason act archives and they have MK ultra shit up there right now that you can look at that's where it gets really weird is it's like they're like yeah yeah but they never admit that they gave people that was the thing about jolly wess he never admitted that he gave people LSD and did studies on them never admitted it i think he was alive at least i don't know if they're admitting it now because of the freedom of the money must because operation midnight climaxes that's officially historical record yeah yeah must be now but when they were when you know they were operating this clinic manson in the family we're going to that clinic all the time there's a direct there's a hundred percent direct connection between the CIA doctors who are providing LSD to the hippies and manson going to this clinic that is it's too this book is crazy man that does not sound like pandemic reading to me that's the best are you sure i don't know man i can't deal like i'm already like weirded out by like just bad understanding of astronomy and like you know i mean i don't know that i need to like it and i shit about the season see i a especially because it's like you know i don't know it you it's just too much you know i'm that being said i'm gonna definitely fucking read that book well just uh listen to the podcast that's the easiest you'll you'll get your dick wet listen the podcast and then you're gonna want to listen to the audiobook or read the book but he has uh sixty pages of citations and references at the end of the book to show each thing and how he can prove it like it's these are not this is not he's got some speculation that he entertained at the very end of the book we talked about it on the podcast but the stuff that he knows for sure to be true is bonkers can i ask you a question that will probably get made into like a youtube clip and using you being an asset of the CIA sure so okay let's imagine this one day you get contacted by somebody who's in the CIA and they show you convincing data or putting something you know whatever it may be media or impact some other in pending danger that it's like you look at it and it's like whatever it is they give you you you believe it and they're like listen i don't we know you're like we know that you're like a wild animal we know that like you you don't want to be dishonest and we understand that but we gotta figure out a way to get this kind of information out to the world because if we don't like it's gonna be really bad and we're just going to people like you and just trying to get whatever the thing is they want you to say a little thing an idea of how they want you to be and the fight they're not offering you money they're not offering you money they're also like saying like don't worry if you say no don't get that job with the CIA excuse me did I get the job did you get that job you applied for no seems like you're priming me what for you're you're gonna give me a suggestion later listen i know what you're doing man show you've you ever thought of a blue butterfly Joe yeah but seriously what would your response be if like someone's like look what just need your help listen i think central intelligence agency i think if be i think i think the DEA i think they're all necessary i don't think they're unnecessary i think that most of what they're doing is trying to protect us let's see the only logo for this i do think also that some of those guys trying to fucking cowboys and try to like coke back from ex-coach the i.a. jets right that's true to yes all that shit that happened in minna arkansas you know all that shit that happened when clinton was governor yeah Barry seals when they were running coke back and forth and dropping off in minna arkansas yeah that guy was a CIA contractor there's a lot of those guys that were CIA look they got compromised i think but that doesn't mean the whole CIA's bad doesn't mean we don't need a CIA man if you talk to people if they're honest i don't know if they're let's just assume they're honest you talk to people that deal with trying to infiltrate terrorist groups and deal with tracking terrorists and deal with trying to figure out if someone's trying to make a dirty bomb trying to figure out if someone's ready to blow up a mall and they're in there they're doing this actively every day all day that's essential right that's essential so the CIA oh fucking mk altra they they dose people at whorehouses that there's not the same thing people okay this is a giant organization has been around for a long fucking time right what you're hearing about from jolly west and the MK ultra those people are dead those are not alive today but you know what is alive today is this you know is alive today a lot of threats all around the world you know who is alive today Kim Jong-un the leader of china all these fucking dictators that are they're heavily armed all over the world there's a lot of them right you gotta keep an eye on those motherfuckers right if you don't think you have to keep an eye on them you're crazy right here what will the CIA is even don't know humans are evil and sometimes you need someone is paying attention to the evil people right yeah that's what you need now does that mean that they're not going to stray across the lines of what is correct and good and fair and and and start spying on regular people too no it doesn't mean that right it means that shit needs to be curved that shit's on American right but if you think someone might be a terrorist like you shit be able to find out before they blow up the fucking school totally right we are 100% so the question is how good are these people at walking that line turns out pretty fucking good turns out pretty fucking good there's a bunch of shit that's happened over time but also they've gotten intel on all these different terrorists and all these different fucking terrible situations all over the world and probably saved a lot of people right it's not perfect but nothing's perfect just on a fucking thing that's perfect ever whether it's the fucking post office or police officers or fire department or doctors no one's perfect right including the CIA including the FBI including the army the Navy there's going to be problems right but overall they're trying to protect I would imagine if I had to ask like what do you guys hear for to make sure the shit doesn't hit the fan pay attention to the shit pay attention do do some of them branch out into coke business yes I'm sure some of them so I'm sure there's someone for the federal government selling guns to a bad guy right now I'm sure I'm sure it's people are people you got a million people are going to get 30 bad ones or whatever the fuck the number is it's just part of life yeah yeah look I mean all I see I am a politics I said you up I don't believe a word what I just said I'm on man you took that job come on man you know I get a big bonus yeah I wear a wire bro you don't have to wear a wire anymore just carry your phone I'm wearing a wire on a podcast I'm monitoring you Joe imagine if you like you got like too close to the mic is like hey Jamie is like dude interference that's when I was a kid growing up that's always one of like when I was at the beach that was always like something I fantasized about is like fuck I hope one of those drug bags washes up you don't hear water like how many of those wash up that people don't report yo you whenever I hear water about someone who's like, oh my god, I found a briefcase full of cocaine. Like why are you, that's, that's grace. Like something is like delivered under you this bizarre thing at the very least. You know, I'm not fan of Coke myself. It like makes me, I hate it in fact. Yeah. But if you got some of that Aussie Osborn from the 70s, Coke, do you know a good that she would be? Yeah. I hate Coke. Okay. Yes. Remember when we talked about government weed? Government weed was good. Unlike the cheese. Oh yeah. The cheese is terrible. But government weed, dude, he's got that government weed. Whoa. Remember that? Yeah, I do, man. I completely forgot about that. That was the thing back when weed was illegal. You wanted to shit the government was growing. Whoa. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Well, because for sure, by the way, you know, there's a, there's like, I guess at the CIA, there's a layer of all the sober people who've like haven't gotten high for a year, which whoever's writing that fucking thing is definitely like laughing. Is there writing it? Just laughing because there's so fucking high. And they're like, all right, we'll just say, Well, there's a test, man. Well, there's a, there's a level they test. But you know, there's a level where you get past that level and like, listen, the no drug stuff, please. We want you to have a good time. Does that fun job? Like we know that you're, you can handle your shit. We just have to do that level below you because otherwise the last thing you need is another fucking Manson. You know what I always think about when I think of someone infiltrating a terrorist group, that's seen in Team America world police where the actor has the fucking terrible outfit on. We need actors to save the world. Yeah. I always think about it. If I think about anybody infiltrating a terrorist group, I think of that guy. Yeah. Well, you know what this again, we don't have to worry about that. That to me is a fucking great thing. I don't have to worry about that. I don't have to worry about infiltrating a terrorist group. Can you imagine if I just don't say that? You remember? He was so good at acting. They just let me look so bad. And they just, they just believe in many walks right through. Oh my God. What a great movie. Amazing. Yeah. This movie is amazing. Folks, if you've never seen Team America world police, I probably laugh harder in this movie than any movie I've ever seen in my life. It is so good. Good team. I remember what a great name. World police. And then also, after you see the movie, go online and find the sex scenes that they had to delete. So first of all, these guys are geniuses. And what they figured out is that if you just add way more than you really want, they let you have what you want. You got to add stuff like they, I think she shit on his chest. Right. They pissed all over each other. They fuck like crazy. So it's a plastic doll sex scene that's so, so crazy and graphic. And then when you watch in the movie, it's like a fraction of this because they just, they just went so far to 69 each other. That is ridiculous. Yeah. And she's stuck in his feelings violently sucking him off. And they just keep so, they did this so that they could have some of it in there. I mean, it's so long and so crazy. And then once you think it's over, then they start pissing and shitting all over each other. Doesn't it keep going? Yeah. The clip from the actual movie. Oh, that's from the actual movie. Oh, what? That's how much they left in. That's something much they left in because they cut out, they got so savage with the sex scene that they let them keep the most preposterous to mount in there because it was so far past that. They just tricked them. They used like slight of hand. Dude, that must have been so funny filming that. I think it took a long time. Sure it did. Yeah. Trey Parker was saying in some interview that he would never do that again. Like, that's too bad. Stop motion. Yeah. Because, dude, Team America World Police is one of the funniest movies of all time. For sure. And you could, there's so much in that movie like what they do at South Park that you could never do with a human. But you can do it with either a doll or a cartoon easily. And it's amazing. Like, death. That seems like you killed Kenny. You couldn't have a guy just die every week on a sitcom. People were like, this is freaking me the fuck out. Yeah. But he doesn't even look remotely real. So he could cut his head off. He could light on fire. He could blow up in an explosion. Yeah. You can definitely get away with a lot more in that regard for sure. Get away with everything. Yeah. Yeah. It's a genius way to do comedy. I don't know. I mean, South Park is like eerie to me in their ability to quickly animate shit that's maintains its relevance. Like, it's insane that they're able to do that. Like that they've got it down to that level of like, oh shit, something happened in the world. And we're going to respond to it almost instantly. Not only that, they do it mockingly, but accurately. Like they figure out how to ride that line. And what do you laugh at? I just all seen I've never seen before from it. I'm looking for the light scene. I thought it was fan made, but it's like a, this is Meryl Streep and this has been an athlete. Oh, it's just a hand. They made match, Damon and Ben Affleck really fucking dumb in that movie, right? Oh, yeah, amazing. I'm that dangerous. Yeah. My team is actually very smart. Yeah. That's so rude. But it doesn't matter. They could just do that. Yeah. Yeah. When you have like cartoons and puppets, you could fucking do anything. I mean, that's the, but except anything you want to do takes forever. I mean, that is the problem is like, yeah, you could do anything. But that anything is like, you know, months of anythingness. So it's like clearly easier to film shit or just to say it or, I mean, the fact that they used hands, God only knows how much money that saved them. Like that decision to just do that. How much time that probably saved them. Who knows? Those kinds of like decisions and shows like that are like really smart and funny. Yeah. But yeah, animation is like, I mean, it is spell by this. Is eating around slightly longer. Is it longer? It's not much different to be honest with you though. No, but there's the shit in the pussy. But it's not coming up on here. What? Oh, there it is. Wait, we'll go back. There it is. She drops a long face. There it is. Perfect. And then I think she pisses on him too, right? Yeah, she's right before that. Oh, she, oh, he pisses on her. And then she shits in his face. How many people you didn't do that? If you look at the whole population, like the entire population, like a little light went off every time someone was shitting on someone's head, how many times that happened I bet you could fucking light up a small town. Yeah. Yeah. It was mostly the girl's shit on the guy's head, right? Would you imagine most of it is like a girl, a guy wanting a girl to shit on his head? 100%. 100%. I mean, look up. Have you looked at the, here's it. Have you looked not shitting this interesting though? What I was going to say is it doesn't, I don't feel bad at all about that. Like I don't feel like he's getting shit on. I feel like he wanted to get shit on and he got shit on. So I'm not mad at her at all. But if a guy was just on my thing, like shit on women's heads, they're like, that guy's a piece of garbage. What the fuck, man? Are you doing that? And the girls did just look. They wanted a thousand bucks. He wants to shit on their head and they make a deal. And he just shits on people's heads. I would feel like that guy's disgusting. But the girl who shit on the guy's head, obviously the guy wanted it. The guy, it's easier to think a guy wants to get his head shit on than a girl. It's not like a guy, like if you told me, hey, you know that guy that we used to be on that sitcom, he likes, he pays girls to shit on his head. I'd be like, okay, that makes sense. Dude, I know how much it costs. I'm just kidding. There's a friend working for it, right? Depends on how good you want her English to be. Yeah, there's some giant German lady who comes over and dumps on your head. There's probably an negotiation. There's probably a dude who's actually at the conversation. He's like, really? Like 2000 bucks? Are you kidding? I never pay more than 1200 for someone to shit on my head. Maybe they'll give a little extra if they let, you know, they're allowed to pick your diet. I want you to only eat Indian food. Oh, God. Just curry. Yeah. I want to smell the curry when you shit in my face. Have you seen those, if you've seen those videos, the fetish videos of people who like to look at videos of people getting stuck in mud, you know about that fetish? Have you heard about that? Oh, dude. It's like, I don't know. Can we show it? Look up YouTube, stuck in people, stuck in mud. People are into people that get stuck in the mud. Yeah, it's like a fetish. It's like, and there's always videos of people. You know, I mean, like, so the humans are stuck in mud, like walking and then someone comes along and fucks their mouth or something? Well, no. No, it's just someone stuck in mud. Like, at first you look at it and it looks like, why did that dude just throw himself in that swampy mud? And then he gets out of the mud or they'll start just like wiggling around in the mud and like, yeah, it's crazy. Oh my God. It's crazy. Well, okay. You're, I found something, but it's not, it could be an evolution of car stuck girls, but maybe not. Like, girls that are stuck with their car like they need help and then see all horns. Someone needs help and they're in an helpless position. I don't know. That's always in a movie, right? The guys waiting in the bushes with a gun and the girls standing there with their hood up and the guy runs on it. Hey, give me a kiss. Yeah. I, it's on YouTube. Yeah, either. So I'm satisfied. I'm sorry, man. I thought you were looking in like porn. I don't think I'm not. I typed in stuck in mud, fetish videos and then there's a lot of like car forums. Like, what's up with all these girls getting stuck in the mud? No, no. It's like they're like, yeah, like a BMW. The one I've seen is mostly primarily dudes. Like it's like, oh, guys get stuck in the mud and the other guys get come on. No, there's no other guy. It's just like a guy like, you know, the Libera carpets. It's just that, but with like, like guy with abs. Oh, my God. He's like, he's, he's, he's, they're yelling. They're just like, you know, like, they're just stuck in mud. Yeah. Yeah. It's so, it's a, that fetish is a really interesting one. But I think any, you know, you're kind of lucky if that's your fetish. Yeah. There's a lot of mud out there, man. It's like, that's a, that's like getting in the direction. That's like getting in the direction. Yeah. No, unless you pay someone to go get stuck in mud and like they like sink down into quicksand or something. Well, do you think that the people that are they fantasizing about themselves being stuck in mud? Don't know. I don't know. Right. It's open interpretation. It's really into watching hot guys that get stuck. Someone's filming it in the jerk off while they're need fucking loser. Okay. That mud, you fucking loser. Look at that. Look at that. There you go. That's what I don't know if this is one. This is 130,000 views and it says what you want. Girl gets stuck in very sticky mud. Yeah. But you notice like it's not like they're trying to get out. That's, if first here. Yeah, she looks like the kind of girl that we just give up. Like I don't think she's that stuck. Like, come on. Not that's not, I'm fucking stuck. I can't see. It's done. Yeah, it's just done. Yeah. How much did they pay her to do this? 50 bucks? I don't know. How much did they have to pay you? How much did they pay me for my money? No, if you wanted to do a mud video, they wanted you to do a mud video like that. Free. Just give me a good patch of mud out there. I'm not. I'm just a cute Asian girl. Chinese girl gets stuck in mud with cute sneakers. Oh, no. She got cute sneakers. She's going to walk right in the mud with those cute sneakers. Honey, those are valuable. Yeah. Well, are you doing these are great Jamie. I haven't seen any of these. I come in expert. These are new. They're so weird. Yeah, it's a weird, it's a very strange fetish. I don't know if it's like, maybe it's like an ASMR thing or something. Maybe that, you know, maybe it's not even like sexual or just something in it. It's like relaxing. She took her shoes off. It's actual. Yeah, that's true. She's got her feet. She's moving around, getting all squirt dirty girl with your dirty feet. Dirty feet and your life. Look at her. She's getting down. Yeah. I lost a sock. Yeah, this is weird. Weird, man. Imagine this is your whole life and you're like, you go in the forums and you talk about what you guys do. I didn't even knew squishy feet in the mud video. Yeah, that'd be really weird, Joe. So Jamie, let's pull up something about the news. I mean, again, why, here's a real question. Here's a word question. Why is that so strange, but like someone who collects stamps, that's normal. Right. Some guy who loves, oh, it's crazy. He dressed up like a Nazi. He's got all the way down. And he goes all the way to this fucking head. Still smoking too. He's like quicksand. Is he in quicksand? Yeah, this is a whole playlist of mass mud and quicksand. You remember when people were terrified of quicksand and then it stopped being a thing? Now this, there's a whole radio lab podcast about that. It's really interesting because you hear the podcast and go, oh, yeah, I remember. People were scared of quicksand and then all of a sudden it went away. I forget what their reasoning is. Well, when we were kids, that was like one of the ways you could die. It's quicksand and sometimes you would, like if you're out in the woods and there was a suspicious patch, you might even poke it with a stick. Because it's like, fuck, that was a whole trope in like all movies. You know, like Tarzan stuck in the quicksand or you're in the quicksand then you someone throws a vine that you pull yourself out. Exactly. Something like 80 different movies. What are you supposed to do if you were really quicksand? You're supposed to treat like it's water and swim, right? I've, there's videos on it. Jamie says no. Go, Jamie, you a quicksand? No, there's videos on it. I was going to say I've seen one. So if you, if you, if that's a fucking quicksand, the best thing to do is, if your phone isn't fucked up, set it up to take a video. And then send that video to I love mudboys at gmail.com. It's my private email. I will come to you. Trust me. It seems like I won't get to you. But I will come to you. Come on you. I'll get you out. I'll come to you out. That's a, that's a, that's a, you see thing. I think you fall back. You have a service in your services. You get people out of the mud and you give them 1200 bucks, but you got to jerk off on their face while they're trying to get out of the mud. Yeah. You go out there with like big mud shoes, like snow shoes, but only for mud. And you come out there and fucking whack one off in there. Okay. All right. We're good. Deal's a deal. Hardest them up to a rope and hit, hit you, hit you to your winch and drag them out of swamp. Think of the bad luck. And you give them money though. Give them 1200 bucks. Here's 1200 bucks. Thank you. But to me, that's like the foot. That would be great. Seeing is like somebody does get stuck in quicksand and someone like, they see boots. And they're like, thank God. Thank God. And it is like a mud fetishes to his like, you know, like, no, I'm not. I'll get to you. Don't worry. I'm going to save you, but just, you know, enjoy it for a second. What about this? What if the, the fucking, the real mud fetishes? They set up traps. So they made their own mud holes. They dug them real deep and you saw real silty, very fine sort of sand. Yeah. So if you get in there, you slide right in like it's quicksand. And they have traps, they have traps. And they got like a little camera trap sends a text to their phone. So that's what we got one. And then they start chewing on Viagra and start getting their dick hard and then they run out. Dude. Or like like a spider. You can't just something. It's not. But you kind of fall in love with him, you know, and then you start dating them. And then like within, then, you know, like all of a sudden you realize like everyone they've dated, they've saved from quicksand and you begin to realize like, oh shit, they're doing a purpose. You're going to, you're looking for something like, does he have a flashlight? Let's see. Find some, go through stuff here. And you find schematics for how to build the perfect sand pit. You motherfucker, you trick me. It shows the water where the water's coming in to make the quicksand. You know, like need this amount of water to capture 200 pound man. Like there's metrics based on weight. That's what he likes. He wants to get like big, burly like fireman type dudes that jerk off on their hair. That's the thrill. He knows, maybe like he knows calls for specific types of people. Like he knows little drunk man. Yeah. That's good. Dude, if you ever done one of those, like if you've ever gone to spa and in there, like, and I'm going to fuck, I'm going to do like, I'm going to get a massage. But then you see in their catalog, they've got a mud dip you can go into that's somehow healthy for you. Like, you know what I mean? To consider like a healthy thing, you laying it up to your head. It's like, you know what I'm talking about, man? Like it's like mud spa. Yeah. Do you ever don't one of those? No, I have not. They're fucking off. Oh, they're using. Off. Dude, I went in there because like we, you know, I was with a, I brought a girl, my girlfriend at the spa and they made it look all romantic and shit. It's like a couple's mud dip. And like, you know, there's like flowers in between them and stuff. And you see it in the picture and it looks somehow relaxing your brain. Part of you's like, how could that, how's that going to feel good? Like it's like just sitting in mud, but it looks kind of cool. And you know, I love getting stone and getting massages. Like I might be following your heart just being mud. We got in these fucking things. They're like next to each other. And like, dude, like, they don't number one, they don't really. It's so stupid. And I was like it. They somehow they make it whoever's doing this shit is made. Try like, see if you can make a biggie. This is a cut normal thing for a couple to do. And then also you realize they don't change the mud. Oh, I'm pretty sure they don't refill the mud. I would you. Dirt. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So the culture that came out of some dudes balls is all like mingling with your culture and all that's like breeding in the mud. Yeah. Exactly. Dude, and not only that, but like the ones that we were in, I don't know if they were heated it wrong or whatever, but anytime I asked touched like close to the bottom, it was burning my ass. So it was like the heater in the bottom. The heater in the bottom was like burning my ass. So I was having to do like this. I don't know what you call like arch my back in the mud. The dips. Yeah. I was like doing dips in the mud. And then it's fucking hot as fuck. So like my heart like starts racing. Also, I'm like, I was pretty high. But like my ass is like getting incinerated by this thing. Oh my God. You went to a janky place. I'm janky mud bath place. I can hear that's actually the name of the place. Janky's mud bath place. What is the expression janky come from? Like a janky, like a shitty, clunky version. That one might be racist. That would be careful. That one might be one of them secret racist words. You didn't know his racist. I was fine. He'd been saying janky and then like, well, let me bring you back to the genocide of the iguan people and Jesus. What? I wouldn't be surprised. What is the ideology of janky? I have no idea. That's why I asked. Are you sure you don't know, Joe? I definitely don't know. I'm 100% innocent. What do we got? He just dies. I just want to make sure that I'm not stepping over any boundaries by using janky, because I want to be good ally. It's probably not connecting anything. It just sounds like a word. It sounds like a bad word. I think it was close to janky. There you go. It's close to janky. I'm trying to be through this quick. That doesn't fit me. I don't like the term janky. Janky's good. Janky's like, you've got a car with a fucked up break. That's just fucking janky break job. I think that's old though. The one in the 90s is like the first time I've invented it. Maybe if I did janky. That's African-Americans playing for the 90s. Yeah, that makes sense. That makes sense. Earlier citations in the 90s. Yeah. So who wrote that? Who wrote that article? Look at that. I mean, I know them. It's just weird. It's someone like we hear a thing like that. And I'm like, all right, that must be true. The first book they founded in first, that this person wrote the article, was to the rust, the longest war written by Jonathan Waldman. By the way, I'm very much kidding. Wasn't clear. I don't really think I made that word up. It's just joking. I can't find another one. It's amazing how attuned you get to comments that you and your brain is like your own. That's so funny, but I was thinking that like that could be misinterpreted. That's my word. I created it. What's another great word that they don't use anymore? That I started using recently? Oh, fresh. I started using fresh lately. Like that looks fresh. I don't understand. I say like that. I don't say with a normal voice. Fresh. It's those like deluxe fresh. No, you don't. Yes, I do. When things look good, fresh, fresh, things look fresh. Oh, you get like a, yeah, I hear it in the back. It gets like, looks fresh. It's like brat over there. Fresh. It's a good word. It's a good word. We need more beautiful adjectives for cool shit. So I started bringing back fresh. Hey, what's your, like policy when, like about cursing around your kids? Like, you know? I gave up. I gave up. You did? Yeah, I told them just don't swear. Don't swear around other people. There was too many times they caught me on the phone. Right. My nine-year-old was specially. She's the one who's always correcting me. Hey, with your party language. She says that. Yeah, yeah. She's hilarious. She likes to correct me. I try not to say it as much as I would say with you. I mean, hey, with your potty language. She says that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. She's hilarious. She likes to correct me. I try not to say it as much as I would say with you. But every now and then, I'll let a fuck word fly or a shit word fly. But it has to make sense. Dude. The funniest story would, I realize I say it too much as one of my daughter was three. We were, we had gone skiing together. And we were all packing up our stuff. And her helmet did not go in her bed. It wasn't in her bag. And I'm like, all right, everybody packed up. And I'm like, hey, your helmet and your bag. And she looks at the helmet, looks at the bag. And she just goes, shit. And she was three. See it a little, and me and my wife were just like, oh no. I did it. Three. But that's the right word to use. Shit. What are we doing? Like, we aren't even in that world. You and I are not even in that world. Like the world of, you can't say words. You can't say that word at work. We don't even live in that world. And yet we're raising our kids for that world. That seems to be a little crazy. And I understand, look, if I worked in an office somewhere or if I had to deal with people professionally, I wouldn't be dropping F bombs all day. You can't. People get upset. They don't like it. They want you to behave like a business person. They'll turn you into human resources if you have a funny joke about Puerto Ricans. You can't. You can't. There's no jokes. There's no laughter. You can't. You got to, so when you're telling your kids not to say certain words about other people, you're telling them that because you want them to be polite. You don't want people to feel uncomfortable. But you should never have them think that there's something wrong with those fucking words. Those words are important. I can't really explain it to them because I can't really say it the way I want to say it. It would just be too sensitive. Like I couldn't say, I can't say sometimes when someone's telling you something that you know isn't true. And they're telling you, you want to be able to look in the eye and go, hey, that guy's a fucking idiot. But I can't say that to a nine year old. Right. It's just too intense. Right. It's too intense. Right. Like if you say this person's an idiot, that's one thing. But if you say this person's a fucking idiot, that's a different thing. It's another level of thing. And you need to know what's what. Especially when the shit goes down. You need to know who's just a dummy. And who's a fucking idiot, right? Some guys just make mistakes or they think they know better, or they do something stupid and puts everybody at risk. But they're not doing it on purpose. And then some people think they want to run the whole show. Those people are fucking idiots. They're certain people that steal from you. They'll break in your house when they know you're not home. Those people are fucking idiots. Right. Yeah. There's a different level. And if we don't use the right words, then what are we doing? We're going to limit a kid's ability to express themselves. The words aren't changing. They're not changing you. They're not changing. It's just another tool for expression. And swear words, like really swear words, you're going to stop using swear words. You're going to make people upset about swear words. Get the fuck out of here. It's ridiculous. Yeah. No, no, no, no. I know, man. I just like, I get it. That's my wife. I've decided that. And some of my friends or parents of all of us said, just teach them not to say those words. Teach them to be nice. Or win the right time to say those words. It's just like listening to like, I don't know. This morning, I put on for no reason, like 10 crack of mammoths. And like, then my son was in the other room. And like, he comes walking in like he's just learning to dance. And then I pick him up. He's laughing or dancing. And I'm like, oh, fuck. We're dancing to the 10 crack of mammoths right now. Like he doesn't know what's being said. But you know what I mean? It's like, fuck. I don't know if I even even even even though he doesn't, even the fact he probably hopefully doesn't understand, at least hopefully does it. I still like, I don't know that. And it's like you're saying it's too much. The energy's too intense. It's very aggressive. Yeah. Yeah, there's certain, there's, you know, you don't want to shelter them a little bit from the most dark shell. You don't want to show your kid some murder movie, like the opening scene of saving private Ryan when they're four. You know what I say, sit down. This is what happens when people go to war. This is the closest that we have that represents what war is like. Right? Yeah. Yeah. Some people's guts hanging out, and legs blown off. Yeah. You're not going to show that to a four year. All right. Me neither. That's what it seems like. If I act, like I act with my friends around little kids. So I, I pull it in a lot, a lot. But occasionally, I'll say a shit for some. But I don't, I just try to, there's, there's words that I don't want to lose. Like, and I don't, the only reason why I think a lot of like these swear words like the F word or the shit word or whatever, if you're at work and you can't say those, like why not? Like what is that? What kind of job is that? Like what, what are we, we're, we're all the grown ups now. And when we were children, we thought that there was a system that was put in place by enlightened beings and these enlightened beings, adults, they knew better. We resisted, but we thought they eventually were correct. Yes. And then you get to be a certain age like, oh, that's nonsense. There's no adults. There's just people that got older. Right. They're just people. So as people, they, they, that you have to limit your language. The only thing that's good is when someone who you don't expect to says, get the fuck out of here. When they say it's even better. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Like a woman that you would think would be like like very reserved, very professional. And she's like, that checks a cunt. Like, no. Yeah. I love that. When you realize someone you thought was a square is not only not a square, but like a million times more out there than you are. But they're like, that's right. Yeah. Or they're, you camo. They just have like figured out a way to like not reveal to you or to the world that because they, they like understood. It's a little easier. People don't realize that unless you're around cool people. Those are the best moments when that window opens up. And, and you realize, oh, fuck man, I, I'm such a dope. I had you completely pegged as something that you're not at all. And those are really like, whoa, fuck, what's that called? It's not real. Marijuana cough. I know, man. I hate, I'm a high contract Joe with allergies. Everybody is. No. I have allergies. I have seasonal allergies. And, you know, anytime before this was happening, anytime I would get sick, I'd be like, well, this might be the end. And now like all of us who are like that were like, it's really intense, man. Cause like any demonstration, you know, my birthday was the other day. We got like, you know, they deliver booze in LA now. Like they'll deliver mixed drinks to you now. The time you deliver boats. Why would your boats brought to your door now? Hopefully not too fast. But I'm sorry. I'm quite full in the limery. But yeah, anyway, man, like I always just hung over, you know, but there was a moment where I'm like, is this a hangover? Am I, there is this like what's this headache? And you know, what's going, that's the, to me, that's the part of this thing is, you know, I haven't seen it getting dollars that much is like just the psychological pressure of what's going on. Like the way it's got to be like, you know, just psychologically like think all the people you and I know who are already teetering at the very edge of sanity. And like imagine them alone in an apartment for a month with like the news telling them, we don't know when you can let you out. Like whoa, how many people are like really losing their shit? And like, I'm not losing my shit, but at least a couple of times a day, I'll have a real claustrophobic moment. Like I can't explain it. It's like a, I don't know if it's a panic attack. It's not, it's just like the sense of like, oh, this fucking sucks. I don't want to drive by Trader Joe's and see people wearing face masks with six feet in between each of them and the fucking weirdness of it all. People are driving weird right now. And it's just like what the fuck people are driving weird. Yeah. Really aggressive. Yeah man. That, that, that, you know, I don't, people I don't think are acknowledging the fact that and they need to that if you're feeling, if you're feeling a little off right now, that's normal. Like you probably should acknowledge that. You know, or at least like otherwise people are going to start thinking they're really going nuts. When it's like, no, you just have some kind of like probably a new mental illness will be they'll probably a new name for a COVID related mental illness. You know, like pandemic associated claustrophobia syndrome or some shit. Like, you know, some like thing that is of new thing because we've never had to do this before. 100%. Yeah. I mean, do you know how many people are going to get sued for this? Do you know? I mean, how, how many people are going to sue the government for the closed downs? You know, many people are going to go crazy. Yeah. How many businesses are going to be lost? I mean, lives are turning upside down. How many people? Fuck man. Divorces. Oh my God. So many. Yeah. Dude, so many. You know, people forced into these high pressure situations that they didn't anticipate. And some people fall on a part. People with drug problems that accelerate because they need a relief, the anxiety from all this. Yeah, man. And we're in just beginning it, man. I mean, just beginning we're still three weeks away from at least here with this state is going to open up right? Yeah. Right. Yeah. But what do you think is going to happen in Georgia? Do you think when they open Georgia back up, you're going to get like another, another series of people that have it? Ah. What do you think if you had a guess? Man, that's a problem. I have no debt. All the data sources or so some of them are so very different. It seems like that it's like, you know, you have people who've won Nobel prizes, you know, saying what they think it is and you have other people who are doctors saying what they think it is and those things don't quite match to the point where it comes down to it's not like what I think's going to happen. It's what I hope is going to happen, which is like that it just not only that the curve keeps flattening, maybe not necessarily because I just maybe because it's mutating, maybe because it's herd immunity, maybe because you know, I don't know who to believe. You turn off Fox News. You see one story. You turn on CNN. You see the other story. You go on the internet. It's a fucking meteor that's going to hit. You go, you know, it depends on who you're talking to and have G 5G. You know, a variety of things, a low level bio weapon that's being combined with a horrific like powerful cyopsoporation. The fuck knows, Joe. We don't know. So it's like the, the, that to me is the, the real unnerving quality of this outside of worrying like if you go outside, like every time you cough, I'm like, mother fuck, I should have worn my mask. I'm doomed my wife's season. She's going to fucking kill my ass. But like that, you know, just that those moments they would normally just go completely unnoticed. I like those, those to me that new reality. The get highlighted. Yeah. And brother, that, that is like, that's another form of virus. It's fear. And it's, it's paranoia and it's like, it's a, it's a meme that spreads. So it changes your outlook, changes the way you interact with life. Yeah. It changes your outlook. And it changes the actual course of your life. Like you'll, you'll be operating with fear and operating with anxiety. And everyone's thrust into that without anything bad that they've done to, to, for no fault of their own, their thrust into the situation where even though they've worked really hard, they've been really disciplined and they've done the right thing. They've been conservative. They take care of their health. All the, all the, all the checks, everything. But still all of a sudden work goes away. Yeah. For everybody. Yeah. Nobody did anything wrong. So everybody's thrust into this situation. It's really the ultimate halves and half knots moment. And it's, for what's really interesting is like right when Bernie Sanders just stepped out of the race, like this is the example of why we need some sort of comprehensive plan for everybody if everything goes wrong. Yeah, man. This is right, right here. That's right. The capitalism moves the world. Yes, it does. I mean, it seems to motivate most of what we do. But the idea that there's, there's not more that we can do for the people of the community of the United States America as a community, right. That healthcare and education and stop people from being robbed, like stop, stop some predatory lending, stop all these things that you can clearly see. People are just getting fucked over from. Yeah. Spend more money on healthcare. Like we need that now. Like yeah, we went through a nice sweet spot where there was no real problems other than occasionally little blips of bad flus and bad diseases. And we squashed them real quick. This is a big one. Right. And hit the whole, and this is only, you know, as far as like terrible pandemics, the amount of people that it kills, per people that get it is not as high as it is for some of the more horrendous diseases. We got lucky. We should prepare for the worst. We should be prepared for airborne Ebola. Right. Okay. We should prepare for all that shit. We should think about it the way we think about arms races. Yeah. Like how much money they put it into the military and how much money they put into the war against viruses. So the war against viruses just killed 50,000 people at home. Imagine if China just had just launched missiles into American cities and killed 50,000 people. That would be at fucking war. All of our resources would be dedicated to that. Right. Well, why aren't all of our resources being dedicated to fighting off fucking diseases? Right. Questions. This is a real wake up call for that. It's also a wake up call for power grid people. People that are worried about the power grid go down. It's a wake up call for people that haven't had food stockpiled in their house. Wake up call for people that are living extended. You know, like they've really extended their reach as far as the how much their rent is and how much their car payment is. Yeah. They're really stretching it. Well, boom. Something like this happens and you're never going to play catch up. Right. We're barely keeping up with your lifestyle before all this went down. Yeah. And again, through no fault to your own. So you got to kind of prepare now. People are going to have to look at this like, okay, now we know something can have happened that we never thought could happen before in the whole world shuts down. Yeah. Now we know that's it. But we should we should act accordingly in like how we run things. Now we know. Well, that's the silver lining. I mean, like that's the silver line. It's like when you have a thing happen that you realize like, you know, whatever. Like in your car, you get lucky and you notice that the tire is like super flat and you fill it up. You just didn't notice or whatever. you think and it saves you from a later fucking thing that could have been a million times worse. But you know, man, the wake up call to me is like, it's no joke that you need to at least be on like some terms with your neighbors. And it's no joke that you need to understand how to do like how to grow food out of the ground. And it's some like basic first aid and stuff like that. And also to always have gas in your car, man. You know, we the other day went to get groceries and like fucking the, you know, left a credit card at the house, right? And like the car was kind of low on fuel because I hadn't gassed it up like I should have, right? And the combination of suddenly not being able to put gas in the car and these two dumb mistakes. It wasn't just a normal shitty day where your car runs out of gas. Now it's your cars run out of gas during a pandemic, meaning you got to call somebody to come and get put gas in your car or walk somewhere to get gas. That's a whole different walk than before. And that's asking someone to come and help you is kind of like asking, hey, would you mind like taking a chance? I mean, I know you're wearing a mask and everything. But you know what I mean? So suddenly, fuck ups in this kind of environment, they mean a lot more than fuck ups in like the previous world that we were in. And that's teaching me a real kind of responsibility. You know, like having some cash on it, like stuff like that. Like what we, you know, we should always be doing that. And to me, that is one of the, you know, and I hate using everything in the term silver lining right now. And it's like anytime you say, yeah, it's like, yeah, it's a silver lining. I mean, people who drown in their own fucking mucus. It's not the, you know, it's fucked up. But I guess one of the silver linings in it is just that. The fact that it's like, look man, Trump just was talking about maybe we should inject ourselves with a Lysol. Okay. Crazy that video. Have you seen the one when they focus on the lady who's a science advisor and she's sitting there listening to him say all this shit? Yeah. Yeah. I have. I've seen Paris tweeted it. And it's, uh, when you look into the abyss, the abyss looks into you. That's it. That's it. You know, and, but also in that look, you know, I saw her thinking like, listen mother fuckers, who's in line? You want to have, you want this job? I'm doing what I can to steer this crazy ship as best as I fucking can. And there's not much I could do. But it's like, you know, you see somebody seriously say to an entire planet that it might be a good idea to inject Lysol in your body. Your parents here, let's hear it. Let me hear it. You start from the beginning. I think you got to actually double click on it. And my computer I had to to get the sound out of it. Nothing. No, I don't hear that was Duncan. That was me. It's haunted. Anyway, bottom line is he's saying whacky shit and the focus is on this lady. And as she's watching him, she's like, I can't even fucking believe I have to handle this. Yeah. And she does. Dude, that's it. But to me, I see it. You can get the disinfectant into the body. That's maybe possible we could get up to drink Lysol. Why powerful light? Use light. Yeah. Kill it from outside or inside. I don't know how you do it. There you go. Because you see a thing like that. And it's like, OK, lean into that. That's going to like lean into that as the thing that you can count on. That's the thing saying inject Lysol. That's the kind of thing where like your crazy is friend if they said that to you. You would be considering like calling their friends or their mom to be like, hey, Jack, he's having like a hardcore manic episode. He's talking about injecting Lysol into himself. You better do something. That's the fucking president. And to me, what that tells me is like motherfucker, you need gas in your car. You need to make sure your phone is juiced up. You need to make sure that you are like, you got to be ready. Because if we like think we're going to lean into something like imaginary hammock made of like people who were saying that we should inject ourselves Lysol, then we're then it's our fault. That's your because you know, it's like, let's imagine, let's say you went and you, I don't know, you went into the forest and you got attacked by a tiger. But right before you went into the tiger, you, you're into the forest, you said to somebody, hey, do you think I should go in that for us? They're tigers there and they're like, no. And then they start shooting up with Lysol. You know what I mean? If you go in that forest and the tiger gets you, that's your fault. You fucking listened to a dude. You thought you could shoot up Lysol. You know what I mean? That's your fault. Now imagine, what was he thinking while he was saying that he's probably like, this got to be an intelligent way to get out of this fucking subject that I've already started and I've already coming up with perhaps for instance, maybe you could, maybe you could. So, supposing we hit the body with a tremendous, whether it's ultraviolet or just very powerful light. And I think you're powerful light that has a inject, but you're going to test it. And then I said, so you can't wait to go inside the body, which you can do either through the skin or in some other way. And I think you said you're going to test that too. Sounds interesting. Right. And then I see the disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute, one minute. And is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside or almost a cleaning. Because you see, it gets a little noisy. Yeah. Can we take your lungs out? Put your lungs through a car wash. Like what? Yeah. What a crazy thing to say. I mean, cleaning, cleaning, give him a cleaning. Yeah. Imagine like being his doctor and you have to listen to him say this like, so why don't you do the disinfectant? Yeah. Inside is like a cleaning. And you dip my liver and bleach. Can you take my liver out? You just microwave it. Yeah. So to me, you see that? And it's like, OK, well, I'm not quite certain that that is where I'm going to get my data streamed from. Because that's a lysol person. But then there must be a thing we can do regardless of the fact that clearly, bro, you wouldn't even talk like that on a podcast. Do I never say that now? But I'm going to imagine, imagine you have zero expertise in a certain subject. You're talking to someone who's like some expert in this said subject. And you're proposing these outlandish, like you're on a podium. You don't even have a private conversation in front of everybody. You're somehow having a side conversation where you're proposing these ridiculous ideas that show that you don't understand how disinfectant works. And like, why is that even conversation even taking place? Also, the other thing is because he did ask the question, that is a time for someone on that side of the room to go, no, look at her. You can't. Why didn't she do that? Because she knows if she interrupts him and goes, what you can't do that? You can't inject this infection. He would probably be upset. And she wants to do the best work that she can do. And this is just some nonsense. She has to handle along the way. Wow. Yeah. Yeah, I guess just a bad path. You look, first of all, and look, the guy works some ungodly amount of hours in a day, right? He's going to do some dumb shit. And he wings it a lot, right? He probably was stuck on that conversation of things that might be able to be done. And maybe you could do a strong ultraviolet light in the skin. Then also he's like, oh my god. I'm laying out possible ways that you could cure this there. I better keep going. I better have more than one. Yeah. And there's like, he's disinfectant. That's right. Disinfectant. Disinfectant. Maybe inside or outside. They have a way of doing that. Yeah. And then he says, and then he goes to her. Like he's looking for support. Like I think you said maybe. I think he said maybe you're looking at that. Yeah, man. I mean, it definitely has that sense. Like when you had to give a report at school and you hadn't prepared for it. That's it. That's exactly what it's like. Well, who were the Assyrian rebels? Well, they were from Assyria. Yeah. They were rebels. Yeah. And then heard there were tremendous rebels. They were fighters. They fought and they fought long and hard in Syria and areas around Syria. And some people in areas around Syria referred to them as rebels and said they were some of most intense rebels in the region. No, Assyria. It's a different place. You're dunking. You wrote a report about the wrong place. Assyrian. I was saying that. You heard me wrong. Oh, yeah. You just heard me wrong. Dad, I can't give you an A. Yeah, man. There's like, how many times did you bullshit your way through? Like those things in high school? Bullst every time. A lot of the times, man. I mean, I got like, I think it was the red badge of courage, which even now I can't remember what if it's I think it's about the Revolutionary War. And I believe that I didn't read it all clearly. I didn't read it because I still can't remember which war it was about. But I remember just having not read the book at all, having to write a report on it where I think I said it in Vietnam or something like her. And maybe it was a civil war. And that she was just like, that's not even the war that it was that I happened to have. You know, I completely failed. And not one of those one of those F's where the teachers met angry. But carbon and he had a bar. Yeah, I found out about Cliff notes when I was in high school. I couldn't believe it. Like this is a gift from God. Cliff notes. You just got to buy it on your own. You got to buy the book. But it's a way you can read it in an hour. That's right. But it's still sucked. You had to pay money for a cliff. I mean, I thought it was cheating. I was like, they're cheating, though. They're giving you a way to like, this is not how so you can learn better. To see you can pass a test. Right. That's this is. So you give me like, oh, yeah. And then Mikey said to her, get off my fucking porch. Yeah. Let's pay 30. That's, yeah. There's a little gray area a few years ago where kids could just copy and paste other people's reports from from years past because they were all digital and teachers didn't know. This was the thing they could check. They didn't know how to have checking tools to find out plagiarism and whatnot. But so many kids probably for a few years just did literally nothing. I'm sure you get out of school and you graduate in high school. You can't read like what? You can't read them. I didn't. I didn't buy a tenant. I can't just play video games. I mean, like a little bit of video games. Yeah. I just made my way through. Well, I mean, you know, there's like, that's one of the, isn't that now? The people who went to recently went to jail for like bribe for getting their kids into college. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of a version of the accent with your kids, right? You're like, you're like, just, their kids aren't, aren't supposed to be in college because they haven't done any work in high school and they don't know what they're doing. But if you pay enough money, you get them in there. It's like, and also aren't they doing some thing where they get people to go and take SATs for your kid? Like, you figure out a way to like, it's an identity theft thing where you can even get someone to go and like do the test as your kid using fake ID. And it should. So it's like an you've sending an operative that isn't your kid to take the test. So you can get no in high school. That whole thing was so crazy. They spent so much money to get kids in school. Yeah. But didn't want to be good students. Yeah. That's right. Almost like you think you could buy a kid's way to enthusiastic focus. That will there you go. I mean, there's the whole problem. Is that this is from the district attorney's office in Massachusetts. One of the photos that was used to show this girl's a rowing, high school rowing career that she got a scholarship on. That's a workout machine. Oh, wow. That was supposed to be like, yeah, look at her in her varsity. Oh, fuck man. What? Wow. So there was no photos of her actually rowing out on a boat. That's part of the thing. I couldn't just having people take tests. They went and staged photos too to be like, look, they're pretty good. Oh my God. You imagine how mad real roars would be at you. If they found out, you got a scholarship based on a fucking rowing machine photo. Wait, what was it for scholarships or was it just trying to get them in trying to keep it in. I don't think they got scholarships. They're like to be on the rowing team or whatever it's called. I forget. I have to talk to my head. Is it good for your GPA or something? It's a way to get in. Oh, way to get in. right so that in the price. Extra-curricular activity kind of stuff. That's why you're a record in my mouth. So they just, they fudge that and then bribed the rest of it. Do you think the kids knew? Yeah. Yeah, you could, you know when your parents like, hey, we just bought this rowing machine. Why? Just don't worry about it. We're just gonna take a picture of you in a rowing machine. Like, sure, you know, you're getting a picture of taking a you to try to get you into this school that your dad went to or whatever. You're complicit to some degree. Like, you have to be a little bit. Yeah, a little bit. Go to that picture. She doesn't even, she doesn't even broke a sweat. Well, it has a face covered. No, so you can't see what I want to see. Close it on that. She doesn't look sweaty to me. Crew is the word I was trying to think about. She looks like she's barely started exercising. There's another one on here too. Yeah, come on. So I don't see no sweat. That's a better one. Because look, stop. Go up. Look at that. That's a gray sweats, a gray t-shirt. It looks sweaty instantly. Yeah. Instantly. This is hilarious. She probably pulled it back a couple times. Am I done yet? Come on. You can't even get me into your seat. Fucking loser. My father's a loser and he takes pills. Yeah. No shit, dude. We want you to love me. We'll get me in a fucking UFC. All my friends are going, dude, that thing that's really fucked up is like there's some kid whose parents are making 20K a year, whose working is fucking ass off. You know, just like somehow managing to study nonstop to try to get into a good school. It doesn't get into the school because of that shit. That's the- is fucking ass off. You know, like just like somehow managing to like study nonstop to try to get into a good school. It doesn't get into the school because of that shit. That's the that's the satanic part is like they buy their way in. And that's someone's place. They have a limited number of places, meaning like theoretically someone doesn't get into the school who could be the person who is going to, you know, invent teleportation or some shit. Isn't that weird with schools like you have your first choice, second choice? Yeah, Billy got his third choice. Fuck. Yeah. Fuck, Billy's going on. Where's he going? South Dakota. Fuck, Billy. What's in South Dakota? Yeah, flat ground. Dude, I get it though. I mean, I get wanting to get enough some Ivy League. I get a little mononny school. I think that'd be cool because you're just- Especially if you're in, if you're in the Illuminati and your kids are dope. Yeah. That's so bad. You're the Illuminati within embarrassing it. And if you're like, I don't swear that much around my kids, my kids don't know how I talk around my friends. What if that's how it is with like Illuminati too? Like these kids don't even know their parents really Illuminati. Yeah. You know, and you're like, look, I'm trying to get you to be, you know, a better position in life. But I was working all the time. I wasn't around. I didn't push it hard enough. No shit. Are they got you in the air? Are they fucking know you're in it and they're just like, you're like, did you get into my fucking adrena chrome again? They're like breaking into your vaults, you know, taking your fucking like, Goblets of blood and drinking it. Party don't drink anymore. I'm like, blood. You have to stop this. You know, like, join them in the skull and bones. Don't they bring their kids to skull and bones? I don't think so. I think they do. I think they, they, once they're in, their son turns dirty to say, son, I'm going to show you something. They take them, take them to the skull and bones. Uh, don't they? They bring them in. No, you, if you go to school there, you get into it, right? That's how you, I think that's how you get to the school. That's how you get in stuff. Right. Like I see it's like, is that how you get in or is that how you get in? It's going bones. Like I would not, I don't think the whole school gets to be scorned. No, no, but that's, that's how you get accepted is what I'm at. That's how you get into the school. Isn't that funny? Like if you're in a place like Yale, which is very exclusive and very prestigious already, some creeps, like that's not enough. I want to get in the secret cult, dick-sucking society. What do they do? They don't suck dick. Do they? We know, doesn't there a rumor that they make each other blow each other on, take photos of it so that they, uh, they have something over them. That was what's one of the crazy online conspiracy theories, right? Yeah. They make every guy suck a dick and they take Polaroids of it. And so they always have it. They hold over you. I think that's just fraternity stuff. But yeah, is that normal fraternity stuff? I mean, birds talked about that. Right. Thing whatever for it. Yeah, they would jerk off on a biscuit. Right. Yeah. That's the circle jerk thing. And the last guy to come had to eat the biscuit. No one's really doing except for the one idiot. Yeah, one guy who can't come because he's just jerking off to your back. I love time. And he just go, yeah. I sucked a bunch of my friends, Dicks, who's fucking cares. I mean, aren't we in a time now where like, like a picture of me emerges, sucking all my friends, Dicks. I think there's more to do that. I think they peg you or something and they take pictures of it where I'm going to strap on. So you got pegged. You want to be in the water. But you know, they want to rise through the branch, uh, Raytheon and get to the top. Everyone in Raytheon gets pegged. Like, well, you know, that's just like fucking work. We all get pegged. Now what? So what? We're vending bombs now, you know, like, who cares? Of course we get pegged. Yeah, but the guys weren't a goat costume. So what? I like to wear a goat costume when I get pegged. I like too much kinky shit. It's like, God damn it. I hope we get to a time where like they take pictures of someone doing a fucking thing that's legit fucked up so that you know, and they get banished for it. It's like I'm God forbid. Like I can't even imagine the Polaroids that get emerged of weird shit. I've done, you know, I've got it only imagined. You can't imagine. I can't. Uh, but that being said, it's like, yeah, I wonder what? What? I think what the initiation, I get it. Like it is a look, let's face it. You're not going to travel free fun to be a part of a little tiny group that's a part of an exclusive group. Right? You got the exclusive group that's Yale. And then you get to little scallum bones while I get together. All brothers in the room. You know, they probably have like secret words. They have to say in line shit. Yeah. I mean, we that's the thing that I imagine based on the way I have come down to understand things, whatever it is, is way more boring than we imagine because you know what I mean? Like when you don't know what a thing is, you always project the worst thing on it. My guess is it's boring as fuck. It's probably just some college bullshit where people are in a frat sit around and like make dumb jokes and do stupid shit. And it's nothing. Probably don't even peg you. They probably just take a Polaroid of your asshole. Got it. Look. We got your. Your man. Shut. Yeah. We have a picture of your asshole. It's your soul's fingerprint. I'm showing you about it. You're so speaker friend. I'm actually your asshole told a lot about you. That's the thing. Look at the person's eyes. You know, and you see their soul. It's a windows to soul. What if the asshole is like you really know whether you like someone just but looking at their asshole. Oh, but like thing about the asshole tells you things. Books come out decoding your asshole. You know, like people read hands. They read fingerprints. You can't they read assholes. I bet assholes tell you a lot. Just like someone's eyebrows do like someone's got like mean eyebrows like whoa that guy looks aggressive. I don't want to read it. Look guys got big, big bushy eyebrows and he's not mean I get it suspicious. He's all friendly with this big crazy fucking eyebrows, but all the villains have big crazy eyebrows. They're all angry. Yeah, they're those crazy eyebrows. Yeah. Yeah. It's just like man for one, here's probably for sure. We don't know that you can't tell person future from their asshole. Yeah, because no one's thought of it. That could be the new thing that people pick up as a business during this pandemic. Yeah. Asshole reading. Yeah. Or what if it's like a what if it's like a there's a skin. Is it this guy? You are. Your asshole flots of do a QR code. All this time we've been looking for alien signals from space. We didn't know it was in our assholes. Yeah, it was all all photos of our assholes. If you put them together on a grid, it gives us the diagram of how to build a spaceship to get out of here. I was going to have to have all the photos. It's like a giant jigsaw puzzle with eight billion pieces. You take eight billion assholes and you put them on a grid and you'll see the schematics behold. It'll tell us exactly when the sun's going to supernova. About 50 years. Maybe what if that's what the quantum computer. The first thing it says is I need pictures of all the assholes on the planet. Like if you vote, you have to show a photo. Your asshole or your vote. You have it on your phone. That's your thing. It's the thumb. You know, thumb prints are not exact. Assholes are exact. Exact. And they don't get changed by workouts or they don't like, you know, you thumbprint, you can't see a bigger, be a little bit different. How do you know? I don't know that assholes don't get changed from workouts. Well, they can, one thing they can do with your thumbprint, right? Some people burn their prints off. You can't really burn. Well, you can't get your burn. Your asshole into an unreadable. That's one of the levels of the CIA. You can't get a good relationship. People keep reading my asshole wrong. Look, I'm more than my asshole. Listen, with that. You just did three and a half hours. Holy shit, man. It's crazy. It's four o'clock already. Listen, man. Your show looks amazing. I'm very excited for you. I'm very happy for you. Thank you. Tell people once again, it's on Netflix. It's on Netflix. It's called The Midnight Gospel. Please, just watch it. It's like, yeah. I'm very proud of it. I think you'll enjoy it. DuncanTrustle.com. DuncanTrustle on Twitter. DuncanTrustle on Instagram. DuncanTrustle family our podcast. Yes. Thank you, brother. Thank you, brother. I love you too. Always good to see you, man. That's a good question. Thank you. Bye, everybody. See you. That was so fun, dude. Do those.