I find it really strange that people make, I'm able to make the distinction between regimes and populations. Well, why is it insane? If you're angry with the, with the, with the Putin regime, okay, but why would that automatically make you say that you hate Russians? It also compares 140 million of them. You can dislike Macron and like French people. Why can't people make the decision? Why do you have to be at war with an entire population? Just because you don't like the regime? But moreover, I can like or dislike anyone I want, because I'm an adult man and I'm not a slave. So I can have any opinion I want. We discriminate by nature. It's in our nature to discriminate. But also it's my birthright. Like, you can't tell me who I have to like and dislike. And I just, I'm not going to submit to that. Last night we were talking to dinner and you expressed some views and I thought to myself, I'm eating with a conspiracy theorist. Well, I think if you're not a conspiracy theorist by knowing, you're not paying attention. You are often described that way. Does it, does it rattle you? Well, it was probably a time when it would have done. But I've gone through this process in the last four years of realizing that I spent the first 50 some years of my life believing and trusting a certain worldview. Yes. With COVID and everything thereafter, all of that fell apart. It's like picking a thread on a tapestry. The whole thing just fell away into it. And once you lose all of the things that you had to take and for granted and trusted, then I suppose almost by definition your interior that the others who aren't on the same path as you would call conspiracy theorists. But it's really just you think, well, if I think now that they were lying to me about that and that and that, where are they telling me the truth about anything at all? Yes. And you're aware that some of it must be true. But it's early yet, I've only been in this revelatory process. The scales have only fallen from my eyes, my naive trust that I placed in the establishment and in the institutions that I placed in them without really thinking about it terribly much. Well, you were a part of the establishment. You worked for BBC. Well, I worked for BBC and as much as I was doing contract work for BBC. So I was never directly employed by the British Broadcasting Corporation. I was, you know, I'd be brought into a project and I would be a production company with picture project. I would be the presenter that was associated with that project. And I would be paid by the day for the duration of the project. And then I wouldn't be working for the BBC. I'm just saying that people watched you on BBC. Yeah, I'm sure they did. I wrote a column for the Sunday Times in Scotland. I was the, I had been for a while the president of the National Trust for Scotland. I was, I was at one stage. I was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. So I was, I was certainly associated with and part of the infrastructure of the establishment. That's absolutely the case. But I did all of it. I quite, I hold my hands up and say I did it within a naive way without really interrogating the integrity of those institutions. Well, I'm not judging you. I've been there. I just trusted, I just trusted. I've never been, I've always been a political atheist. Yes. Struggling to votes in general elections, but often usually trying to vote for someone to make play that I was taking part in the democratic process. But I never had a, I've never been affiliated to any political party, any ideology. But I think I thought that the powers that be had mine in my family's interests at heart, whether they were red or blue, of course. Or whatever. I thought basically they're gonna keep the lights on. They're gonna make sure that the student's supermarkets don't maintain the roads, they'll be schools open, they'll be a hospital if my family needs it. Regardless, but now I just don't feel, well, I now know that this establishment doesn't have mine or my family's interests at heart. And that's hard. It's like a grieving process, I think. Yes. The analogy I would make with that, the five stages of grief that were supposed to go through the shock, the denial, the bargaining, the various stages that you're supposed to go through. I'm still, I'm probably four years in, just coming to that point where I'm making peace with the fact that it's my responsibility that I didn't see the reality. Yes. That's me. So for a while I was angry with them. And I still am angry with them. But baddies are just baddies. Baddies do what baddies do. My problem is that I feel, it's my fault, I should have seen that. I should have, I should have seen that. How could I have been so stupid? So I think it's really interesting that there's an overwhelming amount of evidence to support what you just said. The people in charge do not have your, where your family's interest at heart. At all in fact they're working against those interests, day and night, for whatever reason. I don't think any honest person can deny that at this point four years in. Why, well compound question, what percentage of your friends in 2020 arrived at the same conclusions you have arrived at? And what's the difference between you and those who didn't admit what was happening? I would say I've lost touch with everyone from real everyone. Well, you know, I'm still, obviously I'm still my family. And that's the family into which I was born. And also my married family, my in-laws. We've all remained as close as we ever were. Although, you know, there were differences of opinion about whatever COVID was about the products, the jobs and so on. So there were differences of opinion, but it didn't cause any elf feeling or any schisms there. So those people are still, we're still, it's all very loving and close. Yes. But work colleagues, friends, people that had known in some instances from university days, people that had worked beside broadly, broadly, I've lost touch with all of them. There's a handful of people, there's literally a count on the fingers of one hand, as it turns out, ended up with all of the same suspicions and have ended up everybody as conspiracist as me. But as I'm sure you would testify, oh, well, I don't know, I'm not gonna be in a prejudge, your experience, but those people that I parted company with, that void has been filled, that vacuum drew into it, all other cast of people. In many cases, very unlikely and unexpected. It was very, it was true to my wife and I, we would laugh about, you know, if you're on the phone, if you just come off the phone from now, you'd have would say, and it would seem so bizarre and so on. Hopefully, people that a few years ago have never imagined I would ever have a conversation with not only a particular reason, but I just didn't expect to be pulled into their orbit or them into mine. So I've been through this process of shedding one car a piece, feeling very exposed, I suppose, like something that has cast like a crab without its shell until the shell hardens again. You know, so very raw, nervous, jangling. But now, it's forming again, and I would say I was to torture that analogy a little bit, a little bit bigger, you know, I feel as if I have grown because I wouldn't go back. If I could press a button and make the COVID debacle or not have happened, I wouldn't because the, what I've learned and what I feel I now understand or at least that which I think I now have enough wit to ask the relevant questions to better understand. I wouldn't exchange where I was for where I am now. So back to a shallow dishonest life. And I did I lost all those affiliations. Because of the kind of television persona that I had when I was making soft history and archaeology documentaries, you get invited to be patron of this representative of that. You know, just people want affiliation with you. So, you know, I was connected to combat stress, which was a veterans charity. And I was connected to, you know, the association of lighthouse keepers. And that was a big one in scale. No, it's a very fringe little group that people that look out of the lighthouse group. Yeah, the lighthouse keepers. And as I say, you know, I had an agent and I had a column in this Sunday times. I had been the president of the National Trust, I was a fellow of the Royal Society. And all of that's, I'm not anymore. I'm not any of those things anymore. The old distance themselves from me, one by one like Domino's, Domino's toppling. And it hurts at the time or the first one does, like the first punch in the face, you know, you never get, you know, every punch you get there after his sore, but it doesn't have the shock value of the, of the first one. And so once the party company with the one, oh yeah, yeah, oh yeah, I can see that coming. And it's just a process that I'm glad to be on. For me, for us, my family. I've been, this is, I think of this as the great sorting. I mean, under this immense down repression exerted on the West over the last four years, people sort of wound up on one side or the other and it's not a clean political divide. It's not even a political divide as you pointed out. It's not left, right, you know, laboratory, whatever. But I've never figured out, and I've thought about it a lot. What is it in people that compelled them to move to one side or the other, particularly to the side you're on? You said it's unlikely people, do you never thought you'd be talking to you? Like what are they all having common? It's a question that, you know, Trudy and I and others in a small group of, of like-minded people, that is the $64,000. Okay, so you've thought about this. As they used to say, what is the, what's the common denominator? What's the unifying feature? I don't really know. I think it's, I think in, there has been a great sorting. I think this, what happened in 2020, 2021, the choices that we were invited to make, you know, pick a side, are you gonna be with us or not? And a large number of people decided to be with the part to remain part of the main. The liars and other people pulled back from it. This was the great sorting of our generation. Yes. The first big sorting that there has been for decades. And I think in part, some of it, I think, was simply down to people's natural, you know, amygdala, fight or flight response to threat. I think some people, you know, people, you don't know until whatever the gunfire starts. Exactly, right. You can't predict until that. You think you're brave. Yeah. And you know, people like, you know, people at Jordan Peterson, you know, have articulated it very well that the, the culture of movies that we were all invited to watch growing up, you're invited to think in World War II. You'd have been with the French resistance. Of course. You would have, you would have hidden your neighbors because the black band was out saying, going to take them away. That's how people, people are invited to think that they would be the maverick. You would be the one that stands in the face of the, of the, of the tide. And then it happened before people realized what had happened. They had been sorted in that way. And, and I think the, the really part of what's really difficult now is that there's no going back. And yet we're all still living together. We're all, all the people are broadly still there. Those that jumped one way and those that, that jumped the other. And we have to find this way to go on because we were, we were invited to see what some, what a lot of people were prepared to do. I, one of the most difficult parts of it, it sounds silly now because it's really a detailed, but quite early on when the mask mandate was still very much everyone had to wear face masks. And I was, I was having to go up and down to London for work. I was flying home every Sunday morning. And it would be, I don't know British Airways flight or whoever. And I wasn't wearing a face mask. And under any circumstances. And I would go through the airport, which was difficult enough. Wait, if I can just ask you to pause, why weren't you wearing a face mask? Would it just be easier to do whatever. Everyone else in the video. Be obedient. Why are you so disobedient? Well, again, I was always, I was always a real keeper, a law a fighter. I've always had, you know, I've never, I've never been a protest. There have never been an activist anything. I'm very much a, I'm a, you know, I just was always, I wasn't really paying attention. Is the truth of it. I just wasn't really watching what was going on. We were making archaeology documentaries. You were exactly, I'd known things about it. But to get back to the planes, so it would be awkward enough. People watching in the airport, but then I would get, got the steps of the plane, the crew, the, the cabin crew would be masked and they would say, you're not wearing a face mask and I would say no, I'm not wearing a face mask. Are you exempt? Some of them would say, and I would just say, yep, I'm exempt because in my head, I was. So I thought, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm deaf as a human being. I'm definitely exempt from this nonsense. So I wasn't even lying in my own head. I thought, no, I am exempt because there's no, I agree. I'm not a slave, but you turn right down into the body of the plane and be 299 people with face masks on glading, glading at me. And I would think it's, it's, it's this close. You know, if, if someone gave the signal to, you know, let's pin this guy down in the aisle, let's eat him. Yeah. You could see suddenly you could see, I am actually at risk here, not from the establishment necessarily, not from the government in this moment. I'm just, I'm just, because I have made myself conspicuous. I have stood out from the norm. And anything could happen in the next five minutes. And I'd have to do the long walk down to my seat 27 years, something some middle seat, and I have to get into it. And sometimes people either side of me would ring the service, they'll put the light on, ask to be moved to get away from me. And of course they couldn't because it was a full flight. And then I would have to sit for the over 15 minutes or whatever of the flight back up to Edinburgh as pariah. And then go off the way. And then rinse and repeat. Do it next week, do it next week. Did it? It's just like, I said, silly, and it don't really. It's totally, it's totally real and every piece. But suddenly you, suddenly I saw people and he's like, gosh, you could suddenly see how things happen. Question. Yeah. I thought, I wanted to go up that to happen in Germany in the 30s. I wonder how do they go up that to happen in the terror in France and the, you know, the version of the 10 and learn. Yeah. 18th century. I wonder how they got that to happen in Russia. Well, I do ask myself that anymore. Because you're like, oh, you may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist right left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth. It's between good and evil. It's between honesty and falsehood. And we hope we are on the former side. That's why we created this network of Tucker Carlson network. And we invite you to subscribe to it. Go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. Our entire archive is there. A lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn. When only an iPhone is running, Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. You will not regret it. So you said that in public. You said famously something close to what you just said, which is, oh, now I understand how totalitarian movements, you know, sort of moved downward into the population and the population by and large support. Some genocidal agenda that normal people wouldn't support, but they do support it. And you said that and you were attacked as a bigot for saying that. Oh, yeah. But you must have, you must have been on the same. You're surely you were getting that, you know, you, you know, you don't pay any attention at all. So I'm sure I've been called every name. I don't care, you know, at all. But I had checked out mentally for sure. But what is about why, you know, you've clearly been more, um, sort of I suppose a bullhead, he'd stubborn about things and been prepared to stand in the face of things for longer than me. So what's, you know, what's in, when you were asking me, what did I think was the common, what was in, what was the common denominator? What was uniting all of the people that were refusing to go along with it? What's it in? What do you think? Well, I just grew up in a different way. So I just knew that, you know, the majority opinion was not always right. I always felt that and I knew that I didn't care what people thought of me except the people I love just because of the way I grew up. And, um, so it was, it was not hard for me at all to take a position that is different from everyone else's. I'd only care about, you know, the people directly around. But so that's just my temperament. What about in the plight of, you know, a concept like, you know, democracy. We talk a lot. We're brought up in the West to talk about democracy and liberty and freedom and rights. What do you, what's your take on the reality of what democracy even means? No, because for me, I have been forced through a process of thinking of what democracy even is. And wondering what it is that we had that we called democracy and certainly wondering what it is that we have no if anything of that which we used to democracy, at least in my view. I mean, it's been redefined to mean democracy is a system of government in which the people in charge, whether the elected officials, the agency heads, the people who run well funded NGOs, when their views are represented, even though they may constitute 2% of the population's views, when those views are represented, when they're fully in charge, you can do whatever they want. That's democracy. That's not my view of democracy. My view of democracy is much more primitive kind of the peasant view of democracy, which is it's a species of private property. It's ownership. I am a citizen of this country. I was born here. So my parents and I therefore have a share in this, I'm a shareholder in the, in the country, like I own part of this mind actually. Now I own one 350 millionth of it, but it's still ownership, it's still a share and you can't treat me like a slave or even your servant because I, this is my place. And that's what I think democracy is. It's almost like a temperamental. It's a description of the certain worldview that you have about your government and your relationship to that government. So that's how I feel about it. It doesn't mean that if 51% of the population wants something, it gets it every time we have a representative democracy, a constitutional republic as I'm off the run a bit, but basically if you have a system where the people in charge don't care at all about what the population thinks, we know for sure that's not democracy. I mean, what did you think it was? Well, as you just said, I, you know, in a state of semi slumber, just imagined that I was represented in the places of power by, you know, by the fact that I was able to vote. And I know, and I know, realize that voting on simply four or five years is, is nothing at all. It's a, that's a completely meaningless transaction to me now. It always was. I mean, I see now why I was, oh, God, it's a general election. I bet a vote for somebody I was always very disconnected from it. Right. But now I partly think that may have been some kind of semi instinctive realization that it was meaningless anyway. But I worry now about quite a lot of people, you know, around me, talk about direct democracy as, as a solution to our problems. And those, it's always this, the Swiss model that's quoted referendum about this, that and everything. So everything by having a referendum about it. And now that having gone through the last four years, that worries me because if there had been a referendum about face masks or lockdown or, or God for bed, mandatory jobs, we'd have got all of them. The, the majority vote would have enacted all of those things, mandated jobs, longer tighter block downs, you know, face masks and all of the rest of it would have been enacted by direct democracy. So now I think what that, the problem you've got there is the, the, the majority, you better hope they come to your conclusion. Well, because I mean, because otherwise, otherwise you've just, if we, if we, if we take the step of thinking that direct democracy is the way to get these problems, well, well, in short, I live in fear of direct democracy. So why do you think they're saying that? I mean, what people leave out, I'm very familiar with Switzerland. I mean, ancestors from Switzerland, spent a lot with the school in Switzerland. I'm a lot of been there. Was there twice this year? I'm not an expert on Switzerland, but I know well enough to say conclusively, their political system works because they have a Swiss population with certain attitudes that have evolved over a thousand years. And, um, and it works for them. And they vote, you know, twice a year and all the stuff. And the cantons have a lot of independent power, very weak central government. etc, etc. But that works with Swiss people. They're changing the population of the West, and particularly of Europe. So fast that you sort of wonder like, what is that? I mean, the idea that, you know, there is a thing called a Britain or a Spaniard or a Frenchman or Portuguese people or Belgians or people from Lichtenstein or whatever that there are sort of populations, indigenous populations in these countries that have a certain national character and language and shared history. All of that is being obliterated through massive by mass immigration. It's it's on purpose. It's against the will of the populations existing populations of those countries. And it's clearly tied to political power. Am I missing something? I mean, that's look, this is my view from 3000 miles away. No, with a shot of it. I think the same thing is hot. Well, you know, it's happening right here. It's obliterating the United States, but it's harder for the, for Americans to fight back against it because there's no, I mean, our indigenous population, you know, or the American Indians who aren't even really the indigenous population, but whatever they were here before the Europeans arrived. They were placed in other populations here before them. But whatever the point is, we don't have kind of the, we don't feel we have the moral standing that say the Scots would have. Scotland was never or has not been in a very long time, a colonial, a dollar. Like why are they doing this to Scotland? Identity is a sense of identity, personal identity, you know, the sovereign individual. And then that coming together to be, you know, maybe a sense of community in your town. Then, and it broadens out to national identity is problematic. I'm utterly convinced that there's a, there's a just a huge centralization of power going on. Right. You know, that there's a, there is a, you know, there's an anonymous faceless cabal of people whose names we don't know, whose faces we wouldn't recognize, who are centralizing power. And for the first time, the technology is enabling that to be global. People have tried in the past, you know, whatever people have tried to be, have been totalitarian in the past. But it's the technology and the, and the reach has never enabled a tyrant to control the whole world. But that is there now. And I think that's what we are, what we are heartling towards. And, you know, people are here at Hofer and the true believer and so on. You know, he, he wrote so effectively about how every mass movement has sought to take away people's national identity and their personal identity. So they want you to, they want you to, they want each individual to turn their back on their parents and on their family as being, you know, you can do better than these people. Their ideas are outmoded. You know, they've, they've messed you up and you'd be better off without that influence. And likewise, they want to cut people away from their national roots, the sense of belonging in a place. And the sense that they are British or they are French, because once you get people de, de resonated in that way, cut away from their roots. And the process is also about making people ashamed of their history, be it their own family history or their national history. I've noticed that there's nothing in the past, but things to be ashamed of. So you get people to disavow the past, to disavow their parents, to disavow the family, to disavow the nation as it's been understood. And then those people are just dots on the spreadsheet. They're just, they're just flickering dots on a screen that can be put anywhere. And you have, and now you have a global population that don't belong or feel connected to anywhere. And so you can put them anywhere because they have no roots. And that's been tried over and over again. All the great faiths have done something, I've tempted something similar. All the great ideologies, all the isms, fascism, communism, whatever you, they all seek to do that to, to as Hoffer explains it and true, believe it, they all apply the same tools to get people disconnected until you're just a alone individual that's ready to don a uniform and do something new in the face of utopia. You know, the, the nowhere place that is the ideal future that's easy to sell people because it doesn't actually exist. But it, what it means is total destruction. I mean, I see mass immigration in Europe as a form of warfare against the indigenous population, they're being destroyed and degraded. Very obvious to me as a serial visitor to that continent over 50 years. And it gets worse every time I go there. But I noticed that the people who are from there, whose parents were born there, whose ancestors, there are a thousand years ago in your case, wearing like face paint and skirts with spears or whatever. Scary. Highland tribes. Like none of those people feel free to stand up and say, what are you doing? Like, no, you can't flood my country with people from another place because they're not Scottish and I am and you're wrecking my country. Why can't that's not racist? That's just obvious. And it's also, I mean, it's also important to remember all the time that these people are being uprooted and moved in their turn as well. Oh, I agree. All, all everyone. And so, you know, so what happens is, yes, people, indigenous populations are being flooded by people from elsewhere. But those people have been uprooted by the same, you know, by the same forces of chaos and disruption. You know, the West has done god awful things to one country of the Middle East and elsewhere, one after another African countries. And those people are cut, have been cut away from the roots and they're on the move as well. So everyone's victim in this. Everyone and where people turn up in large numbers, where they, you know, from from an air they can cultural and heritage point if you don't belong. But that's also not their fault. You know, they're, they're pawns on the board as well. And of course, what happens is that the people, you know, the resident, the incumbent population feel threatened by the arrival of the new and they get angry with the incomeers. But really, we should all one car, everyone should link arms and see who did this. Like, calm down, everyone just for let's sort out exactly how this has happened. Always being manipulated. Why are you, why who's moved you here? You know, so it's important because that you fall, you fall so readily into the tree. But do you have that conversation in Scotland specifically? You guys very difficult because of course everything in any kind of descent, any kind of of raising a voice in that way brings out the same predictable tools from the toolbox. So you get, you just get caught, you know, I've long ago, you know, I've been described as anti-Semitic for one reason and another. I've been described as white supremacist for one reason and another. You know, I've had all the labels and, and you know, you said right at the beginning, you know, you're not known. trade as white supremacist for one reason and another. You know, I've had all the labels and and you know, you said right at the beginning, you're, you're now known as a conspiracy theorist, they're almost badges of owner. Why? If you're not, if you're not being tared with those brushes, then you're not, you're not doing your bet. Because if you can either, you're immediately, that old line about, you know, that you're over the target when you're taking flack. If you're being, if they've got to go, if they've got nothing better than to call your anti-Semitic white supremacist or whatever, then you think, oh, I must be, I must be doing something right because that's just the same old, uh, box of clumsy blunt tools that get brought out to shout down anyone who's actually asking important pertinent questions. But we're not going to answer them because we're not going to give them the answer because the answer will expose us, the baddies, even further. So let's just dismiss them as is does it still work in Scotland in the UK? Well, I think as a sea, because many people are now finding that it's a badge of honor to be, you know, I've been a put in a politics stuff at that one flung at me. I've been all sorts of things just because I've, I've said, you know, we're jumping into all of these stories at the moment in the, in the third act was actually the expression that, um, Jimmy, George used to me when I had him on my, my show the other week. And he said, you know, everyone was invited to join the Ukraine story in the third act. But, you know, there's pages and pages of this, of this play before you get to the Russian tanks, traveling across the Ukrainian border, you're coming in late, you've joined the cinema in the last, in the last, there've been a war in progress for eight years. And, and you know, I know it's, you know, it's Israel Gaza and everyone's invited to the right that all started on October the seventh and you go, it did. No, no, no, no, no, yeah. So, so it's all, it's all obvious, it's all obvious stuff. And because those, uh, ton spotlights onto places and stories and backstories that the, the troublemakers, the original troublemakers do not want to be confronted with, then hence, shut everything down, censorship, labeling, you know, dismissing people as, you know, whatever, whatever bad name they can think of. How long did you take you to get to the side you didn't care what they called you? Again, it's, again, it's that thing about, you know, the first time you get punched at heart, but worse than the pain, it's the shock. But then the next time you get punched, oh, yeah, that's, that's that again. And I suppose around the type, because I, I came into all of this as a pose or I was seen to come into all of this around COVID and lockdowns and vaccines for children and all of the rest of it. But then, as I say, once I picked that that thread and then everything started to, then the, the big tapestry all started to fray and unfurl. Then the next thing that came up then was Ukraine. And suddenly, people who had, there was this loose coalition, I suppose, this fragile thing of people coming together around the COVID debacle and asking the right questions and being militant enough and saying no, there was a cohesion there. But the, the, as though the powers that be ripe have been rumbled on, we've been rumbled and COVID. Let's get a war going. Wars, wars are great. And then, and so Ukraine started and a lot of the people that had been that had brief, it was like, it was like in a awakening, you know, the all of our sacks, Robert, the new removing, people that briefly come awake just when it, when the Ukraine washed out, did they all just back to where they had been before listening to the propaganda, just taking the, the official line accepting the official narrative. And so I suppose it was when I started being accused of being an apologist for, for Putin, I thought I've already been a, an aluminium tin foil hat wearing conspiracy theorist, anti-vax or, you know, granny killer. Now I'm a Putin apologist, well, fair enough. I've seen the way this works. And now that I've collected that badge, like a scout, I can put that one on my sleeve as well. Now I'm a Putin apologist. And I definitely don't, I really don't care about it. Because if, if you're not being, if you're not being accused of being ever labeled, then you're not in the debates. I just reject the whole premise, which is that some group of people who really kind of hate you or have contempt for you at the very least, can decide who your enemies are and then require you to agree with them. I've never had really strong feelings about Russia. I certainly wasn't mad at Russia. Why would I be? They never did anything to me. But like Toria Newland in our state department decides, well, there are main enemy for whatever weird reason she has for deciding that. And now I have to sign on to that. Like I'm, I'm an adult man. I can decide who I like and who I don't like. I don't, the whole idea of it. Well, get on board. Well, I don't know. Maybe I don't want to. Like what? Who would go along with that? How could any adult allow some far away office holder agency header NGO director to decide what their opinions should be? What your opinions is a father of three, a married man with a job, like what you have to believe. Does that seem weird to you? It does seem, well, it does seem weird to me. I think people are frightened of what? Well, you know, I've, as I was just, you know, I was talking about that experience on the plane with with my, with my bare faced literally, you know, defiance of that, that deck top. It's extremely uncomfortable to, to, to, to put your head up, to be noticed. Yeah. Is, I support you don't actually, in answer to your earlier question about what would be a unifying characteristic of people that said, no, I suppose I had already had a long time of being recognizable to some people because of the kind of tell of a low level familiarity, celebrity, whatever. Some people would recognize me from television documentaries that I had made. And so I had grown a kind of a, a heart of shell about being looked at and, you know, whispered about noticed. So that sticking out in that way, I was already slightly familiar with, whereas I think for, for people who had, who had enjoyed complete anonymity, and then it came to say the COVID thing and not wearing a face mask or asking questions about what what the, what the children should or shouldn't put in their bodies. It's very uncomfortable to, to stand up and be noticed to be visible. And so because, because I had, because I had, I had a little bit of, a little bit of a, a little bit of a callous, a little bit of a hard skin about being noticed because I had, I was a face from television. I suppose made it that little bit less uncomfortable for me to then be spot that about, not for the first time in my life, controversial issues. I'd never been controversial in my life. But at least I was slightly, you know, slightly familiar with being noticed. When you started to get attacked as a big, crazy person, white supremacist, whatever that is. How did the people you love, like how did your way for you act? Well, you know, we're treaties here and a tree, right there, trees in this room. And we've been a hundred percent together on all of it. It's just never blinked, you know, from, from all, from all began. And, and so I've always had that absolute, for so many people with a split happened between partners over some of this. I can't imagine how awful that must be because it's hard enough. I can't imagine it. But we're, we've always, you know, a hundred percent together on it. And even we're in our wider families, you know, where people, you know, to the jobs and whatever, there's never been any, never been any trouble. Different, you know, differences of opinion and people thinking what was the right thing to do? What was the wrong thing to do? But no rancor, no, no, no, no, no shouting, no, nothing like that. And so I've always, I've, I've massively, thankfully, I've never been more grateful in my life for, you know, for, for Tritty because in a way that she wants to be a big change. I mean, if you're, you know, if you're married to someone who's on television and who's famous for, I don't know, his views on the Vikings and everyone kind of likes you for that and all of a sudden, he's being called, you know, a white supremacist. That's a, it's a big change. Yes, it is. But she, as I say, she just never blinked, you know, she didn't blink or you were blessed in the game of chicken. She just didn't blink. She knew, she knows me. She's known me since I was 19. And, you know, when it comes to being called things like anti-Semitic or racist or misogynists or whatever, whatever, repute an apology, she knows me. So she doesn't have to wonder. Is he? You know, because she's, she's smiling. You know, no, you're just really, really for so fortunate to have well, well, yes, yes, fortune, but we also, I suppose, you know, you have to kind of think, well, we, we, we're probably, you know, chose one another and stayed for reasons and then you think, as it turns out, you know, this being, you know, this being a test thing situation, this would be part of why I chose this person because, yes, one word another, I think I probably knew that she'd be like this in a situation like this. You know, and me for her, you know, we would just, we'll just back each other up, which does make you very invulnerable because this whole, this whole process has absolutely in a way that's clicheds. You do get confronted with what matters. You know, and we've, you know, when it, you know, we've, I mean, we're just, we're very, we've been thrust into this from really a very recognizable and ordinary lifestyle. You know, we've got a mortgage and we've got, you know, and we depend on a regular income to keep the wheels on the wagon like, like, like, like everybody else, you know, a vast majority of people. And, and so we, so we identify and have that commonality with, you know, that's why I think a lot of people, you know, write letters to me from all over the world and they, and they stop me in the street to talk to me because, you know, I think they instinctively realize that I'm not, you know, a credentialed academic, and I'm not an expert on this or the other. I'm very much just a regular person with the same, with all of the same concerns that they've got kids at school, you give all of it that people were, you know, were able to, were able to identify with. But when I say that I've been confronted with what really matters, you think all that stuff about, you know, whether you have kid or food or whatever, I don't know, you know, a second home or a luxury car or all of that, all that cliched stuff that that people are encouraged to think about. You think, oh, no, what really, what really matters is spending a 24 hours a day with somebody that backs you up. And my kids are the same, you know, the kids were, they came through the whole, they were under pressure at the time to take jobs, you know, you won't be able to go to the gym or you won't be able to go to, you know, you don't want to be able to have your socialize and what built a travel. And they were rattled by that. They were, you know, younger than, you know, there are teenagers when all of that happened, very, you know, impressionable and vulnerable. But we got them through that, but they didn't, you know, they didn't, they didn't, they ended up choosing not to take the, you know, take the jobs either. And I cannot put into words how much that means to me that they didn't get polluted with that product. That's it. That's everything to me. Never mind the fact that 29 didn't. The fact that it didn't go into them that there's no, there's no, there's no salary you could give me. There's no, you know, there's no bonus you could bung me that would, that would make any difference. So it's all, it's all of that. And so it's been, it's hard to talk about it in many ways without, without sounding almost like you're patronizing people, but, you know, the extent to which I've been reminded of it, what's important in life is what is worth all of it. You call me any name you want because I know who I am. And, you know, my family know who I am. And I can look at my kids and my wife and they I. And she in mind and think no matter what literally no matter what happens, we made the right calls. It does seem like, obviously you're from a different slightly different culture than we're from here in the United States. You, it's a much smaller country. It's an island in the middle of a freezing sea. And there does seem to be a greater level of conformity in the UK than there is the United States. And, so, is that how it strikes you? I mean, it's, I mean, it's a more obedient culture. You know, you never had a wild west. You didn't have gun fights where you haven't, you know, since Christianity showed up, etc. But it, it does seem, and I'm judging the sweet media landscape. It seems like you and Russell Brand, maybe there's somebody at George Galloway, there don't seem to be many dissenters describe the media in the UK right now. Oh my goodness. I have to be careful with my floating language. Go crazy. Well, I'm appalled. I'm just simply appalled. We don't have anything that passes in the same way that we don't have any representation in Parliament. We don't have any representation in the mainstream media. That was not all, right? That was another aspect of what was so unbelievable and so discombobulating and stressful about all of this because in the early weeks and months of what was going on from 2019, 2020 onwards, there was a period of waiting for the people, the silver backs of the media world to stand up and do what was required to be done, which was ask some questions. Don't propaganda. I just don't just give us the government line and the pharmaceutical line on all of this. You stop lying. Challenge it. So that incredible period of weight and every single one of them failed the test. All the mainstream channels, all the big titles, the telegraph, the times, the daily mail, the works, they all swallowed it and pumped it back out again. So the media is we don't have a media worth its name and journalism in Scotland, for example, had a proud proud proud history of journalism. Dundee, we're pretty studied to be a journalist, D.C. Thompson, an iconic publishing name in Scottish journalism. Duke Jam and journalism was the cry from Dundee and a proud proud history of being ready to hold to the fire, the feet of those in authority and overnight, either it had slipped away and we hadn't noticed. It was only exposed by COVID or it slipped away as soon as the COVID debacle started. And then, realizing, you're part of that process of casting around looking for the COVID. We can't be the only people that think this is bonkers and bollocks. There must be other people like this. And then that process of going online. And as you say, Russell Brand, God bless him. He was already an established podcaster. He was already there doing other things. And when all this started, he was suddenly to the fore asking other things as an understatement. I mean, he was from a completely different. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No incentive to get involved. But when it was when it was required, he was suddenly he was there and we were watching, we were consuming Russell Brand as much of it as we could get. And we were watching you. And we were watching George Galloway on the mother of all talk shows. And you know, these funny things, these constellations, you know, all the other stars went out in the night sky and a few of some of these new constellations appeared. And you're looking at, you know, I think God's right, we can listen to who can listen to today, that who may have many points of view that in other subjects and other concerns I might not agree with. But they're certainly asking some of the right questions about this. And you know, so the new media stepped into the free. And if anyone and they are, people were surprised to see me, a guy that used to make documentaries about stone hange and the white cliffs are dover and, you know, in waterfalls and purple magicity and all of that, if they were surprised to see me suddenly, you know, spotlight on a live television, asking questions about and refusing to comply with this, that. And the next thing, if people were surprised to see me casting that role, well, not average surprises, I was or, or tritty was, you know, looking at me, you can, how did this happen to you? How have you ended up doing this? Well, that's a very good question. I really don't know. But it's like the bit and it's like the bit and he have playing, you know, where the pilots dead with food poisoning and the co-pilot's dead and all the aircraft. And some, some, you know, schmuck has to come from the back of the plane and sit, but because nobody else is going to do it, you know, see, there's a lot of people were suddenly cast into that unlikely, into that unlikely role and have taken the dogs abuse for having done so. And their only crime has been to say, hang on, I've got, I've got a question before we all leap into the abyss of all of this totalitarian regime. I'd quite like to ask a couple of questions just before we all go. And, you know, and some of the hardest criticism has come from people that you're going to thought ostensibly would have been on your side. I mean, you live in a place where there are, I really don't think the American might, we often complain about our media, which is Stalinist, completely Stalinist, they serve the people in power. They'll tell any lie. It doesn't matter to them at all. But I think it's much worse in the UK. That's just my observation. Yeah. I mean, I did watch some of your guys, you know, eating hamburgers and saying, you get free one of these if you get your job and, uh, it was totalitarian. And dancing alongside, you know, you know, people dressed up as hypodermic needles. And I mean, I remember all of that. But so, so yes, it's some, but it doesn't seem like any dissent is allowed in your country. For example, tell us about the Scottish hate speech law. Oh, well, that I would say that's part and parcel of something that seems to be happening around the world in a certain kind of western country, which is to say either small countries with small populations or quite large land masses, but small populations. So, you know, Canada, Australia, but places like New Zealand, the angler sphere. The English speaking world. But then, but then something's equally sinister also happened in Israel. You know, where, where Netanyahu said make make my people the petri dish of the world, experiment on these here, La Bratz. So again, a small, a small population with without, without, with an authoritarian leader that just offhand just decided to do what you wanted. But that was true of all of them. So, and, and yes, but Britain, but then Scotland obviously has a devolved administration based in Edinburgh, empowered to do, to take a certain amount of decisions separate from Westminster in London. And we've been under the, the thrill of, of an administration in Edinburgh led by the Scottish National Party for what seems like a thousand years. It's been like an SNP right. It doesn't seem very Scottish to me at all. Well, I, I first got into, I first put my head above the parapet and got into trouble as a, as a, as a contrarian all the way back in 2014 actually, because that was the time of the referendum on whether or not Scotland would remain part of the United Kingdom or would strike out as a, as a separate entity. And God forgave me. I had kind of been keeping out of it. I was just, I had my opinions, but I was keeping out of it relatively late in the day coming up to the vault. I think it was the telegraph, but one of the big broad sheet newspapers asked me for, what do you think? Would you write as, you know, a thousand words about what you think? And I wrote that, well, to get a long story short, that I'll prefer to stay part of the United Kingdom. Cue the, a pro-brim from the nationalists, those who, and because of I had made television like the history of Scotland and I had been seen as a certain kind of Scottish TV presenter. I think a lot of people made the broad assumption that I was probably nationalist in my politics, which I never have been and, you know, never will be. But none, so I go into, I go into trouble then. And so I've been on the, I've been under attack from the SNP and its little wizards ever since then. So I have it, it's important probably in the context of this conversation to make playing that it actually wasn't COVID that I first got into trouble. It was this, it was this, the independence referendum. And so Scotland is run by, by low caliber people, low caliber, Kakestocracy, you know, government by the worst of people. Yes. And you know, the SNP started, you know, started out famously, one of it didn't start out, but at the time of the referendum, it was led by Alex Sammond, who at least was a, you know, he was an able shoe-fitted politician and a good auditor. You know, so he had some, he had some game, but subsequently it's been Nicholas Sturgeon and it was Nicholas then more recently, Hamza Yussuf, and now he's fallen on his fallen over his own feet and he's been replaced by another one, another, you know, another non-entity, but it was Nicholas Sturgeon through the, through the COVID day back. And they just seemed to, they rel, they reveled and she reveled in the power, and she reveled in, you know, peering every day to count death tolls and insist on the continuation of lockdown and cut in the six inches off the bottom of the doors and school classrooms to let you circulate and insane. She's a pretty smart, happy, well-balanced person. I would say no, no, no. No. No, totally, but anyway, anyway, she's gone. But, so you have in the SNP in Scotland, people who are drunk with the idea of power. You know, they really, I mean, the very idea that people at the majority would have put that bunch actually in control of an independent country, makes my blood run cold because it's a close-run thing for a while. But there's gone now, the threat's gone for a generation, if not for ever. But so that they're inept, they're cackestocratic, and when it came to the hate crime legislation, they just seemed to go for one offensive, irritating policy after another. The attempted, a named person's bill in recent history where they were trying to insinuate between every child and a parent, a named person. That could be a teacher, it could be any figure. That person would have been encouraged and the child would have been encouraged to establish a relationship with that named person. If there are things you don't want to talk to, I'm going to add about, talk to this named person. And your parents would never need to know that those conversations had to take in place. This was the named person's bill. It was eventually knocked back at the super... But this is an attempt to destroy the family. Yeah, well, that's, would certainly be, that was my interpretation. Well, what's the other interpretation? Well, it was supposed to be... The government has more authority in their own, isn't the moment... It's the same reason for, you know, clamping down on the internet. It's for the safety of children. They always say this. It's about protecting children from this and the other. And of course, we know it's got nothing to do with that. It's just about taking control of the internet. So the named person's act was... Yes, but in line with that idea of if you want to lead a popular movement, you have to separate the children from their parents. You've got to you've got to put pressure on the family and to the family fractures. The Supreme Court, the high court in the land, to finally turn back and stop the named person's bill. But it'll be, it'll be in someone's drawer somewhere, you know, still under consideration. The heat crime legislation, which is so it's important not to come in on the SMP and the third act, so to speak. The long history of this kind of behavior. And when it came to the heat crime legislation, you know, that was a pet project of Hansa Yusuf, who was the sometimes justice minister. He always failed in every post, but got fell upwards. You know, he was justice and failed and got promoted up to health and failed and promoted up to whatever, you know, one inappropriate appointment after another. And the heat crime legislation was his, was very much something that he champed. And what was it? It was, well, you see this, a manifestation of it in Canada. Trudeau has brought, in similar, is bringing in Hasbro in similar legislation. I don't know if it's called the heat crime. It's almost the same name. But you see it all over. The same thing is happening in Australia. They're tent by these would be these 10-port dictatorial politicians to have control of the what people say and what people think. Hansa Yusuf wanted to criminalize what people were saying in the privacy of their own homes. So the idea was that if mum and dad were having a conversation in front of the television one evening and dad said something. If the child inadvertently repeated it in school the next day, let's see, my dad said so and so, the police could come to the house hypothetically and see to the father. What was that you were seeing in this house last night? We've got, you know, your child's, you know, that was the level of it. So you see his homes? I mean, that's totally North Korean. I don't even think that happens in North Korea actually. He's gone now. But is he considered, I mean, he should be expelled from your country for doing that in my opinion. But what is he considered a villain? I mean, how well he is so evil. Yes. Yes. You would think that any rational person would respond to that kind of notion in the same way. But look at the way it's happening all over. It's not just happening. It's got, it's happening all over. It's part of a part of a pattern of behaviour of a certain kind of controlled leader in one western country after another. You are demonstrably working from the same script. You know, it's no coincidence that all of these western regimes in these countries are taking similar steps at the same time. You know, they're not acting independently of one another. They're not all having these dreadful ideas independently at the same time. You know, this stuff is being, it's part of the same pattern that we saw during lockdown. We are suddenly, everyone was saying build by better. Everyone was saying, now, the window of opportunity. Everyone was saying safe and effective, clearly centralised. It was a pandemic of the unvaccinated. I think we can agree. Yes, absolutely. That was a favourite. So, but what is that? What are we looking at? Who's coming up with these ideas, these talking points? What's the point of it all? Like, I don't want to be a conspiracy nut. But the level of coordination suggests that there is, you know, some sort of body atop all of this controlling everything. I mean, what else does it suggest? It feels as though, I think it's getting hard and hard to overlook what seems like the certainty that we're on the cusp of change. Yeah. A paradigm change. I would say that we're being, that we're being headed towards feudalism. Most people, for most of 5,000 years of human history, most people pretty much live in a surf, in surf them. In a feudal state, you can, you can describe it anywhere you like. But it's like, it's a narrow, very, very small group at the top with everything, with all the castles, ownership of everything. And everyone else's, it's been so far beneath them as to be an insect level and treated accordingly. You know, that, that is what we're going back to really up until the 19th century. It was, it was the way of it for everyone everywhere. The way, the way, the kind of way of life that has been possible for some of us, a relative handful in the scheme of things are blinking of an eye in the great story of human civilization, a tiny, tiny, lucky group for a couple of hundred years in the west, we're able to live lives of unbelievable liberty and opportunity and equality and aspiration. And, you know, if you wanted to, you could, you know, get whatever you were capable of achieving for yourself. Yes. And enough generations have taken that for granted that now it's, it has fallen. And people think that, you know, food in the supermarkets, lights on in the dark, you know, police on the street actually care about the people rather than being enforcers for the establishment. They think there's been a... food in the supermarkets, lights on in the dark, police on the street that actually care about the people rather than being enforcers for the establishment. They think there's been a misconception that somehow is just an unnatural order of things that society works like that. And just the meat is glance at the rest of the world at the moment, never lies, never mind 5,000 years of history, we'll show that the possibility of living the kind of lives that some of us have been able to live for a very brief period of time is vanishingly, it's impossible unlikely what we've had. But too many people have finally been taking it for granted one after another. Now that now those who would return us to feudalism have seen so the opportunity and have been working towards it and populations all over the west, taking it for granted, being tolerant, being nice, keeping their heads down in return for safety and convenience, have laid themselves open. They're not in a fit state to defend themselves against a well organized, well motivated small group that wants to return the whole thing to some sort of new feudalism. But I mean that's not to say it's too late. You know, I don't want to be completely negative here that I do think it's still possible. I think enough people have realized are realizing all the time. And I would say I think, wait, may I say something so where you suggesting it sounds like you were any probably right, but that some kind of feudalism is the natural state of man. Radically hierarchical societies are just natural. Yes, yes, absolutely. People enslaved. You know, slavery is a natural state. Of course, it just is. It's been a reality for so many for such a large part of everyone who's ever lived or died. Well, of course. Through history. But I think when in 2016, when we had Trump elected here and Britain voted Brexit, it subsequently that we got COVID and goodness knows what all Trudy said, perhaps she wasn't alone, but she was the person that I have to see it. She said, those two things were not supposed to happen. They were not in the script. Somebody took that eye off the ball and allowed a figure like Donald Trump to be elected in America. That's right. And for the population of Britain by a narrow margin, but nonetheless, by a majority to leave the European Union. And Trudy said, everything we've had since has been a sustained punishment beating to put those populations back in their box. So everything that's happened, including the evaporation of your southern border, all of that all of that that's happened has been a panicky response by a narrow group that saw two things happening off script that were of great significance because it was democratic. Those were popular votes. And now populism is being stamped on all over the world. The truckers of all of these things are being mischaracterized by their authorities as far right as extremists. You know, all of the same, all of the same labels. And in both cases, the people didn't get what they voted for. I mean, Trump was not able to govern no, very effectively. It couldn't build the wall that he promised was investigated and spied on from, you know, the very first day. And I don't think you guys got Brexit. We voted for Brexit. Right. That you're absolutely 52% I think it was 52. Yeah, 52 to 48% in favor of leaving the European Union. And from the moment the ink dried on that decision, the all of the powers that be in the establishment in the civil service, all of it across the political parties moved heaven and earth to thwart that decision. And so it's been Brexit in name only, Brian O, the, of called it because it's now worse. I would say that the situation for, for those people that aspire to Brexit, they've got less now than they had before the vote happened because they've been so comprehensively punished and, and Brexit has been so eviscerated, the very concept of it has been so hollowed out that the people that wanted it have got less than nothing from it. Because it was because it was it was populist and notice also that in the last four to five years, how come a pejorative? How can people use the word democracy to describe country? Well, we don't. That's why I have these, I have these fundamental problems about we certainly don't have democracy. I wonder when democracy went away. I wonder, I wonder for how long it's been, it's been slanted. I guess I really gosh, I mean, in my most conspiratorial moments, I think something began to happen all across the West after the Second World War, clearly, really from the middle, from the mid, during the war and after the war, I think the moves, I don't know if it started then, but I think there's a gear shift. Have you been to Tokyo? Have you been to Japan? I have, I have filmed in Tokyo. So then you sort of wonder when you go to Japan, if you go from London to Tokyo, there's no evidence that one saw that the side that one actually won and the side that lost actually lost. Like if you didn't know the history, you would think well, obviously Japan won the war. Look at it. Obviously England lost it. Look at England. Yes. What is that? Oh, yes. I mean, there are all sorts of things that are confusing. I'm not a student. I love history. I'm fascinated by history. My shelves are full of history books. But so I have books of you written. Oh, written. Oh, um, 12 or 13. I think it's fair to call you his story. Well, but I'm not an academic. I don't. And I know I want to be. I never really have had that as, it's not in my nature. I'm not really anyway, but so it means that I'm prepared. I'm perfectly happy to be at home to unorthodox ideas about history because I don't have any academic because I've got a professorship to defend. Maybe that's why you can see the world clearly. And I sometimes wonder if I have a unique a USP, you know, a unique selling point. I think it may be that the things I have said over the last few years, everyone knows they're true. Yeah. It's just that for whatever reason, I've said them. And I've had the opportunity and the platform from which to see them. And because I am, I just I, a regular person seeing what every other regular person knows is true. That's my true. Okay. So that's my, but we've wondered off what I think that's a great, that's your qualified enough. You're not an Oxford done, but what you've been right about a lot of things. I've got basic questions about the second world war. Okay. What are they like, clearly, something important changed in the West in 1925. What's what's very interesting to me is that, you know, that, um, Hitler and Stalin were together at the beginning. Yeah, of course. Of it. And when Poland was invaded, Britain said we will do whatever it takes to restore freedom and democracy to the people from whom it's been denied. Yeah, stolen. And then what happened? And then you're all over. And then, you know, you want to go to any coverage of the central second world war to know that at the end of the second world war, Poland was left, swallowed whole by, well, they handed it to Stalin. So, so the stated objective that the stated objective of Britain declaring war at the time was, well, you didn't do it. You didn't, you didn't do that. We didn't even try. And in our country, it's illegal to criticize Winston Churchill. He's the greatest hero in world history. And then when you look at the, when you look at the markiness that happened at Yolta, you know, between, between, you know, Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill and, and the fact that, uh, you know, agreements were arrived at somehow where, uh, many people who wanted, whatever you would call West, the West, they wanted to be the West. They were just allowed to be swallowed whole by the communist block. Yeah, to the most violent totalitarian and history. They handed these countries, they went to war to protect the sovereignty of these countries that they then handed. And people were being chased back across, right, right, fighting lines back into that. So what is that clearly clearly? So there's lying here. So what's the truth? So that we started, we started there because we were speculating about when all started to go wrong when the, when the slide towards, you know, any of anything that ends inism is the same. You know, whether it's fascism or communism or any of these things end up with piles of corpses, you know, you can't get cigarette paper between these, between any of these ideologies. Yeah, it's important not to be distracted by, by whether or not it's like international socialism or communism or whatever. They're all the same. They're good for a handful of people and they're catastrophic for everybody else. Uh, and so it's clearly, clearly something shifted up a gear in the West, in the middle of the, in the during the Second World War and after and has been moving fast and faster ever since. And I think there's, there's been an extraordinary gamble taken now because even even people who were, who are in a state of semi slumber like myself were aware of notions like a social contract. You know, that I was, that we as, as citizens uh, would be represent, you know, no taxation without representation. You know, we would be, we would have, our views represented. We would have our liberty defended. Uh, we would be, we would be safe in peaceful countries. And in return for that, we would pay tax and we would submit to certain otherwise, you know, owner restrictions on, you can't do anything. You've got to be agreed to be policed by consent and so on and so on. And that, that's okay. So there's no social contract. There's a quid pro quo there for people as a reason for people to, to comply because there's something in it for them. Liberty, aspiration, hope, all of that being protected by legislation and a constitution and all of that. The gamble that's been taken now is that all of that is supposed to, it's being taken away. Everything that the people, all of the, all of the inducements to be lower by eating peaceful citizens is being taken away. And, and, and what, what do I get in return? Nothing. You're going to get a digital ID. You're going to get central bank digital currencies. You're going to live in 15 minutes cities. You know, you're going to have your, we'll tell you what to eat. Your, your currency will be programmable. So we'll have complete moment to moment in real time control of everything you do, everything you want to do. Now, that's a heck of a gamble for, for a very narrow group of people to take with billions of people because there's nothing in it for the people. There's nothing in it for them. And I think, I think they have fumbled the ball. I think that's where there's hope because not 50%, not 51% of the people have realized that and would do anything about it. But history shows that it never, it never requires it only takes 5% or 10% of people to cut on and do something about it and make the difference. And I think that under, in the final news towards this kind of neo feudalism, they have exposed themselves. They've gone galloping towards the finishing line too early in the wrong way. And too many people have seen it. And I think in, in, they're somewhere is hope and it's probably enough hope. I wonder though, I mean, it does seem two things. It seems like they're pushing the population, not just of your country or mine, but really of most Western countries right to the point of revolution. Like how about we give you nothing and you shut up and take it? Yeah. And a race all hope for a future for your children or even having children or grandchildren. It's quite a gamble to take. But the gamble is that the technology is evolving so quickly that it'll allow them to harness the surveillance state and various tools of violence that are so overwhelming that there's nothing the population can do anything, could do about it. Drones and AI are going to be enough to force people to accept this. That's how I read it. It's possible. Yes, of course it's possible. But I think it's incumbent upon us to be optimistic that that's not what happens. You know, I think there's an absolute, there's an absolute obligation. It's beyond a right. It's an absolute obligation to be positive. I struggle with it. I mean, I have to be yanked back onto the path of righteousness by Trudy all the time because she is a band clinician more positive than I am. But nonetheless, you know, I go to I lean to the dark side all the time. Well, Scott's have dark souls, don't that? Yes, I, we are. It's never difficult to tell the difference between a Scotsman and a ray of sunshine. As the saying goes. But you have to, it's when we spoke earlier about being brought to terms with being made to confront what really matters. And it is difficult to talk about it in many ways. It almost makes a person blush because of the things that you find yourself having to say. But you know, the, you know, the Constitution of the United States, you know, the, the first amendment, these, it's, it times like this that these things are suddenly a light comes on inside them and suddenly everyone sees them as though for the first time. It's only because they're being threatened that people see them. You know, the, and the very, you know, the language, you know, the inalienable right is so important. You know that you know this, you get this at school, but you know that inalienable, it's to say that your freedom is not your born with it. It's there. It's from God. It's not given to you by any person and it can't be taken from you by any person. But the third and most important bit about inalienable, I only really began to contemplate in recent years is that even if you want to surrender your freedom, you can't because it's inalienable. You are lumbered with it. You're, you're stuck with it. It's like your leg. You can't it's part of you. You're freedom. And it's when it's challenged in this way and it's under freedom and people talk about freedoms as though it's plural. There's only freedom. It's a single thing. And because it's inalienable, it's at the moment when it's being threatened that people, none of us has any, we have an obligation to defend it. You don't get the choice. If someone offers you slavery, will you be my slave? You can't because it's your inalienable right? To be free. You can't surrender to slavery. It's not your thing to give away. And that's, it's, that's why some of this, I suppose, had to happen. People need to see the freedom of speech being taken away by hate crime legislation, hate speech legislation or whatever. They need these things to happen before they, before you look again at what freedom is, what democracy might be, what it is to have inalienable rights. You know, and we can't, we don't have the option to give these things up. Even, even if we're broken and we want to. And these are, I think these are profound verities. What's the tipping point? What's the point at which you won't have optimism? What's the point at which? Never. You can't. Good. Well, good. Well, you can't, because that's as, because you're, you're not, it's not, you're not allowed. You're not entitled to give up because it's in the nature of inalienable rights. You, even if unto death, you know, they can, you know, you know, you may take our lives, but you'll never take our freedom, you know, the off cruelty line from brief heart. And that is just it. So there's nothing to be pessimistic about essentially, because the option to give up is not there. You don't get to give it up. Do you think that totalitarian's will win? No, no, they won't, because because I believe I also think a lot nowadays about natural law, you know, I've read about common law, which has become an obsession. And I read about natural law. And whether you're religious or not, if you, let's say if you accept an intelligent universe and then natural law says that an intelligent universe does want the best for you, unlike our regimes and our establishments and our powers that be, the universe is there for you to be the best expression of yourself and consciousness that can be. And all of that can be subverted by evil. It, it, a bit like a, if you can hold a ball under the surface of, of water for as long as you put the strength to do it, but the ball wants to be somewhere else, because that's the, that's in the natural order of things. And eventually the totalitarian will run out of the strength to subvert the, the, the way that things are supposed to be. And you can't, it's difficult to put a timeline on these things. You know, I wouldn't say that we are going to see the end of it in our lifetimes, you and me. And it, and it might be for our children to see the end of it. But it will end and the, because the natural law will reassert itself. I didn't, I didn't, another of the things I was sort of sleepy about in a state of slumber about, I don't really think about faith. I've always been a person of faith quietly. I don't go to church, but I believe in a, in a transcendent, intelligent entity. And I think that was brought home to me and the light came on in it for me during this time as well, because so many people wrote to me, thousands of people wrote to me from all over the world. This game started where people, one, one woman wrote a letter to me and addressed it to Neil Oliver, near Sterling Castle, Sterling, Scotland. And the letter came to me. I thought, well, that's impressive. The postman managed to get that to me. And I put a picture of it on social media and without thinking, and it opened floodgates. And now I've had thousands of letters like these. And so people were writing to me without knowing my address. And the vast majority of the letters were about, this is a fight between good and evil. This is a fight between right and wrong. This is about light and dark. It was as fundamental as that for most of those people that were writing to me. And perversely, in an upside down way, it was becoming aware of evil in the world around me that made me think there will be what's the opposite of evil? There must be good. There must be good because I see the evil. And every, you know, every force as it's equal and opposite. Yes. So there must be good. There must be God. There must be because I've seen the alternative. I've seen the adversary because it's it's it's stalking the land at the moment. The badness is visible. And that was, you know, that's part of the profound realignment that I've been going through. But it really is just an awakening. I mean, that's a hack needed to tell. No, but being awakened. Do you see happening to others around you? Yes. Yes. Absolutely. More and more, more and more people are saying it. And it doesn't, you know, differences are never made by the majority. Not really. That's not how it works. You know, this, this signal, the crucial thing is invariably done by the one or just a few people who are right. You know, when, you know, when you, when you sometimes you'll be sitting at a dinner table with friends and family and whatever, and you see something in the whole place just breaks up. Great, perfect line. You just say something in everyone laughs. And if you think it often, most often, you didn't, right, you didn't even think of the line. You didn't compose it. It's just there and you said it. And everyone laughs because what you said, it's not just funny. It's also true, right? People can instantly true runs through people, you know, like lightning through a lightning conductor. It just, oh, it runs through you and you feel it. And that, I think that's what's happened for a lot of people. A lot of people are able to identify very readily with, with what's wrong here, which is simply an inversion of natural law that, that evil is, is trying to accept itself. Freedom is being taken from people, from whom it cannot be taken, but with, but with the ending of those people themselves, these fundamentals are happening. And I do genuinely hand on heart thinking of people think, I don't just think it. They know it because it's true. It's, it's true. And people feel it. It's say, I think you're, what you're saying is absolutely, true things are that they resonate. There's like a tuning fork inside you that starts to hum when you hear something that you know to be true. It almost doesn't need to be explained. You hear it, you know it. But I think there's a step from that experience to using the word God in public in the, in the secular West, are you hearing that more? Yeah, definitely. Definitely. And, and I feel good about it. And, and I think a part of why I feel good about it is because it's coming up in various shades. You know, I'm, I'm being, you know, people of Christian and, and Islamic faith are talking to me. And that, and interallia that they mentioned, they talk about everything, but they talk about faith and good and evil. And I hear within the, within the Christian community, I hear from Catholic and Protestant. And, and they're all seeing the same thing because the, the, the only important bits of any of those messages are the same anyway. And they're all, again, it's the truth. So it's, it's, it's striking. It's chaining with me. It's, I can, you know, I can feel it because it's evidently true. And so I don't, I don't have any, I don't have any quorum about invoking God because, you know, I'm pretty sure of Cote State of the Devil. It's so interesting. Like everything, not everything, but a lot of things that I thought 20 years ago were completely ridiculous now. I was utterly wrong. And one of them, we were told for so long that Muslims are your enemy. And I want to say I'm not a Muslim and I'm completely opposed to mass migration period. I don't care of anybody. I'm just against it. But it hasn't turned out that way. And I have to say, you, Galway, of course, Russell Brand, it feels like the people who hate you the most in the UK are educated white liberals. And it feels like a lot of Muslim immigrants are open to what you're saying and agree with you. That's my impression as a foreigner. Do you feel this? Yes. Yes. I think it's often, it's much more important just to see a person first. Why? Of you know, I know you know that. But that's, that's the thing. And so I don't, I don't all always think about this information's coming up from a Christian or from a Muslim. Well, in our country, I mean, it's a different experience. But after 9-11, and I'm not, again, I'm not Muslim, I'm not going to become Muslim. I don't agree with Islam. But we were told again and again, and everybody in the world that I lived in seemed to agree with it that Muslims is Islam. That's our enemy. I don't know if you had that experience in the UK. We definitely had that here. And it's just interesting. Again, that's, that's all part of that divide and conquer. You're absolutely right. I just did not perceive that in the time. But as stupid. Well, you've made me think about it. You know, you, you spent years in, in Washington, DC only 35, not a big deal. You've, so I'm, I hold my hand up and say, I absolutely, I grew up with absolute certainty that America were the good guys. I watched the West Wing almost all of it. And I thought that, you know, as long as there's Democrats in the West Wing, you know, the, the white-hearted cowboys are out there making sure everything's going to be like, I could go to, go to help me. You know, that, I went, I went, I went, oh, oh, oh, Jed Bartlett. Whoa, fantastic. And now I think, oh, how, why did I ever, why did I ever think that? Now you were in the belly of the beast. What is it, what, what is it with these people? You know, these people that, you know, I'm not going to, why name any names, you know, these people that have gone in skinny and come out fat with money, with lobbying and goodness inside our trading and all of the rest of it. So they've got more money than creases and they're still there in the doteage. Still at it. What drives it? What makes these chimeos, chimeos, chimeos, chimeos, chimeos. They're bad. I didn't grow up worrying about money, just being as honest as I can be. So I never really thought of money as a huge motivator in people's behavior because it never was, what was motivating these people? Clearly, money is part of it. I was just late to that understanding. You know, we all have blind spots and failures and that was definitely one of mine. I just didn't, I didn't see how corrupt it was because I couldn't imagine, like I would never say something I don't believe for money. I just would never do that. It would never even occur to me to do that. So I didn't grow up like that. So the idea that other people were saying things they knew to be untrue for money, that like I never I was shocked. It took me decades to figure out what's going on. And you hear people say, oh, it's all about the money. And I'd be like, that's bullshit. It's not, you know, we just have different views, different ideologies, different worldviews. No, a lot of it was just about the money and I just did not perceive it. But how much money can I kind of multi-multimillionaire to agree? I mean, I've never been that. Well, that is absolutely right. First of all, you know, getting out of debt, I do think it is a massive blessing. And if you can get out of debt, it just means you're not controlled. And there is an inherent freedom in that. And debt is slavery. We love debt in the United States. We have a debt-based society, you know, lending money and interest. That's like the main thing that we do in the United States. I think it's disgusting. I've always thought that. So if you can get out of that, it's clearly liberation. But beyond that, like, is it going to make you happy? No. I mean, I've just lived around rich people my whole life. So I know that that does not make you happy. So if we accept that money's part, but it must be more than that. So what is it? What is the, because, you know, one does end up with fewer and fewer options when it comes to explaining what's going on. And it just feels like, you know, it does begin to feel as if it's in the service of some kind of darkness. That's what it feels like. Well, I mean, it is. It is in the service of darkness. There's no kind of rational explanation for transgenderism. You know, that's just your sterilizing kids. There's no upside that could ever justify that. You're doing it for killing people as, you know, the U.S. government has, I hate to say it as a patriotic American, but it's been a force for for killing for a long time. What is that? And again, there's only a spiritual answer, I think, to that question. I don't see a rational one for sure, but I also think it's recognizable in a temporal framework as hubris. It's the belief that you are God. Do you have greater powers than any man actually possesses greater foresight, greater wisdom, greater power? And that is like the oldest trap there is. Like that is the story of history. Is people, you know, convincing themselves that they're more than human. And, and that's, that's how you destroy yourself in the society that you lead for sure. And so what happens to us? Is, has the, has the American Republic fallen? And is it something is long gone? I mean, the second you will allow an intel agency to murder your democratic, radically elected president as we did 62 years ago. And then fallen And it's something is long gone. I mean the second you will allow an intel agency to murder your democratic critically elected president as we did 62 years ago And then sort of ignore that it happened to be like, I don't think that's really what happened shut up No, it's not a but if you allow Unelected bureaucrats to murder the guy that the majority elected like just by definition the system is not what they say it is obviously so but I do think I agree with you a hundred percent and I Agree with our you know long departed president what is in power that it really was the the second reward in ways that I don't understand But it's demonstrable change the nature of the country change the relationship Between the population and it's government can I ask you a question that I always think about but I've UK specific question so 1914 UK England Britain whatever calling it, you know, it was running the world You know and doing I would say a pretty good job not perfect job pretty good job Putting in railways and spreading Christianity and being kind of pompous but basically being a fairly benign colonial power as colonial powers go There's a war four years The smartest people in the country are all killed for no obvious reason the country is really weakened by that war the United States becomes a preeminent power in the world By 1919 so it's a huge loss for Great Britain. I would say the first rule war again for no real reason 20 years later your leaders tell you got to do it again For reasons that are clearly fake liberate Poland and then hand it to Stalin. That's not the reason obviously Democracy is not the reason and then the country is really like racked and the empire collapses and it becomes sad Is there bitterness about that like why wouldn't that be the the Bitterest thing that ever happened in the history of your country are people still do they talk about that? They brought us into two wars that just destroyed us all these cool things that we had this great society that we had we made the I think there's a I think there is a us a lingering sadness But what about anger like your leaders did there was no reason to join either war? Well, the people obviously in my lifetime your lifetime the veterans of the first world war they're all gone Oh, of course You know and the and the veterans of the second world war, you know The endangered species that they are You know, they are almost all on the way out and so and so the and once once the once the the people to who not happened are gone then that takes something with them, you know, we don't we're only I only with what happened at one remove in a sense Because the people who Really suffered it are gone But I hear what you're saying, but I was born 25 years after the war I mean, so obvious you could say I mean you could say that Britain only became a secondary power after sewers You know, which wasn't until 50 50s 50s so so you you could say that we were for whatever had happened to has got to say the first world war and then the second world It was it was that it was that Shit show in sewers and that humiliation You know with a biomerica that Britain became a se only then Yeah, but it was dead You know, I would say it's much I think You do make me think about something that's not unconnected. I do think that what's happening at the moment We will not Understand what is actually happened here. Maybe in 50 years time people look back maybe in a hundred years time In the same way that I would say you know someone who went through the first world war Even if they were experiencing it even if they were in the west and front or whatever With the bullets flying and seeing all of the of the hotter of it It couldn't possibly conceptualize the impact and the consequences and the significance And the way in which you don't living you don't live through a period I know that you might suspect that the world might be changed forever as a result of the period that you're living through But to actually predict what will be the the real consequences in tain In 50 years time is beyond all of us. I think I think it's impossible I think part of why people won't wake up to this at the moment and won't confront it is because it's So big What's happening? I think it is going to be like a first world war of course You know through you know someone said that the first world war was a set of iron railings between Between the past and everything else because you could see the past but you could never reach again And I think but that wouldn't have been a part right at the time You know that wouldn't have been a part even as the men were dying. It was not My wife's great grandfather's pictures right over there wrote a book about it his service in France And I've read it pretty great book and it's the most cheerful book ever written You know sort of like he was a you know successful guy of the United States Or one over there or fight for somebody didn't understand what he's fighting for and he's a good mood all time I think at some point at some point again in the same time frame that we're talking about second world war thereafter I think the world fell finally into the grip of the banks It fell finally into the grip of Those unelected unaccountable for profit Groups for whom everything was only about money money and power and And for them they became any where's at that point. They didn't care about They wouldn't they wouldn't think care about Britain. They didn't care about America. They just cared about money You know, I think I think that has been has been I think we lost in that in that slow motion consequence of the 20th century or the first half of the 20th century the all of all of what had been before That kind of love of country that kind of patriotism That that kind of identity. I think that was un-unmooered Unhitched at that point and something very large and slow moving just began to drift like a great line You know, there's no longer On its safe anchorage and it's just and it's only and it's only now that with without kind of 20 20 20 vision of hindsight that we ought to look back and see that that happened Um what was the last time Britain had a leader who believed the country was more important than the banks Well, you probably you probably have to go back to pre 1694 and the establishment of the Bank of England I mean that's when the Bank of England was set up and that's and that that became the model for the Fed in 1913 and you know the the creature of jikal island and I think and but then where do you start? You know the city of London was established by You know the time of William the conquerors and there's a state within a state. It's like the Vatican It's a it's a separate entity. You know people don't you know fully appreciate the extent to which the city of London is not Britain It's it's a separate it's a separate thing that's on police force The monarch has to seek permission to enter the city of London There's a there's a nominated person in parliament the city the city remembrance are Most people don't notice who's there all the time to make sure that the the the unique Rights of the city of London are maintained and not compromised by any subsequent legislation, you know so there's there's been a long period of that so to get back to a time before the banks of Thrall You'd have to be before the banks were given the Bank of England was given that magical power to create Fiat money That's when all the you know that that's from the trouble. Do you know about the Bradbury pound? That's a no the great story. Well, you know about you know the Would you call it? The Abe Lincoln had constitutional script the greenbacks. Yes, you know several more obviously You know to get himself out of a financial hole Well the Bradbury pound came about in 1914 because there was a run on the banks war had war War was declared and people panic and the and people were going to the banks with a bits of paper The big bank notes. I promised to pay the bearer on demand The sum of five pounds ten pounds and in those days you could actually get that transformed into gold You'd get the commensurate the You know the relevant goal. You know, it's transferable head value and and so the banks had a run on now the The close the banks, but the There was an extended bank holiday The the bank went stuttling to the treasury David Lloyd George was the Was the was the was the was the person they sought out The the treasury the government must have had an inkling that was happening because Within within three days legislation was rushed through parliament So they must have had something kind of ready to go and they created treasury notes And the first lot of the treasury was a man called I think it's John Bradbury Bradbury anyway And he piece his signature was on these notes and they became the nickname was the Bradbury pound And so the banks reopened The people were still queuing up wanting to transfer their bank bank notes into gold They were persuaded to take these treasury notes instead And people said well what what's the value of these and they were they were debt free and interest free And they were underwritten by the the notional value of Britain The everything that Britain was or is it's creativity its people its labor force It's industry everything that's what underwrote The Bradbury pound and for whatever reason People accepted it. Okay. I'll take these Bradbury pounds. I'll take these treasury note not bank notes treasury notes interest free debt free And that got that that saved the day the run on the bank was averted Now almost at once the banks said or realized we can't have this This is debt free interest free mode of exchange What's in it for us? And so very quickly they went back to the government said with draw these Bradbury pounds Let's go back to the old days. We'll buy government bonds. We'll give you bank notes. We'll call it three percent three percent interest sound fair The Bradbury pounds were great. I think the last one actually didn't come at circulation until maybe in the late But many years later. I can't remember exactly when the last one came came out of circulation Britain's national debt in 1914 before the war was about 650 million pounds by 1918 It was 7.5 billion Because the bankers had regained control but but for a moment for a moment with the with the advent of this debt free interest free Treasury note underwritten by the Nonional or real value of Britain There was a there was a there was a currency went out into general circulation that could have changed everything Imagine if people imagine if the banks had been disempowered because they didn't have the power of debt They didn't have the power of but usually interest whatever you want to call it But they they've realized we're not having this So having been got out of the hall of the run on the gold The the Bradbury pounds are taken away nobody noticed there's a war on And the national debt that began its began its cycling Oh, what is crypto be a breadberry pound? Well I get I I host a seek to host conversations about Brad about Bitcoin and and crypto from from time to time. Oh, I'll make new bones about it I'm not I'm not really sure that I properly I'm in an expert in opposition to see whether I think it's The freedom of humanity. I know I hear very strong voices on either side people say it's like pawns You scheme and a coin and don't go near it other people saying no, this is the foundation upon which we will rebuild society and somewhere between those two Polar Extreme's must lie the must lie the truth I think on I think there are elements about it Distributed ledger block chain. I think somewhere within there that there are Profound solutions because I have asked and and had a vague yes Whether or not you could use the blockchain protocol To have say a news channel that couldn't be shut down Because it's peer to you know the currency exchange with Bitcoin is peer to peer person to person without the interest without the Intercedence of a bank and Hypothetically they say yes, you could you could you could distribute information You could you could transact Bitcoin essentially is a transaction of information So therefore you could hypothetically you could exchange news You could extend that way and the people couldn't The baddies couldn't get at it Hypothetically so the the the crypto currency or Bitcoin and blockchain interests me for that reason And and and I all though I listened to very strong voices saying don't go anywhere near Bitcoin It's been hacked all the banks have got control of it and so on and so on. I think somewhere within that thinking There might be a there might be some of the answer. How long till you get pulled off the air oh I don't know I Do genuinely when when if you're living in a country that is trying to criminalize Conversations at your dinner table between you and your kids send you to prison for seven years for everything wrong opinions I think I think um It's a bold not me. I mean I'm a small fry in these things But you know I'm a minnow in swimming in these waters But nonetheless these are bold moves because I think The people are seeking the control With everything with digital currency with with digital IDs with all of it are Are cowardly frightened people? I think we're dealing with I think we have created an ecosystem That has enabled to thrive the most frightened Like a pathic parasitic Cactus to karate Leadership the world has yet seen We have created the conditions for them We've got to take responsibility for the fact that they are our fault You know you get the government you deserve. That's true And so we have we can't wash our hands of it nonetheless. I think they're scared Very very very frightened people and the fret what they're most frightened of is everyone else Probably frightened of each other And I think there's a line that do they want to do they have the will the cross it and do the wet work That would be required They're operating at one remove from really hurting people physically Really going the lengths of throwing people into You know gulags and Concentration camps. They're not there yet and You know are they are they ready? Do they have the backbone to actually start not so many people? Let me but you know but bigger fish Are they really going to do that? I don't know if they've really got it in them? If as long as people Well if they're proposing jail time for people who criticize them That suggests they do have it in them. Let's see what actually happens. I think some of it is I think some of it is is is Brinkman ship and I'm not I'm not persuaded that they've got the the cajones To be their thought a terrains that they fantasize about being Well, I mean it depends on circumstance right? I mean they once the virus intentionally or not got out of the lab in Wuhan the COVID virus then You know they moved immediately to institute totalitarian rule That will happen again. They're still doing gain of function research as you well know But don't you don't you think there'll be a real virus that escapes? I don't think they I don't think so I'm not sure that ever was anything So does it strike you that What you do the way that you think about people is influenced by Freud and by people who think about human behavior and non chemical terms and in moral spiritual terms That whole way of thinking has kind of disappeared I mean that was a feature of our childhoods where people would say well you have unresolved issues guilt whatever You didn't live up to your own standards. You take that with you now. It's like you've got a chemical imbalance like we can't even I don't think young people can get analyzed human behavior in those terms. I think it's part and parcel of an anti-human agenda Yes, that what has been done fundamentally is anti-human and it's being done to people who see no one haven't they don't know what it means to be human in a life and and therefore they can be casual and contentious of people in a count of billions because we have because they have got away from the sovereign human Being that's right and and for it what it means You know, we don't we don't have that we're barely Floted a dugout canoe onto the Pacific ocean of the unknown as the human consciousness And then and but we've already got The transhumanists not the transgendered of the transhumanists who are already preaching that the human being mark one is sub optimal and needs an upgrade via You know technology You know, they want to they want to blame humans with tech digitize You know, there's that human beings because the time of the biological humans partly over but that's that's a product of the wrong kind of people Not even asking what it means to be human in a life right? Well, it's a rebellion against god too I mean if you know as Christian certainly, but I think Muslims and Jews also certainly Jews do believe that Human beings were created in God's image You know to deface that image is to attack god Right and to change to declare people inherently inadequate um It you know, that's and that's a theological concept It's all it's bound up with many as I say it's going to be a hundred years or more But you know, obviously you're like in in 1968 Paul Eric wrote the population Yeah, and at the same time actually got it hard and wrote the tragedy of the commons Yeah, and they both speculated about the basic crappiness and rubbishness of People in large numbers, you know, they'll just make a mess of everything And it was that return of that new Malthusian Approach to people there's too many over them and they're not worth having anyway So this is going to be the ending over the predictions of air like and so on the wrong You got it completely wrong and we I talked to people I interview people all the time who are saying and you'll be across this That birth rates are plummeting Across the West. It's not just in the West. Japan is poised to disappear in a hundred years The world is a Japanese people, right? So it's not even a Western phenomenon Suites of Populations are not producing enough people to keep themselves going It's true in Britain and France all across Europe. It's true in America. It's really bad in America People are having like 1.4, 1.5 children on average Which is not enough to sustain No, and so and people are not appreciating that they are sitting in the in the cheap seats on a plane that is a tailspin That may not be possible even if you could get to the controls to pull the plane back into level flight May have may have gone beyond that point and so you and you've got that Information out there at the same time as people like Bill Gates and others are saying we've got to check the human population We've got too many people and in that in a hundred years time Can be anybody here. Well, I'm being I'm using hyperbole, but Populations are in steep decline and it's the explanations for our existential You know it has to do with maybe possibly falling fertility and God knows what we've done to fertility with these products That we've jammed into several billion people will see we'll see what the fertility consequences of all that are in due course I think we know I think we know but but in any event There's also people delaying Having children and then when you know so many women when they when they do reach a point where they do want to have children Now and that maybe they're mid 30s the late 30s The relevant partner is not there at the right time. So they they miss that. There's also there's all sorts of existential Reason societal reasons for the for the plummeting but they get to work. They're consulting for the once a year That's who in years. That's not enough But what I'm saying is that we know this and yet the Malthusians are still out there Banging the drum for fewer people We can't get rid of people fast enough. They can't quickly enough to tear people from Having more people is net genocide like isn't that what that is? Yeah, it's anti species and again again It's coming down to people. I think you don't you're not properly invested in the future and they're certainly not invested in the future of humankind They're not they're not they're not giving their not giving their their last measure of devotion But there's like a level of heat so we hit there's a football player You probably haven't followed this but in the United States Kicker who gave us a college commencement speech the other day and in it he said I did trident I watched this morning by chance we watched the online There's deeply steeped in the politics of the United States But then you saw how modern it was he's like, you know as you grow old you might want to like have kids because that's a source of enduring joy and All these politicians and cultural figures and I don't can't remember that chicks name but Taylor Swift Some sort of fake entertainer like it's out there and you know denounces the guy is As in the ender thaw and as evil because he suggests that having children may be more rewarding than your stupid career Like what is that impo like why would you even bad at someone for encouraging young people to have children? That's very weird to me. I was listening to I was listening to Jordan Peterson years ago I'm not claiming that as a badge of honor. I just a fight. I was listening way before Everything is having a moment. I came across him years and years ago I think it was courtesy of you know that the the jore organ experience he was part of that the intellectual dark web remember the Sam Harris Brett and Heather hit Brett Weinstein had a hearing and Jordan Peterson and so and I remember being really very profoundly struck by a lot of the things that The Peterson had to say about children and parenthood And for example, I really remember I'm saying that you know so many people say they don't want to have a baby because it's gonna Interview with a lifestyle and he said I really have to ask what kind of lifestyle is it that you can't take a baby with you and I thought Jaha Because we truly and I went from we had our first and then go for three They always came with us We just were there. They were just then two of them and three of them and they just went everywhere we just It didn't impinge on anything and obviously it goes without saying that it made our lives but by an expressible orders of magnitude richer and And yet you know that they're biting Message out there is that there's better things to do than be families That's anti-human at the base level. Well, so then I want to ask you just finally about one of the great trends in the west And it is only in the west Is the climate hysteria How do you assess that that seems Part of the slarger holds a hoax So hoax in what sense In the well the smelty is multifaceted. I The climate is changing because that's what the climate does. Yep. We're whether You know the climate changes. We did have glaciers at one point. Yeah We when they started when they started measuring temperature We were just coming out of the little ice age. Yes, which had velocity for hundreds of years And temperatures were as low on planet earth as they'd been for thousands of years at that point So when it comes to measuring temperature, there was only really one way for unless we were going to go extinct It'll go straight into another full ice age. There was only one way for the temperatures to go which was up And so the fact that there has been sustained Increase in temperature. Well, it would be because it was coming from the bottom of the well The only way was up also It's it used to be accepted accepted fact that Increasing carbon dioxide follows a rise in temperature. It doesn't cause it right as the world gets warmer There is but there's a kind of a several hundred year lag And then there's more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere as a consequence of that warming And so to to tell people that carbon dioxide is causing the increase in temperature Would be like seeing a horse and cart on a road from space and imagining that the cart was pushing the horse Because you could see it moving That that would be how wrong you are. It's the horse pool in the car And likewise CO2 There's more of it once the planet's warmer. But I think it's 800 years is the lag So there are all sorts of reasons for Being aware that this way in which people are being frightened into thinking that there's a catastrophic Apocalypse coming because of the gas central heating and they drive fossil fuel cars is a hoax There's a big complicated picture to do with The climate changing Used to be called in the 70s I remember the documentary with Leonard Nimoy very well talking about you know We're going to need to know you see that was just the 70s and then it became global warming But then because that isn't holding up its become climate change Well, yeah, of course climate changes And then in any event What's what's been done in response to it Is not green and it's anti-human You know as advocates of fossil fuels say if we are if we are let's see We are going into time of of climate uncertainty and instability That would be the very time you wouldn't want to do with the ability to Cheekly and readily heat homes or your condition them That would be true as appropriate I mean if something's going to happen This would be the you know you do not throw away your matches You know At the time when you might need to light a fire and and also the You know the winter binds that now are at the end of the life cycle and that just being landfilled These vast Unrecyclable plastic things are just being buried in the ground They are being made in in any event using fossil fuels They can't be recycled electric cars. That's just a means to get people out of their cars And and back onto I don't know horses or or or shanks his pony or whatever Um, so it's it's not it's not green what is being done The the planet we're making a mess You know look what happens in the extraction of the the lithium's another rare earth metals are required for electric batteries Look at the the child slavery that that entails look at the look at the scarification of the planet that's involved in the extraction of those things The destruction of ecosystems and habitats in pursuit of green energy really seriously And the one you know the one clean green energy that is available which is nuclear is strictly of a boat and because well But because we've been told that you can't have nuclear energy so in Europe. You've seen a spate of climate cultists destroying Medieval art, you know, it's never modern art. It's always Christian art, but I've noticed but um But they've gone into museums and spray-painted or slash paintings I don't think you've seen any vandalism of private planes at all so if you believe in the kind of schematic You believe in the story of climate change as an existential threat You know the first thing you would do is get rid of private air travel But that doesn't occur to anybody. I don't understand like what is that? What are we watching? Well, you've got that You've got that bizarre situation where the the rich at the world economic forum and Davos and other places are openly saying that because of carbon credits as rich people will buy the carbon credits of poor people that can't afford to go and hold Anyways, and that will offset our private jets and private yachts You're not using your carbon credits anyway because you can be able to feed yourself or your family So you're definitely not going on holiday this year. So I'll I'll take your credit your carbon credits off your hand and I'll I'll use that to legitimize my the perpetuation of my luxurious lifestyle You know the hypocrisy of it the rubbing of people's noses in it is off the scale and again, it's anti human if For one of the kind of farming techniques and the and the fertilizers that we have There's very good reason for thinking that half the world's population will start today the kind of farming techniques and the fertilizers that we have. There's very good reason for thinking that half the world's population will start to death for one of the kind of fertilizers that are made from oil. So they just stop oil. So you're going to see famines that are like there's any doubt about that soon. And when that happens, will people blame each other as they've been instructed to do or will they finally figure out that this is all manufactured? I think again, being being absolutely being an inalienable responsibility to be positive, I would have to answer yes to that question. More people do say, well, I can say for one, I see it now and I didn't used to. So I've added to the count by one and Tritty sees it and she didn't used to. So that's two and her kids do. So that's five. So just in my circle, I'm seeing people waking up on a very personal level. So yes, I do think that enough people are seeing the way in which we are being played. We are being an attempt, a galactic scale attempt to pull the wool over our eyes is going on and more and more people are seeing it. And they're seeing that people are being up-rooted from their homelands and have been for generations. And they are turning up where they, you know, maybe ought to be and instead of people in, you know, pausing for a moment to think, why is this disruption happening? They just angry with the victims of it. And I'm not saying, I'm sure there are bad lads and criminals and absolutely the sort of people, whatever dream colour that you wouldn't want in your communities. I see, I get that absolutely. But they wouldn't be here if the government's an NGO's hadn't brought them. But the bigger picture is, I mean, look at the, you know, they're building a bridge in the Darien Gap to make it easier for the NGOs and the WHO and the UN and the rest of them to drive people into the United States from the South. If you can, as I say, I'm seeing it and more and more people are seeing it. And all it really takes is for people to realise that the trouble is not beside you. It's above you. And there's not, it's not a big, it's not a big group. And actually the techniques are old, worn out and transparent from overuse. And, you know, there's nothing to fear but the fear they saw, I would say. I can't believe that I am more pessimistic than a Scott. Well, you've probably got Scottish jeans. But there's no, there's a zero sum game, Tucker. You can't, you've got to be, you've got to, it's like taking your castor oil. It's like taking your, you've got to be optimistic because it's your obligation. It's nothing less than your obligation to force yourself to be optimistic. You can't, you cannot go to the, to the dark side until it's all over in which case it wouldn't matter anyway. But I don't think, I don't think so. Neil Oliver, thank you on that. I appreciate it. Thank you, Tucker Carlson.