Go, go, go, go, go. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Here we go. Here we go. What's up, Brett? Good. Good. It's great seeing you. Great seeing you too. It's been a long time. Well, you know, we've tried to keep this, like, this from your face. That's probably the first video. Oh, sure. Yeah. There we go. Yeah. I think we first met some random person who sent me an email, probably 2005, 2006. And he said, oh, you know, Joe Rogan is talking about your book. And I hadn't heard of you. This is before I did a podcast. I think it was before the podcast. Yeah. I think you were still doing stand-up. Yeah. Yeah. And he gave me your number, I think, and I called you and you were at the airport. And you said, hey, man, I'm reading your book. I love it. Yeah. The book was fascinating because your book was, you need to adjust, cameras, good. Your book was fascinating to me because it was, I mean, correct me if I'm wrong, but it was the first time that they ever, that the FDA ever allowed real studies to be done on schedule one drugs. There's the first new American study in 20 years on psychedelics. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, any human psychedelic research. And how did you, first of all, why did you want to do it? And how did you get the permission to do it? Well, I wanted to do it because of my interest in chemistry and my interest in altered states, my own altered states. Like the first time I smoked marijuana, I was 18 years old, and it was a fully psychedelic experience. There were purple clouds coming out of the speakers. I was flying over this, you know, the college town, and I was living in it at the time. And my friend was too. It was a shared hallucination on very strong hash. So you felt like you were out of body? No. I was, we were on a carpet. And you felt like you were, so you both saw like a city below you? Yeah, the floor disappeared. Yeah, it was the first time I smoked marijuana. And I thought, wow, this is interesting. And now, hash is the way they create hash is they take what is it called? The crystals off of THC, is that how they do it? They shake out the resin from the flower. Just shake it, that's how they do it. Well, there's different ways to do it. Like in the old country, you get really sweaty and you just agitate a lot of pot. And the resin accumulates on your skin. And you scrape it off. Really? And that's how they make a hash? Well, you know, that's so funky. You're getting someone's funk along with the hash. Yeah, yeah, that's called pre-industrial hash. I was watching or I was looking at something online the other day where they were talking about repurpose. It was in Morocco. They were, it was Steve DiAngelo. He was talking about how they were repurposing machines in Morocco to make hash. I'm going to, how they've been doing it this way and making hash in this part of the world for who knows how many years. Yeah, that's it. Here, I wonder what the machines are. Yeah, this is Steve DiAngelo's hamp activist, cannabis activist. So it looks like some kind of a press or something like that. I don't know what that thing is. Yeah. Interesting. I think it has something to do with automobiles. Here, he's going to say it right here. Things that can't break down, things that don't need electricity, things that can be improvised. And just so much cleverness has been shown here today, so much ingenuity in working with what you have. I mean, this press is a great example of a take a look here. It's just basically an automobile jack that's been put into a frame. Had a couple of springs put on there. And then these iron casing boxes made. And it works really well. And this is the way that the hash that's smoked by most people around the world, the largest quantity of cannabis that's made anywhere, is made still by this legacy method. And the great thing about it is this could really be done anywhere. I think about folks in Mexico or Columbia who could take this method and repurpose it and adapt it and be making quite a very nice pipe quality hash. Just about anywhere. That's a hash salesman I've ever seen one. Yeah. Yeah. That's his pleasure, Nark. He's like, everybody get in on this. Come on, make some hash. I'd like to buy one. Well, I wonder if that makes hash or hash oil, if it's just being compressed like that, squeezing things out. Well, it looked like he was having bricks of hash, right? Yeah. Yeah, interesting. So I think he's using it in that little frame, the little case. And then they're packing it in there with that car jack, which is pretty crazy. Yeah, clever. So the difference between hash and regular marijuana smoking is in general what? Is it just that it's much stronger? It's much stronger. So like that kind of hallucination, that's super rare with regular marijuana, right? But with hash, it can't happen. Yeah. Well, I started a college as a chemistry major. as a kid, I made fireworks in bombs. And started college as a chemistry major, I wanted to become a magnate, making fireworks, a fireworks magnate. But everybody discouraged me. They said, you know, you're a smart guy. You should be a doctor. And so that's how they trick to into it. Well, I got the last laugh, right? Because I'm giving people psychedelics and they have inner fireworks now. Right. Well, so after that experience, smoking hash, and my chemistry mind got peaked, I thought, like a half hour ago, I was totally normal. And right now, I'm just having the weirdest experience of my life. And I wonder how that works chemically. So I figured there must be some chemical changes in the brain. And I was interested in learning what those might be. So what year was this? 70. 70. So OK, so this was like right around this time where everything got made illegal. That was the big schedule. One act was that in 1970. They made a lot of the psychedelics illegal. Their control substance is active in 1970. So it was right at that year when you were just getting involved. You're like, damn, what they took the rug out from under me. It didn't make any difference. The school I went to had a lot of psychedelics. Really? And I went crazy for about two years. And then figured, you know, I think I've had enough. I need to transfer. So I transfer schools actually. I've known more than one person that has lost their marbles from doing too many psychedelics. I started getting unraveled. It's not uncommon, right? Don't we do you know people that have kind of like bone fuse? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, I get the occasional email from people who have really gone around the bend smoking too much DMT. There's people I think that have a tendency towards a type of a paranoid schizophrenia that maybe they kind of have it under control, or maybe it's mild. You know, they just have some weird paranoia and noise about certain things. I've seen a few people do too many psychedelics. And then now they're in fantasy land. Yeah. I kind of wonder about the risk of increased accessibility. I do. Yeah. Because you know, you could prepare, you can screen, and still people have adverse effects. And in the wild, in the field, I think we're just going to have a revisiting of the problems in the 60s with all of those hospitalizations and things. I don't think there's any doubt. The real question is how many of those people were on that path already? Like what is that whole process of someone becoming mentally ill? Because I've seen it happen. But I'm not exactly sure what's causing it. What makes people, I've seen people go down. And they just become different people. Well, I think it's a case of people being vulnerable. They've got a susceptibility in their genes. And they just may also be susceptible because of their lives. They may be doing other drugs, drinking a lot in really unstable relationships. Or they also might have a tendon seagynetically. Let's say one of their parents was bipolar. It's a phrenic. So it's a major trauma. I mean, it's a psychological trauma to have a huge trip. Good trauma, bad trauma, but it's really a shift. And if you're not equipped, I think it could fracture a thin veneer of a normality. Yeah, it's almost like they're interfacing at the wrong, they're not like quite getting like there's a reality port. And then there's like a neighboring port where they're getting, it's like they can pay their taxes, they can drive their cars, they can answer emails. But they think that there's some crazy mind control experiment at the head of, you know, it's just one of those weird ones where people just, they just start believing that the whole world's out to get them and the governments trying to track them down. And there's a chip in my brain, it like accelerates. Yeah, yeah, it's extreme. The chip is the weird one. I've heard multiple people tell me they have a chip in their brain, or at least say it to people, like that I'm communicating to them through a chip in their brain. Mm-hmm. Well, you know, schizophrenia's are like that. Yeah. You know, paranoid schizophrenia's are a friend. Yeah, you know, back in the day, it was radio waves or x-rays that were beaming down from space and affecting people's minds. That was the paranoid schizophrenia's perspective. Yeah, it was, you know, their explanation of their unusual experiences. You know, the kinds of stories I've heard with people doing too much DMT is a kind of mania. They're really grandiose. They think that they've got all the answers. And nobody is listening to them. And it makes them mad. And they end up in prison or in psychiatric hospitals. I just, I'm always fascinated with how other human beings brains work. I'm, mine as well, right? I'm fascinated by the brain, but how it's so different after exercise. It's so different after rest. It's so different when, you know, you meditate or you do something like yoga, some mindfulness kind of of thing, right? It's like what are most people experiencing? And then what does it feel like to be mentally ill? What does that person experiencing? Like what weird shift in the chemical balance of the mind, it's causing that. And, you know, how much of it is genetic and how much of it is life experience and trauma. It's just the way people think and look about things and look at things has always been fascinating to me because I got to assume that everyone's dealing with different hardware or wetware, whatever you would call the brain. Like they work different. They don't work the same. Right. Well, I mean, it depends on the, on the mental illness, you know, the disorder. Um, well, you know, one of the reasons I became a psychiatrist can be sides by interest in studying psychedelics was because I was really interested in the mind. You know, schizophrenic patients were just amazing. Because other than their crazy ideas and experiences, they're just normal people. Right. Yeah. Which is wild. And there's got to be levels to it, right? Are there like, like there's like mild where someone just kind of like a touch schizophrenic and then someone who's like full blown, you know, the aliens are hiding my walls and they're out to get me? Well, it depends on the kind of schizophrenia. Uh, there's what's called chronic and differentiated, which is kind of the burned out types that just don't move. Don't talk. They just veg. They just veg. And they're the paranoid schizophrenics who are a lot more active in their hallucinating and, and they're in your face. Um, yeah, you know, I really found it easy and fun to talk to psychotic patients. I think that was, you know, one of the things that kind of was part of the mix of studying psychedelics. Why was it easy? Well, I think in my own psychedelic experiences, I might have gone crazy for an hour or two. One time in particular, I had to be, you know, talk back down. You know, so I could empathize. You've heard Dennis McKenna's story about being with Terence, the experiment at lunch over. Yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah. You can explain what happened because they, they ate too many mushrooms. Apparently. Yeah. Can you explain like pharmacologically what, or psychologically, what could have happened? Well, I mean, it depends on your model, right? Please tell people what happened. Like, tell people the story. Yeah, I don't know the story. You don't know exactly that. Well, what I believe is they found a bunch of fresh mushrooms in the Amazon and they just start chowin and they went crazy. And I think he was gone for about two weeks. Yeah. Might have been longer than that. Might be two months. Do you remember Jamie? I'll check with you with, uh, he was on, he told the story on the podcast. Yeah. It went into detail about like what it was like. The way he was processing were out reality. It was a long stretch. It was a long time when it was gone. Yeah. It wasn't like two hours. No, no, they had to, well, you know, to the extent that he could communicate, he wanted people to leave him alone. What happens? What is going on when, when that happens? Like what could cause you? Is there something that could be psychoactive for two whole weeks? That's what's confusing to me. Like what is going on with this substance? It must be gone from your body after two weeks. But somehow or another, you're still feeling the effects of it. Like what happened and what is that indicated about like states of mind and how pliable they are? Well, I mean, the, I guess the way I would look at it, which might not be the way everybody would. But I think what may have taken place is that because of all of the suicide Biden that he took, he opened a portal into things out there. And it just didn't close. You know, so the, you know, still a sibin was the trigger. But after the, you know, portal was open, it was open. I'm glad you said it that way because I say that way too. And I know it sounds ridiculous. It's particularly to people that don't do psychedelics, opening a portal. But I've, I've, I've thought about that a lot. I thought about that a lot about the DMT experience because it seems so insane and so impossible that I just can't believe that this isn't just another place. It seems like it's not just a chemical reaction in my mind. It seems like I'm going to another place. That's how it feels. That's how it feels. But what does that mean by when I say that's how it feels? Because I don't have any understanding of what I'm experiencing it. What I'm experiencing rather. So I must put it in some sort of context where it makes sense to me as a person who lives on earth, you know, sitting here right now in 2022. You know, there's all those variables that you, everything when you look at the world goes through all the filter of your own personal reality. The thing about a, a full blown psychedelics experience, like the DMT experiences, it doesn't seem like any of that applies anymore. You go over there and it's like you're gone. There's no, so I was wondering about myself, like maybe I'm trying to put it in a perspective like it's another place because places make sense to me. And what doesn't make sense to me is just fold nothingness, chaos, wild imagery and geometry and things that move to music. And it's like almost like it's so hard for me to wrap my head around that I convince myself it's another dimension, but it's not. Well, it could be. I mean, it could be another dimension. And yeah, I think you need to design experiments, you know, to test if it is another dimension. How could you do that? Well, I think, well, if you consider the location of the DMT world to be outside of us, in objective reality, you'd need to, you know, call upon physics, advanced, you know, physics, dark matter, dark energy, parallel universes. So I think if you could, you know, get into those spaces with machines, let's say imaging machines or cameras, how could you do that? I don't know. Could you get a computer high? It's one of those ideas I've had. Well, seeing some of the new, there was some new article that was written about virtual reality being able to give people transcendent experiences that it's similar to the effects achieved on psychedelics. Right. That's interesting. But can I talk about that a long time ago? He said he thinks that one day they'll get to a point where they can create something visually and it'll bring you into that place that they'll be able to recreate with sufficient technology. Here's VR is as good as psychedelics at helping people reach transcendence. On key metrics, VR experience elicited a response indistinguishable from subject who took medium doses of LSD or magic mushrooms. That's why hold it. Yeah. Well, if they just keep getting better at it, that's like, if you can get someone who's been there and knows what it looks like. Mm-hmm. And then is a good artist who can recreate it because I've seen some DMT art before. That's so close. It's like, oh, wow, that's so close. Right. You know, it seems like it. Of course, Alex Gray. Like, Alex Gray stuff is like some of it is so tripped to mean like, you know. Well, it's important to note that they talk about medium doses of LSD or psilocybin. Right. So you got a good feeling, but you're not hallucinating. Yeah, you may not really be fully tripping out. What in what they're doing, what kind of VR experience would be? Like, what is the images they're showing you? What is the sound they're playing for you that's allowing you to get to these states? The guy that made this one did it after he had a near death experience. Wow. Here, I'm right here. He says he fell off there. Read that. Okay. He says, I knew that the intensity of the light was related to the extent to which I inhabited my body, he recalls, yet watching it dim didn't frighten him from his new vantage point. Glo-glo-glo-wacky. Glo-wacky. Glo-wacky could see that the light wasn't disappearing. It was transforming, leaking out of his body into the environment around him. This realization, which he took to signify that his awareness could outlast and transcend his physical form, block, bought, brought, glo-wacky. Glo-wacky, a sublime sense of peace. So he approached what he thought was death with curiosity, what might come next. So since his accident and artist and computational molecular physicist has worked to recapture that transcendence. Okay. So he had some wild near death experience and he's trying to recreate that with VR. So that's interesting because that's not even a, he's not even talking about a drug experience. So he could be. Right. Yeah. You know, we've been studying or there's a group at University of Michigan that's been looking at endogenous DMT that's made in the million brain and it increases during death and especially it increases in the visual part of the brain. You know, so it could be no that for fact. Yeah, they know that for a fact. It's a 2019 study. When I first met you, there wasn't nearly as much data. And I remember you were talking about how much anecdotal data, the points to the idea of the pineal gland being the source of DMT, but there wasn't a mammal model. Yeah. Yeah. The pineal DMT story, it sounds pretty obscure, but it's pretty controversial. I mean, there are some data supporting the view that the pineal makes DMT and other data. Don't. Um, I think you and I met at Starbucks on Ventura in, and I think 2009, I was out there for my high school reunion. And we met at Starbucks on Ventura. I think it was in Encino. And yeah, we were talking about DMT. Do you think, yeah, I remember that, do you think that DMT is produced in like all over the body like they've found it in the lungs, they've found it in the liver, right? Do you think it's just something that the body produces everywhere? You know, when they first discovered DMT and mammals, people were focusing on the lung. And, you know, they were also interested in DMT being involved in psychosis. And, you know, there was a joke or I don't know if you call it a joke, but an idea that schizophrenia was a lung disease because you were producing too much DMT. You know, doing studies to inhibit DMT and schizophrenia or increase it or. Oh, wow. That makes sense. Yeah, it does make sense. That completely makes sense. Yeah, that could be what's wrong with them. It could be. And if you could block DMT naturally or with a vaccine or something, that completely makes sense because I've seen people on it that like fight it and panic. Imagine if that was like a constant state. Mm-hmm. You were involved. That would look totally similar to someone. Beaks gets a friend. If it was a constant state, you'd have to come up with some ideas about what was going on. And I think that possibly would then lead to the delusions, the crazy ideas about what's going on. Yeah, that makes sense. Wow. Well, so we found DMT in the rodent pineal in 2013, the group at the University of Michigan. You know, so it it, uh, you proved or established the validity of that idea that the pineal makes DMT. But this study in 2019 that I was mentioning where DMT goes up after death in the visual cortex. Yeah, they looked again for pineal DMT and they couldn't find any. And what they believe is that the original paper described the DMT in the brain, which was snagged on the way in and out of the pineal gland. You know, but even more interesting, I think, than the pineal making DMT is the brain makes DMT in quite high levels, comparable to even serotonin. Wow. And it could be there's a DMT neurotransmitter system in the brain, just like a serotonin neurotransmitter system. What is the function of the pineal gland? Well, it helps regulate circadian rhythms and light sensitivity. Um, it helps in train rhythms. It helps keep everything in sync in the body temperature, uh, urinary function, blood cell formation, all those things. Why do you think ancient cultures were so fascinated by it? Like why did they have this? Why did they attribute this sort of, uh, almost like God likes significance to it, right? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's still, there's still a certain pineal kind of reverence out there. If you look at Amazon and enter pineal, there's all kinds of esoteric things that are still being published on the pineal gland. Hmm. Um, well, it's an unpaired organ. It's the only unpaired organ in the brain. Uh, everything else is paired. You have a left and right hemisphere. Uh, but there's just one pineal on the, uh, in the middle of your brain. It's, it's, it's location, I think, has a trib, or has contributed you know, to the reverence. It's just under the fontanelle and certain kinds of spiritual experiences are also felt there. And so it was the, you know, the, uh, uh, physical corresponding position of the subjective experience. So people thought it must be occurring in the pineal gland. Hmm. You know, I have a friend who's, uh, really into Aztec, he's a savagery, you know, history. And, uh, he told me this was kind of grim, but, uh, he told me that the Aztecs used to burn people when they're alive to really like freak them out and then take their brains out and eat their brains because of all the hormones and all the things that we're going on. Whoa. Yeah. So the pineal gland is heavy. That's heavy. I know that is so heavy. Yeah. You know, but they found it gave them, you know, whatever superhuman strength or religious ecstasy. Is it fascinating that that also will kill you? Like that's, that's where people get pre on diseases. They get it from eating brain and spinal tissue, right? Right. Like cannibals when they get that yucko, quick filled. Yucko, Christfeld. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you for Brown said better. Well, when I was a medical student, we were always on the hunt for yucko, Christfeld patients because you know, they were rare and very interesting. How many did you discover? Maybe it's just two or three. And how did they come into contact with it? How did they come into contact with it? I think, you know, they were, I from Africa and they, maybe some bush meat or something or some primate meat, sheep meat or monkey meat. Yeah. Oh, sheep meat, you can get it from sheep meat as well. I thought it was a, there was a thing that would, it was with cannibals and there was a thing with mad cow disease, which is another one. It's another very similar version of it because the cow's reading the cows, right? Right. It's a, it's a, it's a, you're pre on disease. Right. Yeah. So here is Crocsfeld, Jacob disease and sheep brain, places in origin seven out of eight patients with CJD coincide with the distribution of sheep rearing in central and south Italy. Oh, okay. That actually makes sense because my uncle, Vinnie, Vinnie, De De D'Orlando is about as Italian as you get. That's your uncle? Yes. My uncle, Vinnie, who's a great guy, used to cook lambs brains. They would, that was like a traditional Italian meal that you would cook. Like when we'd get together and have like family gatherings, he had, on more than one occasion, cooked lambs brains. Because I remember having it as a child. Yeah, that's interesting. Well, well, so the medical school that I went to is in the Bronx. And you know, there are on a lot of immigrants in the Bronx. There are quite a few Italians and, you know, lots of people from the Caribbean and from Africa. Yep. You know, so I think it was, it was some African patients. But I think it's probably real common over there if it's common in Italy. You know, because eating lambs brains is a normal. I mean, my parents, they, I mean, they didn't eat like a lot of exotic food. That was like a normal thing. Yeah. Yeah. My family never ate brains. I've had sweet breads before, which is the thalamus gland, right? Or really, isn't that what it is? A sweet bridge. It's like, it's a gland. It's one of the glands. Oh, the thymus, maybe. Thymus, that's right. That might be the thymus. Yeah, the thymus is kind of like the spleen, or like the liver. What it is, it's quite rich in blood vessels. Hair goes, thymus. Cuts of meat from either the thymus gland, located in a throat, or the pancreas gland in this by the stomach. Wow. So they could, sweet breads could be either one of those things. Yeah. Interesting. So it's like a generic term in lamb, veal, pig, or beef. They have a rich creamy texture and often served roasted or fried. Yeah. People eating organs, I mean, livers really, really good for you. Like it makes sense that you would think brain is really, really good for you too. And it might be, but maybe like nature doesn't want people eating people's brains. So it created these free-on diseases. Well, you'd have to screen their brains before you ate them. Yeah, but even so, is it the juice worth the squeeze? What do you get in that eating brains? Yeah. Wonder what it's like. Well, it would. Yeah, but even so, is the juice worth the squeeze. What are you getting at eating brains? Yeah. Wonder what it's like. Well, it would depend on whose brain. Right. What if you ate on-sines brain and you actually got smarter? If you gave you permission. Yeah, I got about a week left. Take my brain. Yeah. Well, you know the frozen, frozen brain banks out there? I have heard of that. Yeah. Yeah. They flash freeze your brain right after you die. You have to agree to it beforehand. But imagine if you're in transcendence, you've escaped this physical reality and you've gone into the next amazing dimension where there's no deception. It's all love and energy and you're floating together in music. And then some dipshit brings you back to life. You get sucked backwards, but now you're stuck in a computer. Um, can you imagine? Those are soul. Your soul is just sucked back into that brain as soon as it's reanimated. Well, I have thought about it. Have you? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What do you think that would be like terrifying? You wouldn't want to do it. Well, it'd be terrifying if they couldn't get rid of it. Like if you couldn't go back. Like what if there's like portals, right? Like you were saying. What if those portals are activated by normal human neural chemistry? Right. And then that and then it's a part of dying is that these portals are open. But what if that fucking portals open? You go, you transcend and then they bring that goddamn brain back to life because you wanted to live forever. So they take that thing that they had flash frozen. They kicked that sucker back on. And now you're just an embodied brain in a fucking computer attached to a bunch of wires. Well, I mean, if you're having experience though. But what kind of experience would you have? Maybe you'd just be experiencing the fact that you're stuck in a computer. Yeah. I mean, you're kind of describing the matrix. Yeah. I'm describing hell. It's worse than the matrix. There's not even a body that you could detach. And the matrix they detest their heads, remember? Right. They got out of it. Oh, we've got to get out of the matrix. You can't get out of the matrix if you're just a brain. Well, you know, one of the interesting things about endogenous DNA is about endogenous DMT. And especially with his discovery in such high levels in the brain, is that it may be the endometrics. It could be kind of regulating everything all of the time. What do you mean by that? Regulating everything all the time. It could be the way we interact with reality is through endogenous DMT, which is always at a steady level. Well, it's the way I began wondering about that is because, what is the purpose of endogenous DMT? Why does the brain make DMT? Can you do a DMT test on a person's blood level? It's pretty hard. It's pretty hard. It's really low in blood. It's like, you know, billions of a gram per milliliter. Okay. So you have to measure it in the actual brain itself. In the brain or spinal fluid, maybe spinal fluid, but most likely brain. When they start doing stuff like neural link, or they're going to insert wires into your brain, and you're going to have an app to control your brain, to control your mood. I mean, it seems like that would be one of the ways they would do it, right? Well, you'd need to find where in the brain the main source of DMT is, and then put it in an electrode there and keep that going. Do you think it's limited to one specific area where it's developed? Oh, man. They're just beginning to unravel the whole role and location of endogenous DMT. So when they know that it's in the liver and they know that it's in the lungs, the lungs, to me, sound interesting because of holotropic breathing. Right. You know, because people have done breathing exercises and achieved states of altered states of consciousness. Yeah. Yeah. Kind of makes sense, doesn't it? Well, yeah, but I think it's not working through the lungs because those more recent studies haven't really demonstrated DMT in lung. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. I used to say it's made in lung. Everybody used to say it's made in lung, but it seems like it's made in brain. So if it's made in brain, then all the other stuff you're just getting like a trickle-down effect. Well. Does it go through the whole body? Yeah, but it's metabolized so quickly that, you know, by the time it gets into the blood that you're drawing, the concentrations are pretty minuscule. Wow. What a sneaky molecule. Well, you have to wonder what it's doing, right? Right. What is it doing? What is endogenous? What's the function of it? You know, there is the possibility we have a DMT neurotransmitter system, like serotonin or dopamine, in which case, you know, what is it doing? Wow. So this is a really wild way to think about it because to this time, I'd never even considered that. I always thought of it as being something that was responsible, maybe for very vivid dreams, or something that was responsible for near-death experiences, or what happens to when you die, the idea of a portal. But I never thought about it as being something that is regulating regular, every day reality. Well, you know, one of the hallmarks of the DMT effect is that it feels more real than real. And you study the function of endogenous neurotransmitters by giving, you know, drugs that modify the effect of that endogenous neurotransmitter. You know, so we've got the SSR antidepressants and they effect serotonin, although they may not all that much. But still, that's been the working model for decades. And, you know, so because SSRIs are useful for depression and anxiety, you then can speculate that serotonin is responsible for mood or anxiety. So the hallmark of the DMT effect is it's more real than real. It feels more real than anything else. So it's tempting to speculate. But that, again, when I go back to that disembodied mind thought process of, like, thinking, like, what am I thinking when I'm over there? Since my body doesn't seem to be there and I'm there and it seems more real than real, is that me just tricking myself into thinking that it's a different place? I mean, how could you tell? How could I tell, right? Yeah, I mean, how would you know? I have one way of looking at it that I always describe. This is what I say to people. I say, if there was a thing that you could do, like a door you could go through and that door would take you to another dimension where you would communicate with some entity beyond your wildest imagination that's constantly visually changing and communicating with you telepathically. And knows everything about you, sees all your bullshit and is trying to impart some ideas that will help you with your life. Because it's a God-like experience. Like you're experiencing, like, some sort of uber-powerful entity, some uber-intelligent entity, something beyond any, if we just looked at humans and thought of the evolution of human one day we'll get to this. We're not going to get to that. That is a different, it seems like it's so beyond the body. This is what I tell people. I go, if I could give, if you would open a door and you would go there and you'd have that experience, you would you do it? And most people, like, yes, I would do it. If I gave you a drug that gave you that experience, you still have the exact same experience. It's the exact same experience. You've just decided it's not real. And you've decided it's not real because you're putting into this category of hallucination. Like, what does that even mean? What does that even mean? You're actually having that experience. I don't know what it is. I mean, I like to play devil's advocate and I like to think that maybe I'm messing with my own head. And maybe I'm just like, it's like, I'm like, well, through doing what? Looking at it, like maybe it's just my mineral chemistry going bonkers and interacting with my visual cortex could produce the hallucinations. But it doesn't feel. That's what I'm trying to figure out. If you're bullshitting yourself when you're over there, or if you really are over there. But what I tell people is it's the same experience. Yeah, what difference does it make? What, yeah. Yeah. It's previously invisible. Yeah. And it contains information. A lot. Yeah. And I think that's all you can say about it. It contains information about you, right? Well, it could only be happening to you. Yeah. Yeah. It's not happening to somebody else. It's like it gives you advice. It can. But you, I mean, how do you judge the value of that advice? Yeah. So what is the one of the things that happened to me, I've talked about this ad and I'll see him unfortunately. I've heard this before folks. But one of my experiences, there was like a bunch of jokers, like jesters, like jester hats. And they were giving me the finger. They were going like this, fuck you. And it made me realize I was taking myself too seriously. Like instantaneously, I went, oh, I get it. And they went like this. They went like, I don't do that. You do that. But like saying fuck you to me, it was so clear what they were doing. It was so clear. It was like a little lesson. Like don't do that. Yeah. It's interesting. Don't do that. That's like three syllables. Yeah. And they correspond to a heartbeat. You know, when I tripped on DMT the first time, these beings came out of this waterfall and they said, now do you see, now do you see? How do you see? It was the same three-beat thing. I love you. They say, I love you a lot. I love you. And I think it corresponds to the heartbeat because it's in sync. Yeah. The vocalizations in sync with the heartbeat. Yeah. The one time I did it in these entities were talking to me and saying, I love you 600 million 500,000 times. Like the way a child would say I love you with some crazy number. Seven billion zillions. And every time they did that, it would show a more beautiful image. Like every image. Like I love you 600 million 500,000 times. I love you 700,400. And every time they did it, it was just this bigger and bigger experience visually. The part where I was like crying. I was like openly weeping. Oh yeah. The beauty is just what I was seeing. It sounds beautiful. It was wild. But it was that simple sort of, there's just like a, they'll say simple things to you in a way that you're not really hearing it. But you know what they're saying. Well, it kind of penetrates you. Yeah. Yeah. It's very weird. And it's very weird. Very weird. Yeah. You used to not talk about your personal experiences with it. I know. I figured to hell with it. Yeah. I think so. I think it's good that you did that. Because I remember when we first met, you were reluctant to discuss it. And I was like, you know, you didn't really want to talk about it publicly or want people to know about it publicly. Yeah. I figured that I had suddenly jitternessy to maintain. A few years back, I had this conversation with Dennis McKenna. You know, like about your reputation. And or, you know, one's reputation. He said, I've just given up on my reputation. It just, you know, so. Well, he talk is openly about psychedelics as Dennis. He's the best guy to talk about it too. Because his, he's got a really interesting way of discussing things, you know, and he's had so many personal experiences. And he's so smart. And he's got this incredible vocabulary to just draw from. And when he describes the actual impact of a psilocybin and psychedelic chemicals, particularly in formation of language, he was describing the stoned ape theory. The stoned ape. The stoned ape. Yeah. It's incredible. Listen to him to say it. The way he describes it, like he actually understands what psilocybin and what all these various molecules are doing to different parts of the brain and why that would facilitate the development of language and compassion and connect the tribe more. Well, I mean, do you think it actually is information coming from the brain? Or do you think, you know, that the portal is being opened up and the information is coming from above? I think that's more likely. I think the more likely is that the brain is an antenna. You know, it's one of the things that creative people will always tell you, like someone sits down and writes a song. It just like came from the air. They're getting things from somewhere else almost. And it's almost like you just got to get out of your own way. You got to put enough good juice out there in the world and take enough bad out and like, and just, and see the world from a clear perspective, and at least in these brief moments of creativity and then things come to them. They just, like they're sitting in front of the computer and pam, they got an idea for a book. Like where the fuck is all that coming from? It seems like people always want to say it's a muse. Like that's the Stephen Pressfield analogy. He's got a great book about it called the War of Art, all about like inviting the muse into your life and being disciplined and sitting there at the computer every day and summoning it and treating it like it's an entity. And if you do that, it works. Like this is what's crazy. Like people who are disciplined and also creative, like they decide, I'm going to write this book, I'm going to sit down and I'm going to force myself every day. Like ideas come to them. Like where the fuck are they coming from? Like is it possible that the brain really is like some sort of an antenna and that wisdom and love and all these different things. They're just all around us. We're just confused by our monkey bodies. Well, do you think we're getting that information from God? If that's what you want to call it, you know, the only problem I have with the word God and it's not really a problem. But it's a recognition. Is that it's a loaded word. It's a loaded word but so is love. Yes. So I think you just got to take the good with the bat. Well that's Alex Grace position. Alex Grace says we have to take it back the same way we take back love and say God all the time and you know that's what he does. Yeah and that's the reason I think it's good to use the word psychedelic instead of hallucinogen or anything like that. Yeah I think so too. In the ocean's a cool word. It's cool. It assumes a lot though. Yeah it's like people that call weed cannabis. Yeah. I like to smoke a lot of cannabis like okay. A little down buddy. Yeah. Like the German CO gen. It refers to God. Yeah. Theos. And it refers to N which means that God exists within. And it has the word gen in it which means it's a drug which is generating something like God. You know so that just seems a lot and there are people who could benefit from psychedelic experiences who might not cotton to those ideas and would avoid and then theogen but might take a psychedelic. Yeah. I think psychedelic sounds manageable. And theogen sounds like you join in a cult. It's a bit cultish. Well isn't everything a bit cultish. It seems like whatever anything really affects people in a lot of ways. There's always someone who looks to sort of take the reins and sort of dictate what the experience is and how to do it and what the ritual should be and how you should manage it and it gets culty. It gets culty. But I think you could decultify it to some extent. If you're open minded. I think it also all practitioners. I mean there's a problem. Here's a big problem. So the psychedelics. One of the big problems is that we haven't really had a chance to openly discuss it in terms of the effective and ineffective ways to use it. What's detrimental? What's abusive treatment centers? We could have all this had this lined up. If they didn't pass that sweeping psychedelics act, the controlled substances that we write. Right now they're still illegal. But they've been a part of human history forever. If they just opened that up, we would have the ability to tell people how to use them and not to use them. We'd have the ability to monitor them. And you're going to have some strays. You're going to have some things that go wrong. So there's going to have to be some ways to mitigate that. And if this theory of people that have the psychedelic breaks, if it's a... Imagine if you could find out that it really is like some sort of an overload of DMT. Like they have exogenous levels that are too high. You can't manage it. Reality is too fabricated or fragmented rather. Yeah. I think if we can keep things going with psychedelic research in humans, there's a vast number of options that are going to start opening up. For example, like a vaccine against endogenous DMT. I mean that might be a great antipsychotic. That is wild. To imagine if that's really what it is, they just got a dial it to. Or maybe some sort of technological intervention, like a neural-linked type thing. I think they're going to be able to dial things in, which is going to be crazy. They're going to be able to dial in a horny. You're going to be able to dial in happy. I mean, 50 years from now, who knows what they're going to be able to do. Well, they're breeding these things called knockout mice, which don't produce the gene, which makes X, Y, or Z. And they've developed knockout mice for the enzyme that makes DMT. Oh, wow. So there are animals that don't produce any DMT. So you might be able at some point to put genes into people like, you know, CRISPR. And you have them stop making their own DMT. Maybe that would be a good zombie movie. Every stop is making their own DMT. Well, you know, there's a lot of good movies, I think, could kind of spring from DMT. Yeah. Well, if all animals are producing DMT, that's where things get really fascinating, right? And if many plants produce DMT, and at least have some of the compounds of DMT in them, like, what do you think is going on? Well, I'm doing a member of that language called Esperanto. Yes. Yeah. I think it's like a invisible, it's like a spiritual Esperanto. I think that organisms that contain DMT are able to communicate with each other. That's just an idea. But I think you can occupy the same wavelength of communication, depending on the configuration of your matter. And it may be that that configuration is common to any organism possessing DMT. Wow. So it might be, well, you know how you can communicate with trees, let's say, when you're really stoned on psychedelics or otherwise. But, you know, that could be how, you know, that could be, you know, the empathy existing among organisms. Can we take a break? Yes. Good. We'll take a break right now. And we're back. So what are you saying? Yeah, the first time I smoked pot, I got hooked. It was like, you know, this is the most amazing thing in the world. Did you recreate that? Or we like to have an experience like that for your first time with the hash. No, no, I never did. Just that dragon. Yeah. Well, you know, it was enough. Like I was convinced that this was going to be something I wanted to study. And after the first time I smoked DMT, I knew that was what I was going to study. Now, when you had this idea, how did you go about getting approval for a study? Well, it was a very long strategy. I came up with the idea of studying psychedelics when I was 20. I was doing developmental embryology work at Stanford in the summer between my junior and senior years. I was studying the development of the chicken central nervous system in Petri dishes. It was very high tech. It was fun. Wow. We got two papers resulting from the research that I did that year. And I wanted to study psychedelics, but I didn't really know how to do it. I thought, well, maybe I'll just get some lab experience. And I was reading all of the books for the next year's classes, which involved Freud and Buddhism and the new development and consciousness that were coming out of the time. And I watched, I was watching the sunset go down one evening and I flashed. I'm going to study psychedelics and combine Freud, Buddhism, and psychopharmacology. But I was 20 years old, right? And in the beginning, I didn't get a good reception. Most of the medicals. Well, I applied to 21 medical schools. And the 19 that gave me a chance to tell them why I wanted to be a doctor. They just said forget it. So you were honest, unfortunately. I was out of my mind. Yeah, so the two schools that did admit me, they were either really short interviews or they steered me away from my obsession. But you got the idea that talking about psychedelics when you're 20 years old in the early 70s was not really going to fly. So I kept my interest to myself, but I wanted to get trained enough to be able to do that kind of work at some point in the future. So I went to medical school and I trained in psychiatry and took a job up in Alaska, which was around the time that people were thinking and starting to understand winter depression, which then put emphasis on the pineal gland and melatonin. So I thought that was an entryway in studying the pineal gland and the function of melatonin in humans. So the pineal gland definitely produces melatonin? That's what it's called. Yeah, that's been known since the 40s. Yeah. And there wasn't a lot known back then in the early 80s. So I went back and trained some more in clinical psychopharmacology research. You know, to learn how to do drug studies, giving drugs, taking samples, doing questionnaires. And so I moved to UNM University of New Mexico and ran that melatonin pineal study. And I got my chops as a clinical researcher. And the melatonin was not especially psychoactive we discovered. It just kind of sedating. And it helps regulate body temperature in the middle of the night. But it was not psycho-doubt. Is someone's phone ringing? You hear that? Yeah. I think you accidentally dialed someone. Oh, really? Oh, yeah, Tristan. That keeps happening. It's just Tristan. It's just put the phone, put the phone on the table. Yeah, sorry. Because I didn't know how you pocket call with a flip phone. Did you know that you could do that, Jamie? It was the way it was ringing. I'm like, that's not his word. Yeah, I heard a noise, but I didn't know what it was. But it wasn't his ring. You know, your ring is like, but, but, but, but, but, but, but, but, right. Right, right. Yeah. I apologize. That was like an outgoing ring. Yeah. Yeah. I'm sorry. No, no, it's okay. I just didn't want someone else listening to our entire conversation. Yeah, that's Tristan. Yeah. But you wouldn't be, I didn't know that it was a flip phone. You wouldn't even be able to pick up without opening it up. Uh, true. That's so old school of you. I love the fact that you have a flip phone. I think we were all happier back then. Well, this flip phone is, you know, for a G8. And I had to upgrade from my 3G flip phone. No, they majored. They stopped serving. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You have Verizon. They texted me or something and said, you off, son. Yeah. You have to upgrade to 4G. Yeah. So I got this one. But now they get the 5G. You got to get 5. The 6 is going to come out soon. Mm-hmm. It's never going to end. Meanwhile, you're just rocking a flip phone. There's something about a flip phone, like hanging up on someone as much more satisfying. Thank you. That's all you have to carry around. I bet the battery lasts a year. Home's a battery lasts on this thing. Uh, I, I keep it charged. You have two, three days. Not that long. It's kind of camera. They're like report crime. It has a camera and text. It does text. Yeah. Does it do voice to text? Uh, no. If it does that, if it did that, I'd be really seriously thinking about it. Yeah. Voice to text is so easy. Like you could answer text messages while you're in the car. Just say, hey Siri, text Rick Strassman. Uh, you could do that with Dragon. Oh, okay. So if you have Dragon naturally speaking on your phone. It'll be get that on that. Yeah. It will, you know, transcribe from the cloud on a flip phone. Well, not out on flip phone. Well, that's what I'm saying. I'm saying of that had it because Siri has it. Uh huh. You can do it off or Android auto has it too. I spent so much time in front of a screen that just one more screen would be just driven me around the bend. Well, it's driving people crazy. Because it's just looking to argue with people all day. It's like everyone's mad at everything. So little attention spent to your immediate life. And you know, what's actually going around you where everyone's like freaking out about things that are happening nowhere near them most of the time. Yeah. Well, that's one of the things I like about living in Gallup, New Mexico is that you watch the wind. You know, like it's pretty quiet. And even though people have cell phones there, they're mostly interested in other things. Church, you know, the rodeo, uh, the upcoming parades. Sounds like a good place to live. It's the most patriotic small town in America. Really? Yeah. It was voted. Wow. Yeah. Well, there's code talkers out there. You know, the Navajo, you know, code talkers. I've heard that expression, but I don't know what that means. Yeah. Yeah. That's a great story. You might want to know that. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, you know, the Navajo speak a very difficult to learn language. And they put a Navajo in Japan with the troops and a Navajo state side. And they communicated using Navajo and the Japanese could not figure out the language that will be used. Wow. Yeah. The code talkers, uh, the feeling goes with a lot of pride that, you know, they were responsible or played a major role in the American victory. Yeah. So that, that makes sense. Like how quick would it be? I mean, 1947, how quick is it going to be to learn Navajo? Yeah. Well, you know, you may want to get one of those Navajo, you know, code talkers in here. You know, they're all in their 90s. And they're these amazing guys. They're incredibly well. Yeah. They're just amazing. How many of them were there? There are quite a few there. Yeah. There are probably hundreds. There's maybe like a dozen, you know, two dozen that are still alive. That seems like a story that needs more attention. It's a really great story. There's a code talker museum that I think just opened in D.C. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. The Navajo code talkers. Yeah. Check them out. It's a quiet place to live. A good place to read and study and write and walk around. I'm not that current without, you know, looking at the news. Good. And I could just, you know, turn that off. Yeah. It's just too much for us. I mean, I don't think we should just like let corruption, chaos happen. That's not what I'm saying. I'm saying for just healthy human beings, the average healthy human being, it is too much to be tuned into all day long. It's so damn addictive. Well, it's and it's not good news. No. And that's what the thing, that's what attracts people is the shitty news. The good news like gets a quick glance and like what should I be mad at? Which I be terrified of. Yeah. Yeah. What are they taking away next? Well, you know, I, you kind of don't want to go there. But what do you think of monkeypox? You don't want to go there. Sounds like you definitely wanted to go there. I think it's a disease that is primarily affecting people who have unprotected, it seems like gay sex, right? Seems like it's like it's like 90 something percent of the cases. You know, there's a some sort of a vaccine for it apparently. Yeah. I know a treatment for it. Like do they know how to cure it? Supportive treatment. Just supportive treatment. Fluids. So they just wait until it goes away. Yeah. And how long does it usually take to go away? I don't know. Is it killing people? No, it's not killing people, but they're pretty uncomfortable. Fluid, so they just wait until it goes away. Yeah, and how long does he usually take to go away? I don't know. Is it killing people? No, it's not killing people, but they're pretty uncomfortable. Those are apparently pretty painful sorts of... Mmm, they look gross. Yeah. Um, I mean, there's a right side that's not killing people. Yeah. Yeah, it's hard to say when some fucking weird disease spreads. Yeah, and I don't get weird diseases or I don't even get the news about weird diseases on this phone. It's made it jump to other people. It's not just people having unprotected gay sex. It's people that haven't had any sex at all. I think even kids are getting it, you know. Extended contact, yeah, I think can do it. It's a fucking creepy disease though. Yeah, it's got a horrible name. Yeah. Yeah, they should call it something else. Too late, right? You can call it NPX. Yeah, but what in did they just come up with a better name before they just busted out with monkeypox? Yeah. Yeah. But they do that swine flu, you know, AV virus. So it's always a way we connect it to animals. Those zoonotic diseases. Is it your nautics? Yeah. It's creepy. It's creepy how many of them there are out there. Yeah. I know. Um, well, so what keeps you going with what? Your kids, dear kids keep you going? What do you mean by keep me going? You know, keep an optimistic look. Well, not necessarily optimistic, but what gives you hope. Um, I think more than I've ever thought before that most people are really good people. Most people try to be really good people. They want to have a good life. Most people. That's most. I think you're always going to deal with certain numbers of people that are trying to make enormous profits and doing so at the expense of either the environment or people's lives or they're going to influence politicians and they're going to make laws that benefit these people. And they've done this since the beginning of time. I mean, Eisenhower warned about it when he was leaving office. He warned about the military industrial complex. He warned about all that shit. He warned about. I mean, they warned about that when they built the fucking constitution. But I think overall most people aren't like that. Most people aren't trying to control people and ruin the earth for profit. Most people are just trying to live their life. It's a significant impact for sure. It's horrible. And it represents us overall. It does because what are people capable of if they're worst or they're capable of starting unnecessary wars that are going to cost hundreds of thousands of top millions of lives for profit. We know that people have done that. That's very just what that's not you and that's not me and that's not Jamie. As most people, most people are good. That's what I think. So that's what keeps me going. Yeah. I think most people are good, but I think most people are easily swayed. Well, when things go sideways and when people get scared, people get scared. Their anxiety gets ramped up and they look for something to be mad at. And it ramps up their anger at that person. Yeah, a few years ago, I was pretty sick for years in that Joseph Levy book. And as I was recuperating, I was reading concentration camp stories, concentration camp literature. Well, I just wanted to see how low you could go and still come out of it. And the concentration camp culture history is pretty, it's pretty, well it's amazing what kind of evil everyday people can lay on other people. It's just remarkable. They just got a new guy. Didn't they just find just just caught a new guard and convicted him? I mean, he's in his 90s now. Yeah, those guys are really old. Yeah. It's that wild. Oh man. Yeah. That's about, but the people who are alive today participated in genocide in the 40s. Here he is. 101 year old ex guard of Nazi camp is convicted by German court. The man identified only as Joseph S because of Germany privacy laws. Wow, they're even private of Nazis. It was sentenced to five years in prison after being found guilty of being an accessory to more than 3,500 murders. Who five years in prison? That's all? Well, he may not live beyond. That's all they gave the first couple. Yeah, they might beat him to death in there. Yeah, he doesn't want to Jewish. So, at least there's not even clear if you would even serve the time. Yeah, he may not. So what is the solution? Let him go free. He's too old. He doesn't, he's sorry. What do you, how do you let that guy go free? Even though he's 101 years old, like what is the answer there? I think he would have to repent. How could you repent from that? He would need to make restitution to the extent that he could to people that he's causing a suffering to. Oh man. What kind of restitution could he make to do for 3,500 people? Well, maybe he could tell the truth. It just freaks me out that that's inside of the last 100 years. It's so recent. It's really recent. Yeah. Yeah. Civilization is such a new thing. Well, you know, civilizations a new thing. Anti-Semitism isn't. No. Anti-Semitism boy goes way back. That's pretty old one. Is the world as old as hatred is the way I've heard it. Yeah. I described the ones with coffee. Yeah, some coffee would be great. So we were talking about the difficult role road that it took to serve. Thanks for being here. Sure. Yeah. Thanks. It's very fun for me. Very nice. Yeah. You know, talking about like you, you had this idea and then the long road to actually getting it past. We definitely don't want to skip over that. Well, I spent a lot of time training. I went to medical school by residency. I'm fellowship and then the two year medalltonum project was also under training fund. So I stopped training officially when I was 35, maybe 36. I was on training funds until that time. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so we discovered that there wasn't much psycho activity that was associated with melatonin. And in the meantime, I learned about DMT. You know, that is made in the body. It's incredibly psychedelic. I smoked DMT. You know, the melatonin work was kind of taking me into places that weren't all that interesting. So I switched fields and figured, well, it's, you know, now or never. I'm in my, I'm in my 30s. I've got a good appointment at the university. I've got the support of the research unit. And did you approach them with this idea? I did. I spoke to my, you know, two bosses in psychiatry and on the research unit. And they said, you know, get grants and publish and stay out of the newspaper. You know, those are the three bits of advice I got. They said, you know what you're doing. So just go ahead and do it and you see what happens. I got support from the university. Well, you know, this was 1986, 1987. And people really didn't know about psychedelics at that point. They had become forgotten. They weren't being taught in medical school anymore. There was no research going on for 15, 20 years. So, you know, even after I began my study, the research unit director used to joke people in the study room, we're smoking mushrooms. So he didn't really know what I was doing. He just wanted me to stay out of trouble and succeed. How bizarre is it to you knowing that research on the mind never stopped, but researchers research on one of the weirdest things you could do to the mind stopped. And it didn't just stop for a little bit. Stop for how long, 15, 20 years, 20 years, 20 years. That seems insane, doesn't it? That they wouldn't want to study one of the most profound experiences that's available to human beings. Well, it's important to think of some context, you know, too. Things were just going crazy with kids taking way too much LSD in the wrong set of circumstances without any preparation. And it was a public health emergency, emergency rooms and psychiatric units were being filled up. You know, so the government had to do something, you know, from the public health point of view at the very least, which was to make it harder for kids to get their hands on psychedelics. I think that notion that there was a desire to quash understanding what the drugs were doing to people, like in a scientific manner. I don't think that was ever the case. I think it was more than nobody really wanted to challenge the government and submit a really good study that you can back up with safety mechanisms built into place. You know, once I got my funding and my permits, which was a long process, it took two years, you know, the government was super keen on my studies. They were very interested in what we were doing, what that we were finding. When you say the government, what branch of the government? Mostly the National Institute on Amon Drug Abuse, NIDA, one of the divisions of the National Institutes of Health. You know, they were funding me. Oh, this is cool, too. The first grant I got was from the Scottish Rite Foundation, first kids of Frenia Research. There's a branch of the masons. Wow. Very interesting. And, you know, the masons have a lot of iconography with a pineal and pine cones. So, I mean, that was pretty creepy. That is creepy. People get freaked out by masons. They just, I mean, without knowing much about it, you hear that someone's amazing, you're like, oh boy, what does that mean? Well, and they were the first funders of my research, which I thought was, you see, although Illuminati people are going to go crazy now. The real conspiracy theory people. Oh, it is captured by the government. It was a strange coincidence. That doesn't sound strange coincidence. Well, there's a more mundane explanation. One of my mentors, well, maybe it doesn't help clarify things. It may make it more complex. One of my mentors was a psychiatrist at UCLA. I've followed named Dr. Friedman. And we got to know each other back in the day. In the 50s, actually, he was giving LSD at the NIH. And I met him and he supported my work. And he was on a committee, the granting committee, for the Scottish Rite Foundation for schizophrenia research. And he said, if you could submit a grant to them that focuses on DMT and schizophrenia, you'll most likely get funded. And I did. So it was at least ostensibly from the schizophrenia point of view, but still the source of the money and the interest came from the masons. That's wild. There's another subject that I want to talk to you about. There's certain religions that had an exemption for using DMT. And there's Christian religions in America. There's two different sects of Christianity that allowed to take an ayahuasca drink. Yeah, yeah. There's a group called the U.D.V. and one called the Santo Dime. They're both based from Brazil. They're both originated there. And so these folks, they went and they got religious exemption. How did that go down? Well, let me think this through. Well, in the early 90s, when I just got my DMT study off the ground, I met the leader of the U.D.V., a Anglo-Fellow Jeff Pre-Brantfeman from Santa Fe was the North American representative of the U.D.V. and he asked me about what their strategy ought to be to be able to drink ayahuasca. So I advise taking care of all your permits, kind of the way I did it. Just fill out the forms and talk to their regulators. And after a while, if you stick with it, chances are good. They'll give you permission. Or you could wait to be caught and then take it to court. In which case, you would at least be getting the experiences underway. The church would be established. You would have a track record of safety. Yeah, but that sounds like a terrible idea. I would definitely say try to get the opinions. Right. Or rather permissions. Well, and well, so that's what happened. They were discovered in porting ayahuasca, which they had been doing for, I don't know, three, four years or so. Yeah, and so they took it to court. So they got caught with it. If they got caught with it, you know, you have to think about it though, because it may have taken them years. Right, I get it. That makes sense. And they may never have gotten approval. So is it possible for them to grow the stuff they need to make ayahuasca here? Do those things have to be grown in other climates? Or can they be grown here? You can grow the plants in either Hawaii or Florida. Right. I knew people grew them in Hawaii. I didn't know Florida. Interesting. So if Florida opened it up, they could have ayahuasca plantations. Yeah. Yeah. And just, I mean, that tropical environment down there. Well, I mean, you'd have to work out the regulatory and the organizational structure, kind of like they're doing in Oregon, which it seems like it's kind of halting. Are you familiar with what they're doing in Oregon? In Oregon, they seem to be decriminalizing basically everything. Right. Well, they've legalized. You know, so aside been, which means that the state's getting involved in a board and certifying. So should they legalize it for recreational use or medicinal use? Like, you have to have a prescription? No. No. They're going to be setting up psilocybin centers. Holy shit. Dispenser is wow. And that's wild. And you could be a certified psilocybin sitter. I wish Portland wasn't such a hot mess. Portland's such a hot mess. It's at a hot mess. Well, the smaller counties in Oregon have got the right to ban psilocybin. And they're doing it. Yeah. So if you're in fewer counties seem interested. Interesting. Yeah. So it's past statewide. You're going to have to find some county that's going to give you the green light. And that's where people are going to start growing their stuff. It's going to come with a lot of problems. You know, like one of the problems that happened with marijuana was the early days banks didn't want to get involved. They wouldn't allow people to use credit cards because they didn't want to be connected to that. And people who had giant wads of cash and they were hiring these special forces guys to take their cash spelling from pot. Yeah. Stinking of pot. You know, the whole thing was really sketchy because everybody knew you're leaving that spot with bags of cash. Mm-hmm. Like everyone knew you have cash there. And so you have to really worry about getting robbed and killed. Yeah. It's interesting to, you know, follow us happening in Oregon. It's supposed to all be in place by January 1st. That's going to be wild. It's going to be wild. I think there'll be some problems. Yeah. Well, for sure. That's the problem if it happens, you know, if it happens federally. If some whacky president decided to let all the psychedelics free, we're going to have a lot of people lose their fucking marbles. The question is, aren't we already? And how much of a difference would it be? Would it be a difference? Would those people have already lost their marbles? There's a lot of questions, I guess. Yeah. Well, you have to educate people. Right. And the best way to trip. And they maybe should have some research and how to help people that have had bad trips. Right. Maybe there's like a good cocktail of medications to fucking bring you back to it. Yeah. Yeah. Like if it's a bad experience, you know, traumatic. Mm-hmm. Just like PTSD in a way. Some people have really bad ones and they freak out and they don't know what to do. And then they get elevated anxiety and that sort of cascades. You've seen that. Yeah. Yeah. I think we're going to just be seeing more of that. Yeah. Look, I had one DMT trip that was, I think we did it three times in an afternoon. And I had the last one was really, really, really powerful. And I had like a very slippery grip on reality for like two weeks after that. That can happen. Yeah, that's how I describe it. It's like slippery. Like I was doing everything normal. I was driving to work normal. I was doing it. But everything felt slippery. Like everything can go wrong at any second. Slipper is a good term. Well, you know, that happened to me after my first, you know, five methoxy DMT experience. For about, you know, three days. I just didn't really feel like I was in my body. That I was really kind of interacting with things in a coherent manner. That stuff is interesting. I mean, and really want to know your thoughts on that stuff. Because that's a weird experience in that. It seems like you just go away. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You do go away. And even though people seem to be talking it up, I'm not sure if going away is that good thing. I want to explain that to people who don't know what we're talking about. When I mean go away, I mean, it feels like you're dying. And then it also feels like you don't exist anymore. So you don't have any thoughts where you're over there. It's the weirdest experience. It's all white. It's just this white out. Yeah. It's like this full white out, but it's somehow cleansing. Like you come out of there like lighter. It's like being in the center of the sun. Yeah. There's something about when you come back, you feel like everything's going to be fine. Oh, oh. You know, like it's so wild in the beginning. It's so terrifying when you first enter into it. But then when you come out of it, you're so happy you did it. Well, I think that's the concern is that you feel so good after you've come through and you want to replicate that. Right. I've seen people use five methoxy addictively, you know, habitually. They just want to get back to that state over and over. And you don't really see that very often with DMT. DMT itself has so much information. Dude, I knew who he went so many times. He was doing it so often that he said the entities started telling him to stop coming. Yeah. He was doing DMT like every day. Yeah. I'm like, hey man. That seems like that seems like a lot. Well, do you think it was the entities telling him to stop it or that it was just his mind saying, you know, you're killing me. I mean, let's take a break. Yeah. I mean, or what are those things? What is your mind? Right? Is your mind an individual thing or is it something that constantly changes depending upon what it interacts with? And are those entities that are telling you stop doing it? Do they live in your mind? Does your mind live where they live? Yes. I think so. Yes. But either way, this whole thing of he was having a real problem with it. Like he, the experience was so profound he just wanted to recreate it over and over and over and over again. You know what I get emails from people who start sounding like they're just about ready to like lose it because they're smoking so much DMT. And yeah, they want my advice and you know, support and you know, confirmation of their funny ideas. And I just say stop smoking DMT. That's what I'd recommend. You don't need to do it that often. Yeah. That's the one slippery one that I had I've had it since then. But that one slippery one was so that was a little bit of a wake up call because like, hey, cocky fuck face, you think you've got a great grip on reality? Why don't you just like enter into other dimensions for a couple hours and then come back and now you feel weird about everything like for two weeks took two weeks to feel normal driving. Yeah. Yeah. Well, did you get help? Nope. Nope. Just worked out. Yeah. Layton the float tank quite a bit. I mean, it wasn't scary, but it was next door neighbors to scary. Right. It was like if I have to go through life with this elevated level of weirdness and anxiety forever, like this is life now. Like, I don't like this. It was almost like being too high. You know that feeling when you I'm a little too high. I don't like this. Right. Yeah. Well, so is a close call. It was a close call I think. I think it's a wake up call. I don't think I think these like, you know, Alex parents and wrote that book, tell your children, you know, you know, you know about that book. I don't think so. Alex parents and used to write for the New York Times and he wrote a book making a connection between people smoking too much pot and having these psychotic breaks and these gets a frantic breaks like what is going on? What is happening to people? Like why is that happening? Is it happening proportionate to the population where you would normally get schizophrenics or is it elevated? Like what's happening? Well, if you're if you're kind of prone just gets it for me. It seems pretty clear that the more pot you smoke, the more likely you'll have a full break. Yes. And see this is something that we should have known, right? This is something that we should it's just like people who have alcoholism in their family. Maybe they shouldn't drink. Right. You know, I mean, we know people like that that, you know, dad was an alcoholic, they can't have a drink. This is a thing that really is unfortunate because they could have studied this and had answers and we could be able to tell people how to do these things. Well, I think we should learn from that experience by making sure we're clear about adverse reactions to psychedelics. Yeah. It's something we are about adverse reactions to anything. To anything. Yeah. Well, you're talking about that bad trip that just lingered. I had a bad trip when I was in college and LSD experience and I didn't take anything for 12 years. Well, mine wasn't a bad trip. That's what was interesting. The trip was magnificent. The trip was spectacular. The trip was incredible. The visuals were beyond my imagination and the way it affected me. It was like a real like a shit, a feeling of layers of bullshit of who I am. But the experience afterwards, like I didn't go back to normal. It was so wild. Whatever it was was so wild that every day reality just said like, what is this? Is this a trick? Is this a trick? Yeah. Like is reality fake? It seemed like real weird. But no one would have noticed. I talked normal. I act, you know, did normal stuff. I didn't didn't take days off and sit at home, stare at the walls. I just did normal stuff until it all came back to normal. Did you tell your friends or family? I think I told a couple of people. I think I told people that do DMT. I definitely know I told Duncan. Definitely know I told Duncan when we talked about it. That was the thing. It really wasn't bad, but it wasn't good. And let me know that, hey, would have its way worse than that. Well, yeah, what if you're that way for the rest of your life? Forever. Yeah. What if you, like, we've no little stories of the guys who did too much acid and never came back. Right. Because they're classic stories. And they're true. Yeah. Why is good to have a therapist too? Like I was fortunate in that I was in psychoanalysis at the time. And so I could talk to my analyst about how horrible that five Amy, or, you know, it was a bad experience as opposed to years. But it was quite unsettling. And it really helped to have somebody to get it off my chest with. Did you feel like you were dead? Did you feel like when you did it like you were gone? No. I was stuck in this evil good loop. You know, like good versus evil. And which was I going to choose? Oh boy. Yeah. And I couldn't decide. And I asked the sitter, you know, what should I choose? And they said something like there's no need to choose. They're both the same or something unsatisfactory. And I was pretty rattled for a couple of days after that. So is this when you were coming out of it? Like, did you have a time of the trip where you were just gone? No. No, actually no. This was different. Yeah. I was different. It had more content. How many times did you do five Amyau? Oh gosh. Once pure, the pure drug and once the toad. Yeah. You know, my experience with the DMT compounds is an extensive. But the experiences with the five of what I was getting at it was, are they uniform? They're mostly that white light. Yeah. Yeah. That seems to be consistent. Yeah. It was different. Yeah. It was this one from the toad. No. No, it was this synthetic. Yeah. I could tell you, I was, you know, looking up from the bottom of like a silo. And there was a catwalk that went around and around, you know, the inside of the silo. And there are all these dwarves, like Snow White and the seven dwarves with the long sleeves and the long noses and the hood. And that there are like countless just circulating and they were up to no good. Oh, my God. And at the same time, you know, they were beckoning. And I just didn't know what to do. So that's when I opened my eyes and said to my friend, you know, what should I choose? I wonder if they give you like a mixture. Is anybody given someone a mixture of five meau and N, N, DMT? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's pretty well, I wouldn't say common. Oh, I like the name. Yeah, Ralph Metzner used to provide that to people. Because I was thinking like your sound, you're saying something. It sounds awfully like the visual DMT experience. I know. I know. It's interesting. Because most people have the white light. Yeah, I wonder if you would have gotten like a combo cocktail, like a, you know, what, what is that Arnold Palmer? And Arnold Palmer. Yeah. You know, surely temple. Well, the Arnold Palmer is like a little bit of Ist, a little bit of the lemonade. You know, I think that's what you got. Yeah. That's, I mean, I don't know. I'm just guessing. I've just never heard of anybody having such very distinct visuals before. Yeah. Yeah. My first entity contact was on five meau. Now when you say entity, what was it? The first one. Well, it was these drawers. These counters. That was, that was them. Yeah. That was the first entity contact. Mm-hmm. I think you were seeing when you were, when you're seeing them. I had no idea. I figured, you know, I was under the influence and that's what I was seeing. You just were going with it. Yeah. Yeah. Observing. Well, if you're in it, you can't hear anything. Yeah. I mean, you can only, you can only, I mean, observe, partake. Do you think that when you're tripping like that, are you entering into a world that already exists or are you changing something? Well, I think you're changing your ability to perceive things that are normally invisible. So they're there all the time. They're there all the time, either in your mind, unconscious, or out there in the ether. And you know, that's what we were talking about earlier that it's really hard to tell. Right. But the important thing though, I believe, is that it doesn't make a lot of difference right now anyway, because we can't really design experiments to determine that. The important thing is the information that you're getting out of it. You know, what's it good for? Are you able to extract any valuable information for yourself or for other people? What's it good for? Are you able to extract any valuable information for yourself or for other people? Now when you first started doing these studies, how did you devise a protocol? How did you figure out what the dosage was going to be for these people? How many times they were going to do it? Did you have test subjects? How did you or I mean pre-test subjects? How did you devise a protocol? Well, the main person who was advising me was a pediatric neuroendocrinologist. Whoa, a pediatric neuroendocrinologist. And the research I had done as a fellow and with a melatonin work was what you would call clinical neuroendocrinology. So in a way my study with DMT was using DMT as a neuroendocrinological probe. It was a psychopharmacology study. Yeah, so it's what's called dose response work. You give small doses, medium doses and you give big doses and you characterize as many of the effects as you can. Now you did it intravenously, which I thought was really fascinating because it extends the experience. Well the majority of previous studies gave it intramuscularly. Anyway, yeah, the Hungarian studies, Budapest, Stephen Jara, what is that like? Well, good question and I did bring in someone to receive a test dose of the intramuscular. Did you have a hard time finding somebody for that? Man, my friends were lining up. Of course. Yeah. Of course. So Terrence McKenna and I developed the idea behind the DMT study in the first place, like a couple of years before it actually got approved. I didn't know what approach to take and I went over to this place one day. This was the summer of 88 and we just brainstormed the entire afternoon up and it was lost. And we decided or what we concluded was that we would or you know that I would apply for funding from the war on drugs. That would be the best way to study DMT is to get money from the war on drugs. How did you phrase it? Well, instead of saying that DMT is an amazingly cool drug, we said DMT is an amazingly weird drug or potentially dangerous might be involved in psychosis. People are abusing it. So you know the things that we proposed were coming at it from the perspective of public health as opposed to spirituality or psychotherapy. The more we understand about DMT, the more we'll understand about LSD, maybe more about psychosis and schizophrenia. So it was phrased or looked at as a series of experiments with public health implications. There's something seriously cool about getting the first psychedelic studies funded by the war on drugs. I mean it was an amazing stretch there. What's the felt amazing that you pulled it off? Well, my volunteers and I every so often would look at each other and say this isn't really happening is it? Yeah, so yeah, it was unbelievable. That's pretty unbelievable. Pretty awesome. It was just occurring in complete isolation too at the University Hospital in Albuquerque in the early 90s. I mean nobody knew what we were doing. So how did you devise the dosage like when you're doing it intravenously? How did you figure out how much to give people to have the maximum experience or what did you do? Yeah, yeah. Good question. Let me pee. We'll be right back. Ladies and gentlemen, we'll be answering that question. So we left off with how you figured out what dose to give people to have this experience. It was a convert. The one person that we gave intramuscular DMT to describe it as much slower than the smoked and was in as intense. So because we wanted to replicate the smoked experience, we then switched IV. So the standard intramuscular doses and milligram per kilogram. Was there a reason why you didn't just have the people smoke it? Smoking would have been complicated. It is hard to get as much DMT into your lungs as you need for a breakthrough through smoking. From coughing or the room starts breaking up and you're kind of losing your orientation. There'd be combustion products that would be not DMT that people were smoking. And we didn't really want to expose people's lungs to chemicals unless we needed to. So we switched to the IV. The IV method of giving any drug is the fastest even faster than smoking or snorting. Smoking, oh, how did it know you can't snort it? People snort it? People, well, of course they do. Why don't you even ask that? And you can start other drugs, you know, like any kind of drug, for example. I've never just never thought anybody would snort DMT. Well, if you make a water soluble salt of DMT, you can snort it. Oh, okay. Yeah, you smoke the free base. But you can't crush the free base up and snort that. I don't think it would work. It might. But when people do snort it, it's the water soluble form. What is that stuff that they do where it's like enough that they blow up each other's noses? Those have psychedelic chemicals in it. Yeah. It might even have DMT in it, right? Right. Yeah, the Amazonian psychedelic snuffs. Yeah. Yeah, they contain DMT, five methoxy, DMT, bufotanine, and some obscure triptamines. And it's supposed to be horrendous, right? You shoot it up the nose and it's just disgusting. Yeah, you've seen those black and white pictures that they took in the Amazon and the 40s and 50s. Could you imagine getting a blast that stuff up your nose? Not really. But if that was the only way you could get to reach the spirit realm, you'd do it. Right. Right. I mean, people do a lot of extreme things to obtain spiritual experience. How much have you paid attention to Graham Hancock's work on the Amazon, how they're rediscovering these civilizations and also the use of there's a bunch of different researchers using the lidar down there, right? Whether they're going over the jungle and they're finding grids and the cities that used to exist down there and Graham thinks that there might have been cities with like millions of people in them that existed before these Europeans came through and gave them all small box. Well, yeah, you know, Graham's been really important in making people aware of the role of psychedelics, you know, across all cultures across time. I got Graham on the podcast. I got him high. Had been high in like two years. Yeah, he told me that he blames you now. I would go just don't go so hard. Yeah, he said he's going too hard. Yeah, yeah, he was really proud of himself and then he got stoned in your show. Then he got stoned and he was just on fire. The moment he got stoned, just breaking down how I think essentially we were talking about the dating of civilizations about how arrogant people are with their initial assertions of what the origins or the timeline of civilization is. He's like the timeline of civilization is still a mystery and they're pushing it further and further back with every discovery and they keep finding stuff that pushes it further back, further back, further back. They're finding complex stone structures that are 14,000 years old, 12,000 years old. Yeah, yeah, go back to be 12,000 years old. That's a long fucking time ago. And they keep finding all this evidence of human beings being older than we thought they were. I think that this younger driest impact theory is probably the best theory when it comes to explaining why we're so wacky. I think we had once achieved some very high level of sophistication. I think that's what explains ancient Egypt. It explains some spectacular construction methods that were from thousands and thousands of years ago. And then we got wiped out almost to the point of extinction and then we rebuilt again with a bunch of shit that we didn't understand and a bunch of people that came from really smart people but had been living like fucking barbarians for the last couple hundred years. That's what I think. Yeah, I wonder, well, are you familiar with Julian James and the bicameral mind? I've heard that name and I've heard of that book. Yeah, so, you know, James believed that up until a certain point that it was a common phenomenon for people to hear a spoken voice. That's right. And that's where people got their information was from the spoken voice. Could you imagine if that's really how people used to interact with God? God used to just talk to you? Well, yeah, yeah, his theory proposes that the prophets were the transition between the bicameral mind being common and it kind of dying off. There's no heart, there's no heart evidence of the brain communicating differently back then because it disappears quickly. It's a soft tissue. Do you think of Terrence McKenna and Dennis McKenna's theory about monkeys eating sillside and does that make sense to you? It makes sense. Yeah. If you don't tell people what the idea is that we, the grasslands, that the rainforest receded into grasslands and the monkeys came down, they start experimenting with new food and they found sillside. Right. Right. Yeah. Well, you know, these compounds, psychedelics stimulate the growth of new neurons, neurogenesis and also stimulate the complexity and number of connections among neurons. That's called neuroplasticity. So it could be that there were neuroplastic effects in the monkeys that were using psilocybin. That would be an explanation of how there would be an evolution of consciousness which would be passed on and continue. You know, one of the big fun theories that people like to talk about when it comes to human beings, people that are like alien enthusiasts, they like to say, well, human beings are the product of some sort of accelerated evolution. So the aliens came down here and they ran experiments with these primal people and converted them into modern people. Yeah, we can get some of that. Yeah. But the question is, maybe that's what mushrooms are. Like maybe that's what that means. You're consuming something that gives you this entirely alien experience. It's causing neuroplasticity. It's causing neurogenesis. It's making it more creative. It makes you have a better ability to see motion. Right? It doesn't aid in visual acuity. Acuity. It does. Yeah. Yeah. And you know, sensitivity. And the ability to detect parallel lines moving, who was someone who did that study? There was a, like a straight scientist who did this study where they gave people psilocybin and they showed them parallel lines and as they're moving off parallel, that the people on psilocybin can see it weak-wicker. Yeah. Well, the question is whether those traits can be passed on to the next generation. Yeah, that's what's called Lamarckian transmission. It's called epigenetics now. Activation of certain genes can be passed on here, right, entirely. So it could be that the increase in neuroplasticity in neurogenesis is passed on. Well, something happened to people, right? I mean, they had, we'll keep you off camera. They're keeping you off camera. Keep them off camera, Jamie. Something happened to people because the human brain doubled over a period of like, was a couple million years, which coincides with the timeline that McKenna proposed that these rainforests were starting to recede during that same time period, right? Yeah, you kind of have to wonder what the DMT system and the brain was doing at that time too. I wonder if that was a time of rapid growth of the DMT neurotransmitter system. Yeah. And what was the natural state of DMT back then too? I mean, I would have one of the things that I would have mentioned is that people who have to live like a very hard-scrabble hunter-gatherer life, you know, you're out there in tents. You're trying to protect your children from predators. You're living this like very tuned in to everything around your life. It's probably a very, very different experience in terms of just how they perceive the world itself, how they perceive reality. One of the things that has to kind of, it seems like it kind of has to happen as things get safer and easier. You get less of a concern and a fear of danger. And so your ability to detect danger kind of atrophies, whereas someone who lived at the beginning of human civilization would have been like just a super intelligent animal almost, right? You know, like just tuned into everything. Just like animals, like if you snap a twig near a deer and their head's been around, you know, bear smells you from fucking three football fields away. That's normal for them. We maybe had like a better sense of the world around us. I mean, think about how better senses are. Our noses are terrible. They barely do anything. Like maybe they were like really good at one point in time. And we just didn't need them anymore. And in the attribute, you know, if you had a wolf that was near you and you could smell it, you know, that would be a very good thing to stay alive. Well, they could smell you. I bet you used to be able to smell them, but we've been living in houses for so long. Well, the brain, the old factory centers in the brain are the oldest, you know, perceptual centers in the brain. Really? Yes, obviously they could smell before they could see. If they're the oldest. Well, if you smell things, it'll stimulate memories. Yeah. So that's not the case with other senses. There's a connection between the old factory sense and memory, which is the strongest among the senses. Wow. Which in the case that our sense of smell once was much more important? Wow. What had to be if we didn't have doors, it would have to be. It would have to be. Right. You have to be able to smell things. You have to be able to feel the vibrations on the ground of something running at you. So you get to jump at it. I mean, that environment, if you introduced sillside into that environment, and that's what created human beings, that is a fascinating theory. And the thing is we know sillside is real and we know its effects are profound. And so to dismiss it as being what happened, I don't think that's wise. I think there's a problem with what mushrooms are. It's like people think they're so silly. I don't trip it on mushrooms. And so you're doing something you shouldn't be doing. Like, oh, look at Todd, he's over there on mushrooms. But what it probably is is some kind of a chemical gateway to some either a state of mind or some other dimension. And if you gave that to some savage, proto-hominid that was just living naked, running away from jaguars all the time, and this thing starts tripping and starts figuring out tools and starts figuring out how to make sounds to indicate different animals. Well, you know, it's in a direction. Yeah. The effect of the psilocybin is in a direction. So that's an interesting thing to consider. You know why? You know why? Well, Todd's increasing civilization towards language. You know, towards love as opposed to hatred, let's say. Yeah. It would help them form tribes, especially if they were all doing it together. Well, you know, so you then argue for an evolutionary advantage for hominids that were taking psilocybin. You gave them an advantage. At what point in time do you think people forgot that psilocybin was beneficial? And what were the steps to get people to not have access to that information anymore, not be aware of how long for what an enormous history people were consuming them? How long? Well, I mean, there's turf. You know, so look at the major religious institutions and they're stamping out psychedelic use in the indigenous world. If you could stamp out the estates, then you kind of have the hegemony over those states, or you can promise them if you pray or if you're good or if you do various things. You know, so there's politics involved competing groups, those that used mushrooms probably and those who didn't. There would probably be some climactic and environmental ones too, that the range of the mushrooms was shrinking. Right? Like some sort of climate change and they forced out of areas that used to grow them all the time so they stopped using them and they started taking alcohol and other things. It's just, since we know so much about them today in, you know, in comparison to what people knew in the 50s and the 60s, like, publicly we know so much more about them. So there's so much real scientific data out there. There's so many real, real intelligent people who are enthusiasts of them that can kind of explain the benefits of it. It's just amazing that it's taken so long to just get one state to make it legal. Well, you know, what would you like to see the future of psychedelic use? Would you want everybody to be tripping in the best of all possible worlds like Tim Larry Kenkisi, just everybody? Those guys went too hard. I think they scared a lot of people. I think those guys, they were so tuned, you know, tuned out or dropped out. They were so culty, you know, and they had a wild bus and they threw wild parties. I think a lot of people got freaked out by civilization eroding before their eyes and their kids turning into useless hippies. Like there was a lot of fear that was attached to that. I think it would be different today if you talked about psychedelics because way more people have had psychedelic experiences, I think per capita. I know of many, many people who are very happy microdursing, microdosing, so Simon. They just take a little bit, take a little bit here and there and they really enjoyed doing it that way. You know, I wonder, I mean, is there some yearning for utopia? There was always going to be that, right? But there's also going to be an understanding that whatever that stuff does, it seems to encourage you to behave and think in a way that's better for everybody. It seems to want to encourage you to think kindly, to be nicer to people, to connect more with the earth. And it's like it tunes you into a very, for lack of a better term, positive frequency. But then again, the Vikings took them and they slaughtered people. Yeah, yeah, I think it's, I think they, yeah. You don't want to gill the lily. I think you want to gill the lily. Was that mean? Gill the lily. Make something beautiful, even more beautiful. Oh, yeah. I don't think they should be illegal for sure. I do think that to just randomly give them out to everybody is irresponsible. I think there are a lot of people out there that are having a really hard time with regular reality and that something is profound as a psychedelic experience. Good fucking blow of views. But I don't want to be the person that can tell a person what they can and can't do. And I think that's part of the problem with it all is that they can tell you you can't try something or me, I can't try something. And they're just like us. They're just a person. They're just a person of similar age and they're going to tell you you can't do something. I'm like, you don't even know. You've never even done it. This is a dumb conversation we're having. You're going to make it so that I can get locked in a cage because I want to do something that you haven't done. Well, the chairman of our ethics board at the university when I presented these studies to him for the informed consent and what do you would be doing with people? You know, I bumped into him one day and said, man, I'm so grateful for how open-minded you are about this. And he said, I'm not God. We're not playing God. I thought that was a great line. He was a libertarian, actually. And he figured people should do what they want to do and just give informed consent, educate people, let them know what they're getting into and let them decide. I think it's way more dangerous to have people uneducated about the risks of certain drugs and the importance of understanding the dosage and the purity than it is to tell people not to do drugs. I think that telling people that not do drugs and you're going to arrest them if they do drugs, that's unrealistic. People have done drugs since the beginning of the time. I think the realistic approach is to fucking educate people and to stop all this nonsense about what is and is and allowed that a grown adult person who has never done it can tell you don't do that. I don't want you to do something that's been around for thousands and thousands of years who has a rich human history of usage like self-signment. Like that. That's not the good guy. The guy telling you he's going to put you in a cage for mushrooms is never the good guy. Well, I think there needs to be places where people can trip who want to trip for any number of reasons. Yeah. I don't know what you call them. They might be churches. They might be retreat centers. They might be... I don't think the government should be involved in this is what my point is. I don't think there should have any say. I don't think there's anything to do with you. Because stay out of the way. You don't even know what it is. And if you want to do it, it'll make you a better person. But don't tell people that you're going to arrest them. There's some people that are still pushing back against the idea of their being recreational use of psilocybin. Meanwhile, it's helping so many soldiers. So many soldiers that have come back with PTSD. The psilocybin research is very promising. I know. It's impressive. It's very impressive. MDMA as well. Yeah, MDMA as well. The guy who drove me over this morning is about talking about some of his friends who have done psychedelic therapy. And they're back to normal. Yeah. And more than one different type of psychedelic. I've also heard people got guys doing ibogaine and then 5 MEO. I've heard that there's some real success in doing that. But I've talked to people personally that have had psychedelic experiences that have just freed them of so much that they had from combat duty. Well, I mean, we need to do more research, right? Right. Because once we have more research data, we can say this helps. And it'll really spread out to the rest of the country, as opposed to just within the research communities. My friend Neil Brennan is a very funny stand-up comedian and he lives in LA and he's always had real problems with depression. And he tried a bunch of different stuff. He tried ketamine therapy, magnet therapy, he tried a bunch of stuff. And then he went and he did ayahuasca. And he did ayahuasca a bunch of times. And the difference in his personality, it's like immediately had abandoned 80% of his anxiety and fucking tension and whatever he had that might have been weighing him down. And he was like, he's permanently happier. This is a crazy thing for someone to say. I took psychedelic drugs and they may be permanently happier. What do you think about how psychedelic seem to be panacea is? They seem to do everything. Well, do they though? Because if they make it, it's a friend. That's not good. You know, I mean, they actually, for some people, I don't know what they're doing. I do think they can be panacea is like what you're saying is right. They can be panacea is for a lot of people. If you look at the literature, I mean eating disorders, anxiety, depression, OCD, alcohol, cigarettes. Oh yeah, in that way. For everything. In improved metaphysical views, make your meditation better. So in the proper set, in the proper setting, they do seem to be like panacea is they heal all. It doesn't seem like with every medication. And even if you look at psychedelics as being a medication, every medication can have side effects. It seems like there's no one thing that, I mean, people die from aspirin every year. Well, the stronger the effects, the more side effects they're going to be. You can't be one without the other, really. And that's just because of biological diversity, just because people are different and their bodies react differently to things. Well, the intensity of the pharmacological effect, if it's really like chemotherapy, I mean, it can end the cancer. But it's just rife with toxicity too. So when you're why that would be the case, I think that's kind of just how things are in pharmacology. When you think about silsi, as like a panacea to all these psychological disorders, what do you think is happening? Why do you think it's helping people quit drinking, quit smoking cigarettes, quit doing, gambling? There's a lot of different things that it seems to be helping people with. Well, one possibility is that suggestibility increases on psychedelics. You're more hypnotizable. So someone can program you, like a man training candidate. Or a researcher or a therapist, he says, get better. Right. So hopefully you got a good person programming you. Could you imagine if that's how we can create? Well, the mentoring candidate story's interesting. You know, because the belief was you could just turn in every day individual into an assassin. You know, but you had to have those tendencies in the first place, either conscious or unconscious. If you were a peacnick, like a really peace-loving person, no matter how much LSD they gave you, a son likely, that you would become an assassin. Yeah, they had to figure that out though. And the way they did is just experiment on people. Experiment on people. Right. The just the actual real history of MK Ultra and all the different things they've done. That's 100% not conspiracy theory. Actual real history is true. That stuff is bonkers. Yeah. Yeah. I've looked into that a bit. I even tracked down the old MK Ultra files. They're quite heavily redacted. You must read Tom O'Neill's chaos. It is all about MK Ultra and Charles Manson. And it is fucking wild. It's a guy who studied this case, the Manson family case for 20 years. Charles Manson and it is fucking wild. It's a guy who studied this case, the Manson family case for 20 years. He started off writing an article about it, but as he dove deep into the case, it was so nuts that he just, it was so many layers to it that he refused to stop and he kept going deeper and deeper and he'd missed his deadline and like he had a book deal and they had to give the money back like a chaos. 20 fucking years of this and at the end of it, he's got like very convincing arguments that Charles Manson was a part of MK. The Charles Manson that they gave him acid when he was in prison and that they supplied him with acid when he was out there teaching hippies to be fucking hit people. Well, I think the case of Charles Manson is an important one. It's the case that I try to bring up in every podcast, which is don't forget Charles Manson. When it comes to acid, when it comes to psychedelics, because the drugs increase suggestibility and depending on your environment, you'll be more suggestible to what's her energy. Right. And if you've got someone who's already a charismatic con man and you catch him in prison and dose him up with acid and you run a, I mean, what better person to run a study on than a charismatic lifelong criminal, you know, and just dose him up with acid and give him a sense of delusions of grandeur and then also every time he gets arrested, get him out of jail. And that's what the book is about. It's a very strange story. The book is wild because Tom is like it's very thoroughly researched. Well, everything lines up. And so he's taking the angle from the MK Ultra connection. Yeah, he thinks that that was a part of the project and that where he used to get his acid from was the same place where the CIA was running the health clinic. There's a hate ashbury clinic. The hate ashbury clinic was being run by the fucking CIA. They were doing Operation Mindy climax there too, where they had brothels and they would secretly dose the Johns up with the LSD and study them. I mean, they were doing why you'll shit. And they were also visiting people like Charles Manson in prison. And this is the thing that he makes this argument that they got to Manson in prison. And most likely, we're dosing him up with acid and teaching him how to turn people into your minions. Yeah, the last Manson book I have been reading is the family. Oh, yeah, it's about his group. It's about Manson and his group. He goes into a lot of details of Manson's growing up. And there is talk of LSD, obviously, with his group and beforehand some. But I don't remember him mentioning the MK Ultra connection. That must be pretty recent. Well, this was also their argument for how does he get all this acid? How's he getting all that acid? How's he getting all that acid? And also, how come he keeps getting arrested and let out? And how come the sheriffs who arrest him say that it's above their pay grade? And they were told it's above their pay grade. Yeah. And they have to let out this fucking psychopath who's supposed to be supposed to be fucking jail. You know, he broke his parole. Yeah. That's that's quite a CD chapter and psychedelic work. It is a really wild book because it's so thoughtfully and thoroughly done. I mean, it took 20 years for him to do it. But that it, that was a absolute part of the history of this country is that they performed tests on willing subjects. They just dose people up and studied them. Yeah. Well, that's the reason now you need what's like an airtight informed consent. You know, they did that with Ted Kuzinski, the unibomber. He was a part of the Harvard studies. They're given him LSD. Yeah. You know, so it isn't that you just take LSD in your cool. Not at all. Not at all. I mean, I think we can't stress that enough, right? That's the point I'm making my book actually over and over is, you know, you should know what you're getting into and prepare yourself. And this is the second book, not Joseph Levy escapes death. No, not that one, but the psychedelic camp. Yeah. Yeah. Just released today. Yeah. The longest chapter in there is how to trip. It says a practical guide to psilocybin LSD, ketamine, MDMA and DMT, ayahuasca. We're extra asman MD available now. Did you do the audio for this? Not yet. Are you going to do it? You should do it. You're a voice. Come on, man. Yeah, it just came out like, uh, yeah, today. So I think people would like to hear it in your own voice if you're willing to do it. It's a lot of time though. You know, quite a few authors do that. Yes. Yeah. I like it when they do it. Yeah. I don't like it when someone reads somebody else's stuff. You know, especially if someone is like good at talking. Yeah, I've never considered it. Well, that's not true. I've considered it, but quickly dismissed it. You know, but I will think about it somewhere. Yeah, you should because I think people would enjoy it. If it was like in your words with your with your voice, it was a fun book to write. I mean, I had to really bone up on the latest research. I mean, I thought I was current, but man, the last couple of years, it's really hard to keep up. When you did your very first patience, did anything surprise you? Like when you put the very first people under, had any of them had any psychedelics experience? Yeah, the group had to be psychedelic experience. I only studied psychedelic experience people. That's good risk. Yeah, it was for a couple of reasons. You know, one was the risk that if they had a hard time and they would know how to get back. Right. And also my figured they would be giving better descriptions of the experience. Right. They wouldn't be so blown away. Right. And the third reason was that if they started abusing psychedelics, they couldn't blame me because they had already been dating them. Oh, that's very clever. Yeah. Yeah, we have to do it that way though. Yeah. Yeah. It was a real straight on study. I mean, we really make sure to anticipate any objections. Did anything surprise you about the first batch of test subjects in their experiences? Yeah. The first intravenous studies we did, we overdosed two people. What? Yeah, we gave him too much DMT. Oh, no. Yeah. Well, we started off at this dose and that dose and I called FDA and said we're not quite there. And they said, you can go up two or three times. And I figured, well, you know, things are pretty easy. So far, let's go up three times. And it was way too much. Both people just couldn't remember anything. Really? Yeah. So we figured it okay. Let's how long did it last? You know, half hour, 20 minutes. And what do they say it was like? One guy thought one guy described as being thrown off a boat in the middle of a storm and ending up in the water and just being thrashed about completely helpless and terrified. And yeah, the other guy, he just like, wretched. And he didn't remember much. So we figured that was too much. Yeah. So then we settled on a pretty stiff dose. It's the biggest dose still in use or smaller doses are being used now currently. So far, nobody has gotten up to the high doses of DMT that we gave and what you were giving them was the experience uniform that they described. Mostly. Really? Yeah, mostly. One person was completely unresponsive to it. Well, like your story of THC, could I ask you one more question before that? Were they doing it simultaneously? No, everybody was just like, do you want to do any where they did it simultaneously? No. I would be really interested in that. Why? Because of the telepathy thing, when they before they figured out telepathy was harming, they were kind of called telepathy because they had shared group telepathic experiences. Yeah. Well, you know, David Luke in the London, well, you know, some place in England, you know, David Luke is a parapsychologist who's very interested in psychedelics. And he's done ESPN studies with psychedelics. Yeah, and he's finding some promising data that ESPN telepathy is enhanced when both people are stoned. Because I've heard of people having conjoined experiences on ayahuasca before. I've heard of people having experiences like they independently verify with other people that they were kind of in the same place. Well, that's as far as like what they saw. That description of my first experience, smoking hash was a, it was a, you know, shared hallucination. Yeah, we both were seeing the same thing over. Do you see that? Yeah, yeah. We'd expand on it. Yeah, it's just what is it? What is that? What are those group minds? Those, those weird sinking of minds like what does that mean? What's happening there? Well, it seems that everything is contained in a field and you can tap into that field in certain circumstances. So including your thoughts and my thoughts and that we're all just, we can link up. Yeah, my, you know, favorite science fiction writer is an Englishman. His name is Stapleton. And he wrote a book about 19 species of humans that evolved over 2 billion years. And the final species is able to experience population wide telepathy. Wow. I'm every 500 years or so when things are just, you know, dialed in and it would be what people would be looking for. These people would live, you know, 35,000 years because that was the necessary time to attain all of the knowledge that was out there. And they would spend all their time otherwise you know, trying to connect on a worldwide level. Wow. And it was every 500 years, every 1000 years, they was a rare event. But everyone would sing and dance in that space. What do you think about the possibility of some sort of a technologically inspired or driven group telepathy? Like what I would worry about with stuff like that is it being co-opted and someone being able to control it. But somehow or another, they released one of these things that you put on your head that allowed everybody to communicate in a universal language with everybody. I think a language that everybody picks up pretty easily because you're getting downloaded information much quicker because you actually have some sort of a weird implant in your brain. I think we would need to be wiser, you know, for it not to go south. I think it's going south. And I think that's where people are going. I think we are sliding down the mountain top, holding onto our ass. And I think I think we're going to go right off. I think we're going right into cyborg land. Right. And you know, because people are the way they are, there's no guarantee that it'll be for the good. Yeah, that's, it's, once you can read minds, it's going to be way harder to control people. It's going to be way harder to get people to buy into bullshit. You can't have propaganda anymore. There's like so many positives to it that a lot of people are just going to dive right in. But you're also never going to have privacy. You're going to live in this weird world of communication where people communicate with you non locally with with your mind. So what are you going to get spam? You're going to get spam texts in your brain. I get like four or five spam text messages a day. Like do you need cash? Like question is fill us out now? I get four or five of those a day. You're probably going to get those from the whole world. You're going to have a hard time avoiding them if we're all like hyper connected. People are going to take advantage of it to try to sell Bitcoin and push NFTEs. It's going to be well, I think you need to stay out of cell range. If you can, this is going to be a way, it's going to be a way probably for people to opt out during the day like shut off so you can work. Well, do you like Philip K Dick? I, um, I really like that there was one that they turned into a film. Um, what was it? What was the Philip K Dick book that they turned into film? Well, there's total recall. I think it's this popular. I was told a recall. He did that too. There's later in our scanner. Scanners dark, dark, dark. That's it. Scanners dark. These wilds. Yeah, that's a great great movie. Yeah, scanner darkly. That is a really fucking cool movie. Yeah, I like that. Yeah, it's like a wild semi animated movie. Yeah, it's called a rotoscope. Yeah, that was fun. That was a cool fucking movie. Well, so Philip K Dick has written a short novel. It's called the three stigmata of Palmer Eldrich. And it's about the competition between, uh, between, you know, two psychedelic drugs. You'll once from earth and once, you know, from a, and, uh, you know, one is from another star system. And the one from earth, you know, they're both, you know, these huge corporations that are making, you know, millions of times of this psychedelic. The one that was created on earth just puts people into the perky pat world where things are really fun. Like there's this little figure perky pat and you go into their, into her house and, you know, you wash dishes and you have parties. You know, weird Philip K Dick stuff. And, you know, there's another, you know, psychedelic that, you know, comes from outer space. And, uh, it's really bad. You never really stop tripping. Maybe even though you think you have. You know, so I, oh my god, that sounds terrible. Oh, it's a, it's a horror story. Scary than anything. I've ever read. Um, you know, so I think there's going to be this, you know, competition, you know, there's going to, you know, like what's the most popular soft drink? You know, what, or the most popular music. I think a state of consciousness is going to be, you know, kind of the, you know, turf that huge interests are battling over. Yeah. It's going to be interesting to see whether or not they can control it. Whether or not the technologists will allow it. Ultimately, it's like the people that put it out, whatever it is. Like it has the, they have the ability to control it or not control it, depending upon like what stage it's at. But I feel like if it keeps going in the same general direction, the general direction is like about access to information. It's like more instantaneous. It's more accessible. Like there's only so much you could do to put a cork on that. If it really gets out, if it really gets to a universal language thing, the only way they're going to get people is if they figure out some sort of a digital currency, force people into a centralized digital currency and then attach it to a social credits core system. And then bam, you live in China. Yeah. They could do that. They could trick people into doing that. But the other option is psychedelics. And I think if more people had positive, well-guided experiences and not people with, you know, slippery grabs reps on reality as it is, but I think you're at least going to get a sense that percentage of the population is moving to a better state of mind, a better way of coexisting with other humans. Not so angry, like more in awe and wonder about this whole thing and with like a general attempt to be kinder because of it. Well, I think any, I think that the outcome of any individual psychedelic experience, I mean, it's obviously the set and the setting, you know, who you are and what you want to get out of it and your environment. You know, so it must, I think, you know, you really need to work on the set and the setting for positive outcomes. You know, so I think that's kind of the task now is to work out the best sets and settings. You think about how good people always feel in nature. Like nature is almost like the ultimate set and setting. I know. It's great. It's so it's kind of like biologically in a riching or something. Like you lay down in a beautiful hill and you look out at all the trees and the mountains. It's like, God, this is so beautiful just by itself. Yeah. And then if you add still sieve into those experiences, it's generally it's like, I mean, the ones I've had have been like extra, like filled with awe, like extra. You feel connected to all the trees and the grass and the dirt seems alive. And I think that also though, you know, sometimes you'll need to be indoors. Well, yeah. Like if you're smoking DMT, let's say, oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You want to be out. Yeah. Yeah. As opposed to the field or something. Have you seen anybody fall like black out and fall down on it? Yeah. I was at a conference, not a conference, but an event in Dallas a long time ago. And I was being hosted by a couple of kids and they took me over to their house and everybody smoking DMT, they're ordering pizza and there's music and everybody smoking DMT. Oh no. What a disaster. Yeah. And this one guy had never smoked DMT before they gave him a huge amount and he started screaming and falling down and that's the worst set and setting ever. Yeah. Yeah. They wanted me to see what they're doing. Man, this is kind of, you know, high risk. Oh, that's so dumb. I did it with Doug Stanhope once in the almost out of seizure. I was worried we're going to lose him. He like with making crazy noises. It's very strange. Never seen anybody respond to DMT that way. He's like moaning like, oh really? Yeah. I just think that he was like hanging on in the beginning of it. Maybe a little too much. You know, if you try it, like it was a five MEO DMT experience. If you try to hang on, like you're not hanging on to that, it's going to take you with it. Just relax. Yeah. Maybe that's what was going on. Maybe he was hanging on, but he came out of it with it was a positive experience. Well, there's, well, you can see videos of, you know, people flapping around on your five MEO DMT. That see, this is the problem with legalization, right? I think it would be irresponsible to just give it away to everybody. But I do think that it would be very beneficial to have it in places that are like a really well-established well set up center where people can do these things under professional supervision by people with experience and people that know that the purity of the stuff, right does the right thing and it could be a business. And it can make sense as a business. And then also give people the ability to do it on their own afterwards. Okay. Now, you know what it does? Nine, you know, to get it. This is the right doses. Don't fuck around and enjoy yourself. You could learn like you get certified in proper use. It's not a bad idea. If you give people a license to drive a car, give them a license to do DMT like, hey, Todd, like, how do you feel about reality? Like Todd, you know, what shape do you think the earth is? You know, asking pretty simple questions. Yeah. Well, I mean, the future of psychedelics, I mean, it looks pretty bright. What do you think is pushing it the most? You think it's these studies they do with PTSD and soldiers? I mean, there are just, you know, so many influences out there that want to see psychedelics or, you know, so many interests that want to see more people take more psychedelics. You know, there's commercial ones and there's therapeutic ones and there's spiritual ones and there's brain science ones. You know, so, you know, the great thing about psychedelics is they extend their reach into everything that's distinctly human. And they affect all aspects of human consciousness. I mean, across the board too. So, yeah, they're kind of like mirrors in a way. But they're strange drugs. I mean, I always encourage students to get as much school as they can and to study psychedelics in a real, you know, rigorous manner if they can. If you had the ability, if they came to you, if President Biden came to you and said, Dr. Strasman, could you tell me, should I legalize everything or not? Would you just, if you could switch, if you were the guy they came to? That's a trick question. Are all the good questions or questions or I should ask you, is that a trick question? No. What would you do? Well, I say it's complicated. You know, that's a typical, you know, response from a psychiatrist. Yeah, it's complicated. Yeah. Right. And so would you have to develop some sort of an assessment of the pros and cons and what the negatives could be and how to mitigate some of the negatives like the people that are losing their mind and overdosing and access to people that are too young. Like there's a lot of factors in that you have to consider upon legalization. Right. Right. Um, gosh. You know, it's like a multi-prong approach. I mean, education and organizations and have to get the church on board. Yeah. Or at least, you know, you're not against what's happening. So your experience with, you've had, you had some experience with one of those churches because I'm going to re-tone this story about what it was like to go visit them and they were in like golf shirts and do an ayahuasca. Well, you know, the U.D.V. is a pretty straight. Uh, the, um, the ceremonies take place under lights. You know, like, you know, in a big room and you sit in a chair and there's, you know, somebody leading the ceremony. It's like a church, you know, ceremony. So when you say straight, you mean like like a regular church, but they also do psychedelics. It does, they don't seem to be hippies at all. They seem, I mean, they really emphasize being a good family member and a good contributor to society. You know, so it's like a, you know, Christian church in that way. And how often are they having these psychedelic experiences? You know, generally twice a month, usually a little while. They would be a fascinating people study. Yeah. Whether being studied. Oh, are they? Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of information about the effects of participation in the churches in Brazil. And you're some in the U.S., especially Brazil, because that's where they both, uh, Netflix, you get on board with that. You know, because that could be like a whole series. Yeah. Study these people and study the effect that that would, that actually is a fascinating idea for a series. Because what they're doing is really profound if it's working. Like if they like someone should find out like, is this really a harmonious society? Are they really happier? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They've been studying members of these ayahuasca using your churches for a long time for decades. And what is their conclusion? The kids are healthier and the less drug abuse, less alcohol is in less depression, better quality of life. It's quite impressive. It makes sense. It makes sense if you've had experiences yourself and you understand the, the impact that it could have if you attached it to a structure like religion. It's quite structured. Yeah. Uh, they're in, you know, they're into God. They're into Jesus. They're into the Bible. They're into Solomon. You know, so the ethical, you know, teachings, which, which are, uh, you know, part of the Bible, you're part of a, you know, a spiritual system. Do they have like certain passages that they recite while they trip or before they trip? Uh, not that I remember to come back with like some sort of an experience. It seems like biblical experiences. Um, their story of the beginning of the church relates to King Solomon. Uh, so there's, you know, references to King Solomon. Uh, they do refer to the Bible. I'm thinking about as most, you know, Christians do you know, Protestants anywhere are pretty familiar with the Bible. You know, so they know text. Do they, but did they come back like, what are they experiencing? Are they experiencing like a standard ayahuasca, you know, seeing vines and snakes and jaguars and UFOs, or are they seeing things that are Christian in nature? They're mostly seeing things which relate to them. I'm at how to be, you know, uh, you better people. You know, so there's a real emphasis on personal growth and evolution and, you know, bringing society to a higher level. It's quite altruistic and it's, uh, you know, like as you note, if you have a structure, uh, that is essentially good that you're kind of giving the psychedelics within, you know, the outcomes can be really positive. Yeah, I think this structure of, uh, you know, if you look at the best aspects of almost all religions, they're all about trying to unite society in some sort of a way. The best aspects, you know, if you attach that to a psychedelic and then it becomes a, uh, bimonthly ritual, that's pretty wild. Yeah, you know, uh, being charitable, doing good things like that. Yeah. Oh, you said biweekly, right? Every two weeks or so. That's so much. That's so much. Those people are on cloud nine all the time. They just recovered from the last one and bang the right back in again. Yeah. Well, I spent about three months associated with him. I like that. You said that way. Yeah. Three months associated with them. Well, yeah, that's what it's called. You, you become an associate. Oh, yeah. That's the terminology. Interesting. That's the religious terminology. Yeah. I like that. Yeah. Yeah. Like that. And I was an associate for maybe three or four months. Yeah. I'm not a string. Yeah. A lot of ayahuasca. And I felt pretty darn good. So when you were doing it, what was the experience like, like how would a ceremony go down? Everybody would do it together? Yeah. Well, what was interesting is you would eat beforehand. Most of the time they say, have an empty stomach and so on. But, you know, their opinion is if you are throwing up is better to have, you know, something in your stomach than just, you know, throwing up, you know, the ayahuasca itself. Well, the ayahuasca itself for your stomach acids, then you have some food. It will kind of buffer things. That's actually, that actually makes sense. Would it slow the absorption though? It can. So that would be the negative, right? You would want to get the full dose. Well, they spent about an hour in, you know, preliminaries on your socializing. Okay. So you do digest it somewhat. Yeah. Yeah. And then everybody gets in line. And the master of ceremonies is that night, well, look at you. Look at the brood, decide how much to give you. Interesting. The look at you. Yeah. I know this is one of the fucker can't handle this. Yeah. Yeah. I just, how do they just decide? Right. I've wondered. I've asked them and they, you know, said it's in two or two for, oh God, look over here. That's a lot of power. He controls the ayahuasca controls man. Yeah. I think I've gotten, you know, yeah, it's an interesting process. Like you are thinking, I hope they don't give me too much. And but also, you know, I hope he gives me a lot because I'm like much over whatever. Right. Yeah. I can take it, bro. Yeah. If we did have legitimate cycle, psychedelic centers in America, I mean, they would have to be some real thought beforehand as to what's the best way to approach it from an education perspective, explaining things to people. What to expect? You know, like there's a lot to that. But I don't want to like be the person that tells a person they can or can't do it either. Like I would say we should have some sort of screening process, but then I'm entirely against screening processes. Well, I mean, screening is really helpful. Sure. Yeah. You should have some sort of screening process, but then I'm entirely against screening processes. Well, I mean, screening is really helpful. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. But I don't like the idea that someone can like say that someone can control whether or not people do or do it. Don't do it. Cause it could get slippery. That that could get weird. Someone could come up with more and more reasons to not give like maybe the wrong political persuasion or they've labeled you a terrorist because you don't believe in taxes or whatever. Okay. I can't do it anymore. Yeah. The screening idea I was thinking of was screening research people. Oh, right. Yeah. You have to screen and even then when you're screening people who participate in research studies, there's no guarantee they won't have problems. Oh, for sure. I meant for the general public screening people in terms of like being able to not give it to people with like legitimate mental illness. Yeah. How would you stop that if someone's, you know, it would be like any other drug I think. Yeah. Like if you've got an allergy to a medication, you're screened out of getting that your screen out of getting that medication. Right. But we'd have to alert people to it and then tell them to tell them not to do it. Well, yeah, it's like a huge multi level process of organizations. It's almost like the NIH ought to start a division. Maybe you have psychedelic medicine. Yeah. Well, it's not a bad idea. I think over time, we're going to find more and more people are interested in that because it's not a stigmatized as it was. It was such a, it was such a stigma attached to psychedelics when I was in high school when psychedelics were for idiots. If you're doing psychedelics, you're trying to blow your brains out like that guy from the who. Yeah. Well, so when was that that year in high school and played right? Oh, pink Floyd. Yeah. Yeah. The crazy diamond. Yeah. This was 1981. It was my first year in high school. Really. So that was like the peak of the dare stuff. Exactly. Yeah. That was the Reagan years. You know, just say no, all that stuff. And for what I mean, if you go back to the 1960s, the Ken Keezy Tim Leary stuff and then you shoot just 20 years ahead. Like it's gone. Like there's nothing. In high schools and then like in the in colleges, people were more turned on to some of those things. But it wasn't like overwhelmingly popular. Like it was just 20 years before. Yeah. Even 10 years before. I mean, there are a lot of psychedelics on campus in the early 70s. Mm. So how do they put a fucking fire hose on all that? They didn't. You know, underground use state pretty much cost and even during the war of drugs. Really. Yeah. Like for LSD. What about for other things like still side and ayahuasca was not very popular back then nor was DMT. I I mean, you'd have to look at the specific survey, but you know, they ask certain questions about certain drugs. And I think they probably had an LSD category and maybe psychedelics in general, you know, back then they really weren't looking at psilocybin. That that's probably changed the last five or 10 years though. Hmm. What do you think is going to happen in terms of the way the country opens up in terms of being able to do therapy on people with PTSD and then ultimately, do you think we're going to see like some sort of a recreational usage in our lifetime like federally? I'm hold that thought. And we're back again. Come on with slays of gentlemen. But my question was in our lifetime, do you think that you're we're ever going to see legalized psychedelics where people of consenting age? Well, I think there'll be you models that'll be you know, recreational and also medical. So do you think it'll be like state to state? Um, probably state. I think it would be like liquor or it would be like alcohol. And you're recreational, they'd be dispensaries. Right. But alcohol is legal nationwide federally. That's the big problem with with cannabis and cilcybin. No matter what happens, if these towns make them legal, it's still federally illegal, particularly like hard drugs. Right. Yeah. Well, there would need to be some regulation across the country, which would require rescheduling. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's interesting that there's no scheduling of alcohol. For example, I mean, that should be scheduled. A hundred percent. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's a tricky drug. Right. But you know, but the watch list expression, you know, the horse is out of the barn at this point when it comes to alcohol. It is. And it's also socially people's favorite drug. It's like so accepted, so recreational. And you know, everywhere you go, where people are eating dinner, they're drinking alcohol everywhere. It's happening all over the place. They're drinking beers with their burgers and they're drinking wine with their steak and people are always drinking. Well, if there were going to be dispensaries, yeah, they're neat. Well, I think state to state would be how it goes. You know, kind of like what they're doing in Oregon. I mean, it is legalized even though it's a schedule of undruck. I know, but Oregon is like the worst. All right. They're always lighting their courthouse on fire. Yeah. I mean, that place is fucking wild. Yeah. They're stressed. Yeah. They're very high strung. Yeah. And Portland. And I think also prescribing, you know, so you could prescribe. But you could also deny a prescription. And that's what it gets to me. It's like I don't like the idea of the government being involved in psychedelics. I don't think it should be some like prescription. I think there should be some educators that put forth some sort of reasonable recommendations and then society adopts some people really understand what the dosage should be with the most important part about setting and setting and, you know, having well, well, educated experience to travelers who are also counselors. But, but getting the government involved, kid, the fuck out of here. If they regulate it, they're just going to tax a shit out of it and ruin it. They'll just water down the dose or, you know, figure out a way to make too much money from it. There'll still be underground juice, though. Of course, you know, I'm underground culture, which, yeah, of course, which could maintain the integrity. Yeah, but why bring the government into ayahuasca? Get out of here. They should just stop with all these stupid schedule, you know, when it comes to something and has like a history of use, like stop, you can't make that a schedule one drug. That's ridiculous. Gordon Watson was writing about it in the 1950s. Like, what are you talking about? You made that a schedule one drug. This drug was like a mountain of positive experience stories. I know schedule one, you know, one of my studies started giving DMT, I mean, DMT schedule one, but I was thinking about the scheduling of psychedelics in the schedule one, which means, you know, there's, there's no known medical use. They can't be given safely under medical supervision and they're highly abusable. You know, so this was in the early 90s, I began the study and I wrote to Janet Reno, who is the attorney general under Bill Clinton at the time. And I said, these drugs shouldn't be in schedule one. And I could say why not? Because I'm doing your research, which indicates they can be given safely under medical use and we're gathering important, you know, data, which means they have utility under medical supervision. So, you know, one of her assistance wrote back and said very complicated, changing drug laws. Yeah, so didn't get much further beyond that. Isn't that fun? They could just say it's very complicated, changing drug laws. Sorry. Can't do it. Can't do it. Impossible. All right. Impossible. The grid goes down. We'll get that back up. But it is impossible to change this piece of paper or it says that you can't do that. It's not. I just I can't. I'd like to help. Well, you know, at the time I had more important matters at hand, like, you know, running my study, but right, I think at a certain point, it would be worth, you know, while to reconsider for sure the scheduling of schedule one. Well, what is a ketamine? Three, I think. That's interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Cause they're doing a lot of that. They're doing a lot of these guided ketamine sessions. Yeah, yeah, ketamine is huge. Yeah. But it's it's real psychedelic. I don't have an experience with ketamine, but my friend Neil that I talked about earlier, one of the things that he had did prior to ayahuasca, he did ketamine in a like a medical setting. And he was like, I can't believe how high it was. Like how strong it is. It's like you're really tripping. It's not like some sort of like, you know, like little sort of baby ketamine thing. Like feel about yourself thing. Well, it sounds like he's describing the K hole. I'm already familiar with the K hole. I thought the K hole was negative. Cause I don't think he was saying this was negative. You know, the K hole when you can't move, but you're stuck in a hole. You can't move. Yeah, you're under general anesthesia, but you're still cautious. And some people like that. I'm sure. Yeah, especially if your life sucks. Right. Right. Just want to zone out. Yeah. And for some people is terrifying. Some people get addicted to that stuff too. Right. Yeah. You know, somebody I heard describe it as psychedelic heroin. I've heard of people getting addicted to this snorting it. Snorting it. Yeah. Yeah. And injecting it. injecting it. Intramuscular. Yeah. That's what Timothy Leary used to do, right? No, John Lillie. That's what John Lillie used to do when he got into his float tank. He would intermush in some musculary jab himself and then walk. Well, you know, I knew John Lillie or we spent a little time together. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, he was pretty old at that point. And I was at a conference with him. And, you know, he was, I don't know, 70s, 80s. And he, he loved ketamine. He still got after it. Mm hmm. Yeah. So, some people, but why not? Why not? I mean, you only live once, right? Well, he is the creator of the, the, in my opinion, one of the greatest tools for exploring your mind ever. The tank float tank. Yeah. A thing's amazing. Marijuana plus float tank is the wildest ride. Oh, my God. Sometimes I get out of there. I'm like, what the fuck? Well, you know, I've never been in a float tank. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Never? I don't think ever. No, I have friends who own float tanks or float tank companies like an Albuquerque. You should definitely try it. And I think you'd enjoy it. I've been invited. Yeah. It's very relaxing too. That's the thing about it is like it's not just that when you do the float thing, you have these wild visions in this weird way of like seeing reality because you're sort of detached from everything else. Just you alone with your thoughts. Because the water is the same temperatures as surface or your skin. So you're just floating there and you can't distinguish between the air and the water. It just you feel completely weightless. But but besides the visuals, it's also like really good for your muscles. Like everything just sort of relaxes and soft and yeah, I'd like that. It's nice. Yeah. Cause it's Epsom salts. It's the same as like it's like a thousand pounds of Epsom salts in that tank. Well, so I you know, once to ask you a Rupert Sheldrick if you know, there is a specific passage in his book that you know, seemed like he was stone when he wrote it. Yeah. And I said, did you write that when you're a stone? You said, I write everything when I'm stone. Yeah. I pretty much do too. I write a lot of things not stone, but they're not good. I mean, I write some I've written some bits definitely sober. Like it came up with an idea sober and I wrote it down to became a bit. But there's a thing that happens when I sit down in front of a keyboard when I'm high. It's like it it it almost like it opens up like a channel that I can't reach. Like I can tune into it. Like shh shh shh hey here we are. So here's the ideas and then like in it's bizarre. Yeah, it's weird. But it's true. Well, it's some it's a strange form of creative enhancement that as we were saying before where we were allegedly smoking marijuana. Well, so I get stone and I take you a pen and hand on a pad of paper and and well, so the ideas just come. Yeah. You know, I really can't do editing. Stoneed. Yeah, that seems like a sober task. Yeah. It's kind of, you know, yeah, you have to think you have to be critical. You just can't let stuff kind of flow. You know, George Carlin had the opposite way of writing. He would write sober and then edit stone. He would write his bit sober and then punch him up stone. They come funny or stone. Yeah. Well, do you think you're a friend in your stone? I don't know. When it comes to doing stand up, it's it really is about your mood. You know, I don't think you necessarily are funnier stone. It's really about your mood. It's about the material. But like being funny or is really about like how you feel and if you feel funny, yeah, you feel what you feel good to you, you're having fun. Like that is funnier. It's so that's like a state of mind and then it's the material and how you deliver it and you should, you know, that's part of being a quote unquote, quote professional, right? Right. You don't really find your stone where you're doing it that way. But there's things that happen when you're stone that wouldn't have happened when you're sober. That's the dilemma because sometimes like when you're stoned, you are on a subject and then a new path appears like, oh, all right, I go down there. And you just start talking about something that you never talked about before and it turns out to be hilarious. Right. Right. I think it really, you know, loosens up, you know, suppression or resistance. You can. Well, I think it has an effect, you know, clearly on short term memory. Oh, for sure. And you're in a detrimental effect. That's what's dangerous about it. Yeah. Yeah. You need to be in the right place when you're that stone to be that creative. Yeah. Are you recording this? Yeah. We good? Or do you want to not? Uh, you know, this is interesting. Yeah. We were recording all of it. Yeah. Okay. Good. Yeah. We were going to come back to what was a Rupert Cheldrigg? Okay. Fine. We're going to start. Yeah. That's good. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you know, the first time I smoked hash, one of the things that really struck me was how I lost all self criticism. Oh, you know, I was able to think things and feel things without any restrictions at all. And I think that's part of what occurs when you can't write or if you have writer's block is your kind of criticizing yourself. Like you're no good or you can't write it or you can't have any good ideas. And for me anyway, that part of my inner dialogue goes away. I'm not that's interesting. That's interesting that that's what writer's block is in your eyes too. I wonder if that is it like the self criticism. Like a lot of people have a hard time enjoying themselves, right? They think of themselves in a bad light. They don't like themselves. You know, they want to like get drunk or do something to escape. Yeah. Well, I think people take, you know, drugs a lot of time to escape. Yeah. Yeah. When I was working in this little town between Towson, Santa Fe called Española, really serious drug problems. And I would ask people at least early on to distinguish among the effects of the different drugs that they were on like heroin or methamphetamine or pain or whatever. And they mostly said, it just makes us not feel. You know, all the drugs, each of the drugs would have the same effect, even though they're quite distinct pharmacologically, but they just wanted to stop feeling. One thing that psychedelics make you think is whenever there's some sort of a problem in this world in terms of like a poor neighborhood with another shooting like Chicago, or like South Side of Chicago or, you know, Baltimore, when you hear about these crazy things, like how much money would it cost to fix that? And how much money do we just send over to other countries when we're finagling deals and hooking people up and fixing things and I'm not talking even just about Ukraine. I'm talking about like how much do we spend period? How much would it cost to fix that? Doesn't seem like it would cost as much as like arming other countries. It seems like like if they had money for that and they didn't anticipate that and then they had money for that. Why didn't you fix that other stuff? Why didn't you fix if you guys are really competent or you really wanted a better country? Wouldn't you want to fix all the places that are fucked up like that? There's been zero effort. Well, do you ever think about going into politics? No. No. No. No. In nonsense. Oh, why not? Same reason I don't want to go into pro wrestling. You get fucked up. You can change things from the inside. Okay. And you can also find yourself hanging from an extension cord. Yeah. It's a dirty business with a lot of money involved in it. I'm not interested. I have the best jobs. Talk shit and tell jokes. That's the best. And occasionally call UFC fights. It's great. Yeah. And you're making a critique of society through what you're doing. Well, I'm just saying what I'm seeing and having people on that have all kinds of different perspectives. I want to hear how they're looking at it. Constantly amazed by how many intelligent people there are to talk to. You know, there's so many cool people that you can just have conversations with about everything and anything. Whether it's you about all the above about psychedelics, about your research, about your, you know, having the mind and the courage like it's so you're such an important part of the psychedelic history of this country. Because what you did is you legitimized like a very important thing that everybody had already kind of heard about and some people had experienced it and you legitimized it by doing it in like a real clinical setting with the government's permission. And fun fun fun did by the war on drugs. I mean, it's amazing. And it's like, you know, it's it's really important because it opened people's eyes that this is repeatable that this is this is understand understood rather to be something that has been used by human beings for a long time. And just recently we probably have been detached from that. Yeah. Well, I wanted to demonstrate you could do it. Yeah, safely. And you could generate valuable information. Yeah, that was, you know, the goals were modest, but the goals were modest because I wanted them to succeed. Right. Yeah. So that was a good strategy. You know, when they try to find the history of DMT use, they, what is the current understanding as far as like how long back they know people were either taking the snuff or doing an ayahuasca or some form of it. So have you talked to you with Dennis McKenna about his thoughts about the evolution of DMT how far back it goes in the family tree of life. I don't remember if I did, but please. Yeah, like I haven't looked carefully into his thinking, but as I understand it, he points to it being very old compound, a very ancient compound that had occurred, you know, fairly on an evolution. But when do they think humans started ingesting it? Yeah. Well, the historical record, I mean, there's ayahuasca, right? And that might go back 5,000 years. But you know, probably before. I mean, why not? This is my question before smallpox ravaged the Amazon before all those people died. And they're still doing research on this, right? They're not, they don't exactly know what these cities were because that light art stuff when it lays out this grid. They understand that there were structures there, but they don't know what it was. But yeah, the big, the big crazy story is that there's millions of people there. That was real. If that's the craziest possibility, that's the one that Graham subscribes to. There was millions of people there. Do you think that that society perhaps was a psychedelic society? And that's why they had that knowledge of how to make that stuff. And then the people who survived were the people that were removed from the inner city areas, the people that lived in these tribal areas were the ones that lived and they had the knowledge that these people had run their society with using that stuff. If they were able to have these insane structures like the whole lost city of Z, you know, that it was a feature film, but it was also a book and it's based on a real explorer who went down there and they were looking for this lost golden city that had been talked about before. But most likely what they think happened was those people that went, whether it was 100 years ago or whatever it was, they killed everybody. They gave them diseases and it just ravaged everybody and the jungle just consumed everything. So when they went back to look for it, they couldn't find anything. Mm-hmm. Well, your question about whether it was a psychedelic society. I guess I could go that far advanced. Right. Yeah. I mean, it could be. I mean, in the right circumstances, psychedelics enhance associability, right? And empathy and compassion and those kinds of virtuous characteristics. Yeah. So it may have been a part of their society. I'm not that familiar. It's a Mayan phenomenon. It's definitely in the minds, right? Yeah. So the Mayans used mushrooms and other psychedelics. So yeah, I mean, I don't know how extensive the use pervaded down among the lower strata of a society, but you would think that the clergy would be taking them regularly. Well, you had to be on mushrooms to build those fucking pyramids. Mm-hmm. So the scientists also were taking mushrooms. I mean, what? How did you figure this out? When you go to Chichinita, like I don't think they let people walk up it now. I think too many Tiktakers fucked that up. Did they ruin that? Is that true? They don't let you walk up the pyramid of Chichinita. I feel like something happened there. There was some like event, some sort of a news story. And then they said you can't walk up it anymore. Yeah. But I got to walk up it. I think I went in 2003 or four or something like that. And it was wild. Just to be around those things. I want to take... Not a lot to anywhere. You're not allowed to go walk. Somebody fucked it up. Yeah. Yeah, it's probably Tiktakers. It's always shaking their ass up there. We got rumors about legal climbing. It's legal climbing. Yeah. Well, luckily I got to do it. And I want to do the other places. I want to do the ones in Mexico. I want to do... I eventually want to see someone fell and died. Oh, shit. Whoops. So out somewhere. Imagine watching someone slip and go down that thing. But the point is like these people, however long ago it was, that they built these things. Like these are incredible structures. Incredible. Like the way they're set up, they're so symmetrical and beautiful and they have at the top of it like a place where they're put human bodies when they had to do sacrifices on them. So they've got this like kind of creature. It has its legs bent. Yeah. Boy, you wonder if they came up with their architecture based on their visions of the GM metric, fractal like visions. They may have modeled their buildings on some of those. That's entirely possible, right? What do you think led to them going? Why do they all go to sacrifices? What's that all about? So many of these like ancient cultures, like... I was sacrificed. At least they kill people on purpose. Well, it's the... You know, it represents a certain system of belief that if you sacrifice, then you'll have a benefit. Yeah, it could be rain, could be crops. The wildest one I've heard of was the Aztec one. Was it monazuma that did it? Someone sacrificed... I want to say it was something crazy, like 80,000 slaves over a period of just a couple of weeks. Yeah. I think they finished building a pyramid. And then after they built the pyramid, they sacrificed all the slaves, like some insane number. Yeah. It might not have been 8,000 something. But it was something really crazy like that. What is the name of the pyramid? It's Teotu Akan. I don't know how to say it. Here it is. Yeah, yeah, people come up with crazy ideas. Some conquistures wrote about some... some... some... some pantley in its towers, estimating that the rack alone contained 130,000 skulls. But historians and archaeologists knew that the conquistadors were prone to exaggerating the horrors of human sacrifice to demonize the Mexican culture. As the centuries passed, scholars began to wonder whether... I don't know how to say that we're... some pantley had ever existed. So what does that say in? I was... I thought it was actually talking about the things but I read it too fast. It's all about the same place you just mentioned. I scored rack. Tawak. I'll say it either. Oh, no, no, no, it's not the same. This is not the same. No, okay. It's... It's like Teotu Akan. It's a very complex word. I'm gonna fuck it up. Not that. That's it. Teotu Akan, right? Is that it? Is that no? It's as a city. No, that's not the name. Google... just Google Aztec Pyramids. Aztec Pyramids... 80,000. That's how I got to this. The Socksby had... 1,000's performance sacrifices were performed there. But... I don't know about that one time. Maybe that is it. Is that a... Is that a pyramid? Is it a pyramid of Teotu Akan? Yes, it's a city. I don't... Okay. Yeah. Well, I should have had that story at my fingertips. But the point being, they did sacrifice some fucking insane number of people upon completion. Like why do these cultures believe in these mass sacrifices like that? Like what do you think caused that kind of horrific thinking? I just don't know. You know, it's incomprehensible. Especially if they were a psychedelic culture. Well, I mean, you have to wonder if the psychedelics strengthened their belief that what they were doing was the right thing to do. Right. Because if you have pre-existing beliefs, they're often magnified by psychedelics. Right. That's a good point. Especially if you're living in a really rough part of the world in a really rough time and history. Well, you interviewed that guy, Brian, who's got the book out on early Christianity and psychedelics. Brian Murrow Rescue. Yeah, it's called the immortality key. What do you think of that theory? Fascinating. Well, they have real physical evidence because of the vessels. They have real physical evidence that the... Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. There's some lysergic acid and some various urgots. Like there's some forms of urgots that they can find residue of inside the wine. Surgic acid and some various urgots. Like there's some forms of urgot that they can find residue of inside of the wine vessels. So these wine vessels weren't just wine. It was, they were throwing in a bunch of psychedelic compounds into the wine. And that's what they did with all wine. And now that they have like physical evidence of these vessels that has trace elements of this psychedelic compound, they can be sure that this is what was going on. And this is why when they would talk about drinking wine and having these visions and I mean, this is where democracy came from. These fucked invented democracy doing this. And they were probably all tripping balls. So what do you think that the relationship is between the cichion for example in early Christianity? That's the part I didn't quite understand in what way didn't you understand? Well, you know, we're the thoughts new that were induced by the cichion or were they already there? And the cichion just magnified them and made them more devoted to those ideas. That's interesting. Yeah. I don't know. I mean, we'd have to like find the origin of all of their ideas. Because it was such an incredible time period for people thinking things through and communicating and devising ways to live. And saying things that to this day people quote as wise words. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, you know, our sacred literature is pretty old. Yeah, that's not much near. There's the Bible. There's the Greek philosophers. What did you think of those scholars from Israel that were connecting Moses' burning bush to DMT? Yeah, that's an interesting idea. Yeah, so psychologist Venetian known. Yeah, so he proposed that the burning bush was an acacia. And it was emitting fumes of DMT. And that's how Moses experienced the vision of the angel speaking to him. I mean, it could be true, but it doesn't necessarily explain the broader phenomenon of the prophetic state. Because it was only Moses that one time. And it doesn't really explain Isaiah or Ezekiel or other prophets. Other prophets having experiences? Other prophets actually being exposed, whom are taking an exogenous, you know, psychic delegation. So that's not talked about it all. No, no, they're only one, well, let's see. You know, there are certain things that stimulate your prophecy, like a good meal and being happy and good music. The mana may be, you know, some people have suggested the mana has got a researchic acid ingredient. And that's why the Hebrews were experiencing their visions in the desert. But the only like, you know, clear-cut plant and a person, a piffany, as Moses at the bush, some people believe that the incense and the tabernacle or in the altar had cannabis in it. So, but there's not... Yeah, I've heard that before. Yeah. You know, but the whole presence of endogenous DMT kind of makes it moot, whether or not people took, you know, plants or substances in the Bible or any of the soul spiritual literature because you have endogenous DMT. You've got the means to experience visions without taking anything in. Have you ever attempted to achieve visions without the use of the chemical? Like, have you ever attempted to do it through Kundalini Yoga? Or... That's one way that I have talked to people that have had these experiences. They said you can get pretty damn close with yoga. Well, and with holotropic breathing too. Yeah. Have you done either one of those? I've done holotropic breathing. Yeah. Could you explain how that works? Yeah, the first time was very psychedelic. What you hyperventilate deep and long for as long as you can. Might be five minutes, might be ten minutes, might be fifteen. When you say hyperventilating, like what's the scheduling in it? Like how you don't... No, it's what you're doing. Very deep and very fast. Very deep and very fast. Okay. Yeah. And you do it in your hands kind of spasm up from the changes in the acid-based balance. Really? Oh, yeah. Your hands, Pazin. Yeah, your feet. Your lips begin tingling. Should be sitting down when you're doing this? Oh, yeah. You need to be screened. I mean, you need to make certain that your heart's in good shape and you're not on any medications that might interact. You're badly with being that out of it. Yeah. It's a whole system. It's like tripping without drugs and they've got a long deal for it. Before you start the... You know, five minutes, ten minutes, or half hour. I mean, it just depends. You can snap into it real quickly or it might take a long time. I wonder how much of that is what runners high is. It could be. Well, so we studied runners high from all atone levels back in the 1980s and 1990s. You know, there was a marathon in the winter on San Diego Crest, which is like 10,000 feet to 10,000 feet. And you guys run a marathon along San Diego Crest. And I was, you know, looking for some way to stimulate melatonin. And so I looked at the stress level of those guys and figured if anybody is inducing enough stress in themselves to raise melatonin naturally, it would be them. Yeah. So we did that and we found some increases. We tried blocking it with meloxone and those were the kind of studies that I was doing. Yeah. And after a certain point, you just switch and you're in this very, you know, highly altered state. And how long is it last? Well, you stop doing the breathing once that happens. I don't know, maybe 10, 15 minutes. And so what would be akin to it? Like, what is it like mushrooms? Is it like eating edible marijuana? What is it? The experience that I had as I remember, I feel like it once like really break through. It was like MDMA. Really? Yeah. That's a great clarity. Ooh. Really. Yeah. But, you know, I think, you know, people have a range of experiences. What do you think is happening? Like what is causing that euphoric sort of sensation like pharmacologically? Well, it does, you know, it isn't always euphoric. Some people is really very difficult. There's throwing up in there. Oh, really? And, yeah, you know, people can get pretty, you know, it's a very powerful technique. Yeah. And I'm not, you know, recommending that anybody start doing it. Can people overdose? Can they over breathe? Not that I've heard of. That's good news. Well, thus, you know, I'm familiar with their network and they're pretty well trained people. Wow. So there's a whole place you could go and you can be guided through these sort of breathing and so what they do? Yeah. Well, Stan Groff, have you heard of Stan? Yes. Yeah. Stan was that Czech psychiatrist who did a lot of LSD research. Stan was at the University of Maryland for a while working with Bill Richards and those guys. And once they stopped, you know, once the compounds, once, you know, psychedelics were scheduled and all human research ended, you know, Stan moved on. And in the meantime, developed this, you know, wholeotropic breathwork. Wow. And he's trained hundreds of therapists in the technique. Did he get it from any sort of indigenous ritual or some ancient civilization ritual? Yeah. I'm trying to remember where he got it from. I think there was some school of psychotherapy, kind of obscure. And I think I'm just not sure. You know, it was going around. And he picked it up on any rant. What I was getting at is like, is there a culture that exists anywhere that also knew about this that was doing this a long time ago? I'm sure. But I don't know. Nothing we know. Yeah. I'm just real curious. Like what was the, they say like ayahuasca is one of the first DMT experiences that people have had. But I wonder like, how do they figure out how to put those two things together? You could just eat it. Well, if you ask them, they will tell you the plants told them. Yeah. Yeah. But how that works. But how do they know? They weren't alive like that. Yeah. Just thousands years old. That's nonsense. Well, it could be King Solomon. It could be. Yeah. Or yeah. I mean, it seems so wild that someone figured out how to combine one thing that has DMT and another thing that's an MAO inhibitor so that your body will just absorb it. Like that they figured that out in the jungle. One thing that they may have been doing is the vine, the banisteriopsis has got the beta carbolines and the Harmine, Harmaline, MAO inhibitors. And they use that as a screening tool. If they're on the banisteriopsis, they can taste other plants. And the essence of what's in that other plant comes through in a way that doesn't normally the case. Oh, wow. Yeah. So they may have had their antennas up, so to speak, by being on the MAO inhibitor, beta carbolines all the while and experimenting with what plants do. Wow. So just by using that as you just say is like a regulate? Well, like radar or something, they can pick stuff up that otherwise is invisible. You know, within the plants, animals must have something similar too, right? I mean, it's got to be a reason why they only eat specific types of grasses and avoid other ones. Is it just taste? Because I know that certain grasses and certain plants will actually change their flavor profile. They think like cows are eating them or if deers are eating them. Really. That's interesting. Yeah. They said that amount of quesia. Yeah. The quesia tree, there was a thing they were reading about giraffes who wouldn't eat the leaves of these trees. And it turns out they were downwind from trees that these giraffes were eating. So these giraffes were eating. The wind goes down. It changes the flavor profile of all these other plants. So whether it's through the mycelium and the ground, how are they communicating? But they've even done it to the point where they played sounds of like caterpillars chewing on leaves and that causes the change in the flavor profile to the leaves. They've sent us some weird senses. Well, and there are stories of animals getting intoxicated. Oh, yeah. So, alcohol, fermented fruit, other things. Don't elephants love that. Yeah. And, you know, catnip and, you know, cot. They discovered, you know, cot from goats eating the leaves and they would get frisky. Have you ever tried cot? I've grown some cot in my greenhouse back in the day. Is that legal? You know, in New Mexico probably. And that stuff is like an amphetamine, right? Yeah. It's a stimulant. Did you enjoy it? It was okay. Did you want to take over a boat? No, it was a small plant. I only got a couple of years ago. It seems like the preferred drug of pirates, right? Right. They love that stuff. They always scare people with, though, they're on the cot. Oh, Jesus. I just wanted to know what the actual was it like? It's like caffeine pretty much. Yeah. Yeah. Well, in the Middle East, in more traditional societies that are really into cot, you know, they chew cot in the city council or the village council guests together. They chew cot and they make their decisions. Wow. I guess it would be like chewing cocoleives. Right. The chewing cocoleives is fascinating too because so many people think that there's actually like a health benefit to chewing cocoleives. It's actually probably good for you. It's just cocaine because how they get it is from cocoleives. You can't have cocoleives. Well, it's like cot. They extract a catheon from cot. What's catheon? It's the active ingredient in cot. Like, you know, cocaine is in cocoa. And then you start manipulating the catheon molecule and you come up with your bath salts, more or less. Oh, boy. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so it's a good drug gone bad. Well, that was a weird time in history, right? Where people would go to like drug stores or gas stations or other and buy what they would call bath salts. And it says not for human consumption. Right. And people would buy it and just kill each other on it. That was a wild time where people found out that you get that. Yeah. Well, it's, you know, it's kind of like that kind of your THC CBD you were talking about before the show. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You can buy it over there. Delta 9. Delta 9's legal. And it's very powerful, you say. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, it's legitimate. They have it a lot around here too. Like they have stores that they sell it. And there was like some sort of an amendment to get rid of it. And I think it got knocked down. I'm pretty sure that was a story behind it. But they, they have like a fake version of marijuana here. That's legal. Yeah. Okay. Well, you know, they're designing new drugs every day. Yeah. Um, they're coming up with new versions of drugs that are illegal. Well, and these, you know, these, you know, psychedelic startups are, you know, designing new drugs as well. That's wild. Yeah. Like if someone figures out a better acid. I'm a better acid, a longer DMT. Yeah. You know, something that lasted maybe an hour instead of just a half hour. Well, you guys were doing with IVs. How long was the drip? And could you have prolonged that experience by like, like, was the longest one you did with people? Well, you know, we just gave it as a push. Like as a, as a bolus, like I would inject the drug over 30 seconds and then clear the line for 15 more seconds with salt water. And so is it from an IV bag or is it just straight into the tube that's attached to the, you know, from a syringe? Okay. So it's not going, oh, okay. I wasn't the impression it was an IV drip. I thought it was like that's interesting. Like how would you regulate? Well, once one study that we did was in attempt to cause tolerance to closely spaced repeated dosing of DMT, you know, like if you take LSD every day for a few days, you stop responding. Right. And there were some studies giving DMT to see if you could develop tolerance. But you couldn't. So I thought maybe if you spaced the injections close enough together, that was a issue regarding half life. So it's interesting to hear you say that because I had always heard for some reason that if you do DMT next to like a recent DMT trip, like 10 minutes ago, do it again, 10 minutes. Like you won't, you won't be able to do it. But it's not true at all. I've had that experience. I've done it multiple times in a day and is the most potent one was the last one. Exactly. That's more or less what we found is that, you know, we gave it a, we spaced injections every half hour. And there'd be a real progression of the effects over the course of the morning. And as a result of those data, group in Imperial College, I'm in London, is developing an infusion, an infusion model to maintain the state for at least a half hour. So when you're doing it, you're injecting. And then in 30 minutes, you're injecting again. Yeah, they'd come down. And we would spend maybe 10, 15 minutes processing. And then they'd get ready for the second dose. So when you say processing, like explaining what you saw talking about it. Yeah. Yeah. Like I would ask them how it was and what was, you know, what, you know, what came up. It was a pretty packed 10 to 15 minutes to out. Dude, you're like cleaning them up and setting them right back into space. It was a lot of fun. Yeah, people really got a lot of good work done during that, you know, in the course of that morning. Usually, you know, they'd be exhausted after the third dose. Like I can't do anymore. And, you know, we would give them the fourth dose. And they would experience this great resolution. Real of whatever, you know, troubles came up over the course of the morning. Wow. Yeah. I'm collaborating with a group at UCLA that's going to use. I probably repeated the same of DMT and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. Mm. That's amazing. And it'll be good because we'll be able to, you know, to do therapy in between the individual injections. Wow. And so if, what if you come up across an issue that's going to take more time to resolve? Like you're saying, be able to do therapy. Like, will you postpone the next treatment? I mean, if you gave four doses over the course of a morning, you know, stuff will come up and you'll resolve it more or less by the fourth dose. But it's, you know, it is in the end of treatment. I mean, you would be in treatment already in some form or another. And with the stuff that came up, you know, during the DMT sessions, you would have that as grist for the mill in your future work. What I was getting at was that, like, say if someone is having a bad experience and say if they're doing this for, those things, but they have a really bad experience around dose number three. Would you allow them to do those four? Or would you have to have a conversation with them? Yeah, you'd have to ask them. And you would just do it based on their word. Or if they're like a protocol for when you pull a patient. Well, the study is still being designed, but, you know, the standard of care would be if somebody says no. I mean, that means no. Right. Right. And if someone says yes, that means go ahead. Even if you might think they might be a little slightly unhinged at this point. Well, you know, stressed or uncertain as what's next. Like in our study, after the third dose, a lot of people felt up against their ropes and they'd say, you know, has anybody ever dropped out? And I would say not yet. And everybody went ahead. And they were glad they did. They could kind of metabolize the stuff that had been stirred up. Yeah. That's the fine line between whether you push someone to keep going or whether you'd say, let's take a break. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, safety first. Yeah, for sure. Could you imagine a world where there are places that would take care of people the way your studies were run? It would do it that way. I mean, is that achievable in our lifetime? There could be a place where people that know what they're doing certified have everything locked down doing it the right way, do it exactly the way you did to those patients. Well, it wouldn't be exactly the same. I mean, I had my own style. But I'm sure you would. It wouldn't be as fun. It might not be as fun. But yeah. Yeah. I mean, you know, why not? Yeah. Well, why not? I mean, I think one of the really nice things is there's a lot of support for it on the right now because they realize the effect that it has on soldiers. Yeah. That care. That care. Yeah. That's a big one. Because everyone's always looking for give some relief to heroes that come back with PTSD. And this is the way to do it. Yeah. So that's the way to do it. I think that's going to get the most funding and the most support. People got to realize that this is not like a left or right issue. This is a human issue. I mean, we should treat our veterans really carefully, lovingly. Absolutely. Yeah. 100%. And for all human beings, not just PTSD from that, but PTSD from being attacked, car accidents. Like people have all sorts of traumatic memories from their youth. This is not just for that, for anybody with like these horrific patterns in their head that are caused by trauma. Well, you were talking about being uploaded to a computer and how horrible that would be. Yeah. But I mean, worst case scenario. Worst case scenario. Well, I was just trying to look at the worst possible version would be you stuck in a computer box. Like looking at the world and not able to move or act. But there might not be any trauma beyond that, anyway. Maybe. That's pretty. I just would think that like a disassociated brain. Sometimes if you found out that like your thinking wasn't just your brain, that your heart was actually involved. And that all the neurons that are around the heart actually working conjunction with the brain, but that a brain disassociated from the heart is always a psycho. Like so if everybody who did get their brain uploaded somewhere, they just popped out in the other end like a three quarter human psycho. Yeah, well, so you're using the biology to support like this philosophical idea. Sort of. Yeah. The philosophical ideas the most interesting because I think if people really do freeze their brain and they really do boot that sucker back up and you get drawn from heaven back into this like earthly realm inside of a fish tank with a bunch of wires attached to you. You're floating in some super serum like fuck. Yeah, well, I mean it could be great. Maybe. Yeah, if you got a good handler, somebody gives you the right juice. If you just stimulate different parts of the brain, they give you orgasm, fix your memory. Well, you know, set and setting. Yeah, you need the technologist to get it. You have to trust people to fuck with your brain for the right. Why would they have any incentive to help hold the end of the bargain? Maybe they fold like some of those online Bitcoin places. Maybe they fold up shop. Well, you've read that. What's it called? This story that is the basis for total recall, we can get it for you. We can buy it for you wholesale is by an APK dick. And these people enter into this implant kind of state and they have adventures and whatnot. Yeah, but I think we are one hundred percent on our way to that. I think we're one hundred percent. I don't think they're stopping us. I think all they're going to have to do is continue with just a general, like virtual reality was non existent 20 years ago. Nobody gave a shit about virtual reality because the technology wasn't up to date. It wasn't something that got discussed. You know, every now and then you hear about somebody who was, you know, had a headset and oh, it's crazy. We tried it out. And I remember doing it. I forget what year it was, but Duncan Trousell had wanted his house. It was very, very pixelated. I think it was the Oculus. Very, very pixelated. And we put this thing on and we're moving around with it. No, it wasn't the Oculus. It was the other one. What's that? Five. The five. The five. HTC Vive, right? That's what it was. And so we're moving around with this thing and I remember thinking wow, this is just the beginning. This thing's going to get really bizarre. And then a couple of years later Duncan had one and he said this one's so much better. And he gave me this one and you have this experience where you're in the ocean and a whale swims by the way. it's wild. It's like underwater with this thing. I'm like, wow. And that was quite a while ago. We are whatever it is. If it's 10 years or if it's 20 years, because 20 years ago again, nobody cares where we are. If it's 20 years from now, whatever it's going to be, whatever year it is, they're going to have something that replicates reality. Like down to every moment, down to touch. They'll be haptic feedback. They'll be something that like hijacks your nervous system and think your feet are on the ground. You know, replicates the field of gravity. Yeah. Well, you know, I think it's kind of kind of detachable from reality. 100%. Yeah. So what's the point of that? Well, I don't think it's good for us, but I just think it's inevitable. I think there's, if we really do come up with a way to live in like Avatar land and fly around on the planet. And fly around on dragons and live in some bizarre fake universe. We're going to do it. I guess it's an instinctible. Well, yeah, some people will. I think a lot of people, man. I think it's going to be a lot of people's number one past time. Because if it's a, why would you live regular life, stupid? I lived regular life when it's indistinguishable from regular life. And you could be on a pirate ship. Yeah. I kind of wonder how much it would be adopted by the Indian reservations that I live within. Oh, for sure. That would be probably the first place to implement it. You know, because they're pretty much living in nature, but they're not very happy. A lot of them. You know, they drink and there's unemployment and feuds and things which never really get very far. So you might think the more traditional lists wouldn't go far, but the kids, you know, the kids because life is rather bleak. Well, those reservations were the places where mixed martial arts first thrived in California. It was illegal in the state of California, but they would hold their own, they have their own laws, they have their own rules. So they would hold these events at these Native American reservations and we would go to there. Yeah. That was where they kind of like saved a lot of those promotions, the early MMA promotions. As a fact, they could put on some fights and it also gave these guys a chance to develop in a state where MMA was completely illegal. So Native American reservations have a history of like doing things, you know, before anybody else was allowed to do them because they can write their own laws. If they decided to imagine that, they decided to make their own psychedelic therapy at all these Native American casinos. Well, you know, there's that long history of the Native American church been using masculine containing peyote forever. That's a pretty small segment of the Native population, but still it's established and protected. Yeah, that's the reason for the religious freedom restoration act was, you know, peyote use. That was the primary driver. So that was the first one before they got to the ayahuasca church. Yeah. Yeah, the ayahuasca church relied on that ruling. Just support. Both ayahuasca church are just two different ones, right? Do both of them have similar rituals? No, they're different. You know, the U.D.V. like I mentioned is, you know, kind of straight-laced. You're in chairs. You have lights. You have a leader. You know, on the other group is called on the Santo Daimi, and it's a bit more free-form. They're singing and there's dancing and sounds like more fun. It's more fun, you know, fun capital F fun. And are they doing that under the influence? All the singing and dancing? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, they drink tea all night. They drink ayahuasca. Oh, boy. Yeah. I'm not familiar with ceremonies tend to involve more ingestion than that. Now, is anybody study those folks? Because that sounds like they'd be even happier than the other ones you talked about. Yeah, I'm not familiar. You know, I'm not super familiar with literature. What I've read mostly is the U.D.V. has been studied. And it's because of their interest in establishing that the use is safe and effective and helpful. Well, it'd be really interesting to see the two of them studied. You know, see the contrast between the singing and dancing and the way the other one people would do it. Like they're in sort of a mainstream Christian church. Mm-hmm. Yes. A side to side comparison. You know, those, I would think those data would be out there, but maybe not separated. And that exact same manner. I think we've been doing this for almost four hours. Four hours. Can you imagine that? Time flew. Time flew. Time flew right there. Yeah. Thank you, man. Thanks for coming on. Yeah. Your book, The Psychedelic Handbook is available right now. There it is. And this is the novel that you wrote Joseph Levy, Scape's death. That is available as well. Well, you could read the comment by, you know, Grandma disturbing and, you know, something or another tale, you know, Grand likes the Joseph Levy book. Well, Grand likes it. I'm sure I'll like it too. Yeah. It's entertaining. I enjoyed talking to you, man. It was a lot of fun. It really was. That was great. My pleasure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was fun, right? I would like to do it again. You're up for it. Let's go. Yeah. All right. Thank you. Bye, buddy.