The US Institute of Peace was think of it like the National Dammit for democracy. It's George Orwell in charge of naming these groups. National Dammit for democracy is subverts democracy. All these peace groups are like aggressively anti-peace. You can check out these protests online. They're hilarious. It's people protesting in the streets so that they are not allowed to know foreign funding of their own societies. Put the blindfolders on me. I'm not allowed to know whether that is funded by a foreign government. How much is funding? The CIA was running an initiative to control the education space during the Cold War to stop the spread of communist sympathizing teachings and curricula. All this was repurposed against right wing populism when Trump won in 2016. To notice, according to George Soros, the Open Society Foundation was to provide a basically a tax loophole for his kids. Nick became such a powerful force in Washington that we had to synchronize US foreign policy with the foreign policy set out by the Open Society Foundation. NGOs, you hear the term all the time and in fact, the deeper you look into almost any news story, especially one that pertains the destruction of Western civilization in the United States, you find something called an NGO at the bottom of the story. NGO stands for non-governmental organization, but paradoxically, NGOs feel like a parallel government to me. You've done a lot of research on this. I don't think this topic's talked about enough. So I'm just going to stand back and let you explain what an NGO is, where they came from and what role they occupy in the modern West. Yeah. NGOs are the stem cell of the government's central nervous system. They are this highly flexible tool, just like a stem cell can transform into any of the some 20 different cell types in the human body and they self renew and they can generate all these new neurons. That is really, you can't disentangle or really separate the government from the non-governmental organizations. This started in its origin really with the creation of the US income tax in 1913 and then 1917 contributions to charitable organizations, to 501c3s as we now know it, became tax deductible from this new income tax. And so that gave rise to this money flow into private foundations and into nonprofit organizations that would come to play a large role in both world wars, but in particular World War II, and humanitarian relief began to be a big part of OSS and the predecessor to the CIA and military financial assistance to groups inflicted by World War II. And then in particular during the Marshall Plan after World War II, NGOs played a key role in being a deniable front to run money to establish contacts and to provide direction and guidance to groups that the US government did not want to be caught necessarily doing directly. And so you can trace this back really. You have all these charities. There were fronts a lot of them, or at least important. So it's a complicated relationship because you have government agencies and then you have outside high net worth individuals and families, dynastic American families, like the fords, the Rockefellers, the Carnegie's, all starting these private philanthropies, all playing the role in US statecraft, all having international businesses that rely on foreign markets. And so they're highly dependent on the state department clearing the way for them, negotiating deals for them, acquiring territory, creating export markets, maintaining laws in foreign countries that maximize profitability, securing mining rights, securing trade routes. So there's this complex interplay. This is why I always call. So the story is really about, I don't really think of it as a government being different than an NGO as being different than this corporate financial overclass. Use the term the blob, which is not my term. That was a term from Obama's deputy national security advisor Ben Rhodes to describe a force within Washington that was bigger than the White House that the Obama White House felt like it couldn't get its foreign policy done because this foreign policy establishment is blob structure seem to be more powerful than that. I think of the blob as having three levels to it. You have the guts of it inside the government, which is the state department, the defense department, the intelligence community and USAID. You can think of it. Hillary Clinton would call this the 3D model diplomacy defense and development. And then the IC plays the CIA, for example, plays a supporting role in those functions. And these are all merged together as one cohesive way of advancing US foreign policy. That's what we call it. But it's really advancing the interests of, generally speaking, insiders or national champions like our large multinational corporations. But bring this back. So you have this, this government structure in the center of it. And then below that you have the NGOs who are funded by the US government and who work alongside the US government and have a longer reach than the US government. The state department can't just walk into certain conflict zones and talk to the indigenous community and get honest answers or tell them what to do without being on the record saying something that might not want attributed to them. The NGOs can go in and do that. The NGOs can serve as the back channels for diplomacy. The NGOs can provide a plausible way of providing financial assistance or money or bribes to various groups to run shipments and arms and to create networks of assets that then a assistant secretary of state can then liaise with. So there's this network creation level and there's this influence level at the bottom. But above that, above that government level is what I call the donor drafter class, which is, and everyone understands the concept of big donors having a big influence on politics. Not only do they largely play the key role in determining who's president through the funding that they provide, but they, I say donor drafter because they draft off the policies off of the US government. And don't just donate into it like in a bike race. You always want to be not in first. You want to be right behind the guy in first so that the guy in first is cutting the wind for you so that you don't suffer the cost of the extra exertion to cut the wind. The Pentagon cuts the wind for companies for multinational corporations. The state department cuts the wind for multinational corporations and private equity funds in the whole financial overclass. The CIA cuts the wind for corporations of financial firms. The USA, it cuts the wind. And so you have these figures like George Soros, for example, and Bill Gates, who are now obviously very well renowned in the NGO world, the Open Society Foundation, the Bill and Linda Gates Foundation, and then also Rockefeller, Carnegie Foundation Ford Foundation, all these, all these have corporations and financial firms attached to their philanthropy. And when they, so they will receive funding from the US government, from the USAID, or their portfolio assets will, or their portfolio NGOs or companies will, but they will also donate into it. And I bring this up because oftentimes they are paid by the government, but oftentimes they are actually paying into a government project that advances some other interest. And then I can go through a bunch of examples of this, but maybe I'll come back to the history real, real, real. Yes. So in 1948, this was the start of the intelligence state in America. It was NSC 10-2 authored by George Cannon, which gave the CIA its plausible than I built a doctrine that allowed you to, that allowed the CIA to have a license to lie. The CIA came into creation, and let's take a quick swag here. The CIA was created because the State Department wanted 30 deeds done without being attributed to the State Department. So they needed some outside agency, which could do what George Cannon called two months months before he authored the plausible deniability doctrine in NSC 10-2. He called this the inauguration of organized political warfare. This is a very little known memo that was not declassified. I believe until 2005 it was written in 1948. Everyone knows George Cannon as the head of the policy planning staff at the State Department as the author of the containment strategy. That's Russia and the Cold War. One of those celebrated folks in U.S. diplomacy history. But two months before granting this license to do all this, to have the CIA operate through NGOs, through civil society organizations, through private foundations, through these astrophoturf grassroots advocacy nonprofits, he wrote this memo called the inauguration of organized political warfare. And they argues that this is now April 1948. We had just effectively rigged the 1948 Italian election. April 18, 1948. We had wanted, this was the first Democratic election in Italy, which after World War II it ended. And we had, it was, it pitted basically a pro-U.S. pro-Western democracy candidate versus a pro-Soviet autocracy candidate was how it was pitched. And the very first national security memo, one-dash one, was on the central importance of Italy to the U.S. position at the dawn of the Cold War and that we could not afford to lose this election. And so the very first covert action of the central intelligence agency, because under the 1947 act it was largely conceived of as being an intelligence collection agency, not so much operations. The CIA is two different career tracks. Intelligence, you know, they call it the analyst track and the operations track. And they're very different breeds of people. They're very, very different in what they do. One of them, you collect the intelligence and you synthesize it for policymakers of the state department or the White House national security council. A lot of reading, a lot of foreign websites. Yes. A lot of academics. And the operations is where you get the Barry Seal cocaine cowboy types. And you know, these, you know, the kind of wild folks who go in and do the dirty work to overthrow democratically elected governments or to do the right. So people talk about the CIA. They're talking about the director of operations really. That's what people in the popular imagination, that's what the CIA officer is. True. Random was an analyst track his whole career. And you know, I don't know that that makes him more charitable case than the operations side. But the fact is, is Kenim writes this memo in 1948, 12 days after the US had rigged the Italian election in 1948. And that's what it was. The Miles Copeland, who was one of the leaders of that from the CIA side wrote in a biography later in his life that without the CIA intervention in that election, we would have lost 60 to 40. I believe, I believe his son went on to play the drums in the police. Stuart Copeland. Well, and, and Miles Copeland, the, the, I think I may be getting that wrong. Well, the, well, the grandson actually went on to be, I think the manager for a sting or a, or a, a bunch of these major bands and then teamed up with Donald Rumsfeld in order to help do music diplomacy in Iraq and Afghanistan, which is a whole other, you know, it's family of secrets. You've probably heard about eight sleep. Lots of people are talking about it. It is a company with one mission, improving your sleep and it's changing the way people do that. The way they get a good night's rest. We just got word that their team is launching a new product. It's called the pod five. It's an original and innovative mattress cover plus a blanket that uses precision temperature control to regulate your body's sleep cycles and give you the perfect sleep, which really, really matters. You can range all the way from 55 degrees to 110 degrees, meaning that you're covered no matter what. It's like electric blanket to the next level, but also a cooling blanket. So it makes you sleep better. Temperature is a massive effect on the way you sleep. By the way, it also detects snoring. And then it adjusts your bed position to reduce or completely stop it. So there are a lot of ladies in America who are going to be grateful for this product. Everybody who works here will tell you because they all use it that there's no better way to be alert, productive and happy than by sleeping well and eight sleep really does help. Visit eightsleep.com slash chuckler use the code tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod five ultra. If you don't like it, you return it within a month that won't happen. We think you'll love it, but you can if you want eight sleep dot com slash tucker. What happens is in the 1948 election, the CIA, which does not at night really have the authorization to do what it did. It was a last minute, last ditch, Hail Mary effort to swing the election. And they took the assets that they had had from World War II backing, you know, at that time, the OSS, the war department before it in 1948 had changed the defense department. The war department had worked closely with the with the Vatican with the church as well as with mafia organizations organized crime organizations organized crime factions in Italy that were being prosecuted by Mussolini. And we worked teamed up with them. They gave us access to ports to to infrastructure to safe houses. They were a big network pro US network node during the during World War II. And because of their influence on unions, they allowed us to run arms, you know, run trans shipments of supplies, food, assistance, all of that, which is one of the reasons that the Italian mafia was protected for 60 years. It was a very much a cold war asset for the US. But so the CIA achieves this successful result in April 1948. And they do so by using NGOs. They use charity fronts. They use philanthropic foundations to funnel money and assistance in. They work through the unions in the trade labor associations, which are civil society organizations that you can consider in the NGO fold. They work through all of these charities foundations, nonprofits, the NGO sphere in order to run in order to run this election rigging in 1948. So 12 days later, George Kenin writes a memo from the US State Department called the inauguration where it has political warfare. And everyone can look this up online. And he lays out how this is the model blueprint for the American power in the 20th century. And that we need to overcome the basic distinction between peace and war that Americans have long believed there was because the average American does not understand the intricacies of international relations. And if we don't, if we don't seize this initiative to build an organized political warfare apparatus through this State Department intelligence function, then we will lose the American century. It will lose the 20th century to the Bolsheviks or to the British who each have their own Department of Dirty Trix. And so it goes on to say that this is a State Department function. Ideally, it would be within a State Department Bureau of Political Warfare. So I think the director of political warfare is what they wanted to call this until they decided. And in the memo, he says that there are problems with this, which is that because the State Department has provides public audit of its funds, we would not be able to conceal these funds in the State Department budget. So it might be ideal to have an outside intelligence agency to take on this function. And that's why two months later, the CIA was given the plausible deniability doctrine and given delegated these powers by that very author of George Kenned. But at the back of this memo are fascinating exhibits of contemplated ways to structure, recommendations and proposals for structuring this CIA intelligence work through NGOs. And it includes creating, for example, voluntary councils of an outside organization that would not only look to the public like it was a grassroots organization that is helmed by fine-upstanding members of the American establishment or people in great repute. He actually uses the line, members of the American Business Community of the caliber of Allen Dulles. Of course, Allen Dulles was the CIA chief, but they would, a true criminal, right. And the time his brother was running the State Department. But and it goes on to say that it would look to the world like it's an NGO, but it would receive funding from the CIA. It would receive guidance from the CIA and it would constantly coordinate. It was that that very year that the term NGO really became a codified term when the term non-governmental organization was entered into the charter of the UN Declaration on Human Rights in 1948, where the Economic and Social Council was directed to coordinate everything it did with NGOs. And that's really the sort of etymology of that term in terms of its explosions when the UN codified that term. And that's what essentially set off this NGO arms race, this proliferation of cells within American statecraft, the American business community, within the American intelligence community, the national security community, to each create their own cellular circuitry in order to advance their interests. And I can get sort of deeper into that story. If you'd like, I can just take it from history there to their to present. But I feel remiss if I didn't also note that there's a government and there's a business side of it. And the thing that I think a lot of people are missing in this story and the attempt to take on the rogue elements of the NGO Plex is that last time we talked, it was right after USAID had pronounced its closure. And I took what a lot of people, I think thought was a somber tone on that that I was celebrating it shut down, but I was braced for impact about the ramifications of this and how it might play out. And I think I use the term that this is necessary to do this open heart surgery. We also have to ensure that the patient doesn't die on the operating table just because it's the right diagnosis doesn't mean you can set it and forget it. If you don't midwife the process diligently, you could kill the entire American empire. And I bring up that point here because it's not just American intelligence, an American state craft and the state department, the DOD, the CIA. It's also virtually every single major international corporation that we consider to be American that is wrapped up in this NGO Plex. And if you, and I can go through examples of how that manifests, but I can't think of a single industry on that's domiciled in America that people think of as great American companies that is not deeply connected to the NGO Plex. And in some respects, dependent on the NGO Plex to secure their markets, to secure their profitability, to secure their revenues, to secure their interests. And while we are taking on the NGO Plex, there's also this, and now they're going to make their voices heard through lobbying, through pressuring Congress. And this is what we're seeing. The Congress is now looking like they're not going to codify these doge cuts. We saw 26, I think, Republican members of Congress who are saying they're not going to approve the doge cuts around USAID. But a lot of this is, I think, to find the solution that is politically possible. You have to understand, I guess, how the whole ecosystem works in order to provide offer solutions that might have political viability, if that makes sense. Of course, of course it does. So non-governmental is actually a misleading description because they're paraggovernmental. It sounds like. Yes. They're not, I mean, we're led to believe they're like, you know, doctors, that borders or whatever, you know, which I'm not against for the record. But whatever the famous NGO is, going into South Sudan to save people, they're acting totally independent. They're non-governmental. But that, as you just described so capable, that that's a lie. Well, this sort of gets down to the stem cell concept and what type of NGO cell type you're talking about. I'll give you a couple examples. So there are these paraggovernmental ones. Like take, for example, the Open Society Foundation. And then in 1979, according to George Soros, it was to provide a basic attack loophole for his kids. That was the idea that he said. And then it quickly became wrapped up with the U.S. State Department operating in all of the major Cold War hubs, especially in Eastern Europe. And fomenting the turnover of those governments so that they would break away from the Soviet Union and join the U.S. Hungary, Romania, Poland, the whole litany. And meanwhile he was running the quantum fund and his George Soros management fund that was speculating on the foreign currencies of all these governments. So while he's working with the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency and every U.S. embassy and every country in Eastern Europe and using this foundation, this network to influence the course of those events so that their governments would flip. He's using his hedge fund to speculate way before anyone knows that this movement is even being cultivated by the State Department and by his own nonprofits. He's speculating on the direction of those currencies. So he's got insider trading knowledge of everything that's going to happen in these countries. He's sort of like the Nancy Pelosi stock tracker type of thing. But by the 1990s, the Open Society Foundation had become such a powerful force in Washington that Bill Clinton's deputy secretary of state, I think was strobe Talbot, who said we think of the Open Society Foundation as being an independent but allied partner country like the UK or France or Germany. And so we work closely with the Open Society Foundation. We can submit an ally but we have to synchronize U.S. foreign policy with the foreign policy he set out by the Open Society Foundation. This is a quote everyone can look this up. It's on my timeline on X. But so this is in the 1990s, 30 years ago at this point. X. foreign policy is being synchronized with the George Soros policy recommendations. And a lot of this is because it's not just that George Soros is the largest donor to the Democrat Party and Bill Clinton was obviously the Democrat president. George Soros provided two and a half times more than any other single individual to the Democrats in the last election cycle. But it's that in this just the last election. Yeah, for Joe Biden $100 million, I think the second largest was 40. That's crazy. And although that may be the 2020 election actually, I'm referring to those numbers because I think those are the numbers in 2024 pre-election. So they may have been the 2020 election cycle. I'm sure it's comparable for 2024. But so the other part of it though is that the Soros Foundation, so it drafts off of those policies. And I give you some crazy examples of this in Mongolia. There's a particularly perfect example of this. But we'll come back to that in a second. So it's not just that Soros donates to the political candidates who's running for president, who's running for attorney general or who's running for district attorney. It's that the Soros Foundation is also a co-investor and a co-sponsor in government initiatives and government projects. At USAID, you will frequently find almost constantly find that the Open Society Foundation is a donor into USAID initiatives, a donor into State Department initiatives. And this is what you frequently see when a government agency cannot get sufficient funds allocated from Congress. They need to reach into the NGO sphere or into the private sector with multinational companies to effectively co-sponsor and provide the top-up capital to get the amount of money they need to run this operation. That's legal. Not only is it- Can I just fund a war if I want? Can I just send a check to the Pentagon to buy more? I mean, we can have privately funded government. Yeah, we've had it since the banana wars. We've had this relationship for- And Honduras. Yeah, Honduras, Guatemala. This has been a constant feature of American statecraft. Almost since the beginning, which is that you have a government national security interest or a government commercial national interest, but then you also have the profiteers of that government action in the private sector and the for-profit space and also at the NGO layer to the extent that they're getting funded to do this work or it satisfies the wants of the sponsors of the NGOs. So this is what war is a racket was about. You know, the Smelly Butler 1936 book about how all of the major multinational corporations were on the take for World War I. All of them were on the take for, you know, when he's talking about how he toppled governments in South America for, you know, what was it? City national bank and, you know, the petroleum companies and United Fruit and, you know, but may I ask, I mean- national bank and the petroleum companies and the fruit. I have fruit. I mean, I mean, yes, of course I knew that. I read it, but I didn't understand that they are not only the beneficiaries of these policies, but also the funders of the policies. Yes. But the problem with that conceptually is that it puts, it's all beyond democratic control. There's no, I mean, there's no way to vote out whoever George Soros or Larry Fanker, whatever. There's just kind of, right? Right. Well, it's a tectonic plate. It's something that shapes the fabric of what we consider democracy to be. And I think arming everyone in America with the knowledge of that topography can shape the kinds of democratic action that you propose. Give me an example. I mean, this was just yesterday. The nation of El Salvador announced a 30% tax on every on all foreign funding of domestic NGOs within El Salvador. This is a shot heard around the world. There've been many attempts by countries to contain the NGO Plex. Yeah. Most famously in Hungary, Hungary, Slovakia, Serbia. Every time they've been confronted with street protests and attempts to pressure the parliament using civil disobedience and these same sort of state department, USAID, Soros Foundation type, rent a riots. We saw that in Slovakia, Serbia. In Hungary, when they passed their NGO transparency bill, it was blocked by the EU. The EU intervened and said that you cannot enforce this NGO transparency law because what? Yes. Yes. And they threatened to cut them off of EU funding. If the Hungarians aren't allowed to know where the money's coming from into their own country. Yeah. Yeah. They called it the Russian law, by the way, the Russia law. Yeah. It's bad. Therefore, it's Russian. Well, the idea was Russia had banned USAID, had banned the national down for democracy. If you think in 2015 around then this was after the pussy riot incident. Yeah. This is sort of a little bit pre-Nubalny when the regime change was sort of from the right wing national side. We attempted to sort of left wing anti-fa type coup in Russia through the whole pussy riot and associated streets. Well, that was an organic artistic expression. There's no choice. I mean, you can look up online the lead singers, pictures with Tony Blinken and standing at the State Department podium and all the national down for democracy literature on it and the USAID. Just look up USAID. That wasn't just like, especially empowering form of feminism. It was tactical. It was tactical feminism. And it always is with it, always is. That's right. Well, you've heard a lot of complaining in the last couple of weeks since Donald Trump announced his new import tariffs on foreign-made things. A lot of people don't like it, but the companies who make American products in America with American materials, they're pretty happy. They're not affected by this. They've been doing the right thing since the beginning. They're not paying tariffs because again, they're making American products for Americans. What he's saying is a perfect example. Nobody's safe is not making it stuff in some foreign country. It's not made in China or Vietnam or India. It's made right here with American steel. They employ skilled American craftsmen who do an amazing job. That's why they make the best safes. There are a highest standard of quality and security. So you don't have to worry that when you lock up things that you really care about, they're getting it stolen. They're not. These are safes you can trust. I keep my father's shotguns in a Liberty Safe at my house. When you buy Liberty, you support American jobs. You protect what matters most. Choose American Steel, American Craftsmanship, choose Liberty. Visit LibertySafe.com for more. But what happened was, after all this stuff, Russia passed this basically banned foreign NGOs or at least banned a huge subset and required all these transparency. around it and they banned USAID and NED. And so when Hungary and Slovakia and Serbia and all these Eastern European countries who were in the post-Soviet orbit tried to pass transparency laws so that they could get a sense of how much of their own civil society cellular body was actually foreign assets of a foreign government. This was called, these were referred to as Russian law, the Russian law because Russia had done this. But think about this. This is so insane. I don't. But think about that framing. And you can check out these protests online. They're hilarious. It's people protesting in the streets so that they are not allowed to know foreign funding of their own societies. I demand. I am not allowed to know. Put the blindfolders on me. I'm not allowed to know whether the newspapers I read, whether the union I'm a part of, whether the lawyers association I'm a part of, whether the private company that pays my paycheck, whether the public health sector, my hospitals, whether that is funded by a foreign government and how much is funding. And you know, the Russians are not complaining about that because the money is not coming largely. If the money was largely coming from the Russians, the EU and the US State Department would be demanding this. We have this in the United States. It's called a far registration, the Foreign Agents Registration Act. We consider that to be a criminal violation where you can spend five years in jail if you you don't file a far registration. But if Hungary or Serbia or Slovakia tries to pass a foreign agent registrations act law there, we call that an attack on democracy. Why? Because it reveals, it takes the mask off of the NGOplex and reflects and shows to the people what it really is. It is the long arm of US intelligence. It is the long arm of US Statecraft. And it is the long arm of that corporate financial donor drafter class with all of their own secular private interest. If I get a interject and say, you know, what I find so infuriating is that none of this helps the America that I live in or want to live in. I mean, a lot of the agendas being pushed are not just like, you know, we want to grow our bananas in your banana favorable climate or we want cheaper coffee or, you know, we want your oil fields. Like pushing stuff that is just terrible off like blowing up families attacking Christianity. It's like, why does it have to be that too? Why that agenda? This is why where it gets really complicated. The idea behind this positive synergy between the corporate sponsored NGOs and the government sponsored NGOs and them all working together as a common blob was that if we secure American business in a country, American contracts, American rights to minerals or American rights to mines, we're boxing out the Russians and the Chinese. That's not a crazy goal. Not a crazy goal. And that, however, gives a license to some of the dirtiest stuff. And this total profiteering, especially because the multinational corporations have no, we're still living in Milton Friedmanland. And this is something Milton Friedman was a huge influence on me as a kid. Huge, huge, huge. I want me to all 10 hours of free to choose. I think he's an incredibly, I think he's a high integrity guy and he means what he says. But I think he fooled a lot of conservatives with this concept of maximizing total shareholder value, which is now codified effectively into our corporate law that you have a, it's the law, the law, you have a statutory, you have a duty to maximize total shareholder value. That does not mean value for Americans when your markets are abroad and your labor is abroad and your factories are abroad, but you are getting billions of dollars from the US government to advance your own private interests and you are toppling many solid parts of the world order to do so. You're overthrowing governments, you're bribing media, you're controlling organized crime groups and conflict zones and all of the dirty work that goes into making the sausage in a lot of these countries. It's not trickling down per Ronald Reagan to the people that live there. These companies all got extremely rich while the heartland turned into the rust belt. And it's so to me, it's no surprise when you see that John Bolton on Pierce Morgan held up his USAID hand grenade when he was the head of USAID policy and budget on a Ronald Reagan. He showed this a few months ago on Pierce Morgan that his parting gift from USAID after he left running the policy and budget there. John Bolton, humanitarian assistance guy, was a USAID hand grenade. So that was the parting gift they gave, my golden hand grenade with his name engraved in it. But that is... And what did that imply? But he was trying to blow up USAID or that they're in fact using fire. Well, I think the idea was that they are hard charging about it. But what it represents to me is this development defense, they call it the 3D's, the development defense development. The idea that USAID is absolutely critical to US military operations. It's absolutely critical to US diplomatic operations. It's absolutely critical to US intelligence operations which supports the diplomacy and defense. And so while you're masquerading as this humanitarian NGO sponsor, you're the embodiment of the hand grenade. And that to me, that's a Reaganite philosophy that we're fighting the ghost of. This idea that you deserve a slot within this government apparatus, US government apparatus, when you are not representing the interests of the United States. Or at least there are no conditions on it. There's no bounds on it other than you need to be in the good graces of that government. For example, the US embassy in Brasilia did nothing to stop Brazil's attack on X or Brazil's seizure of assets. Exactly. That's exactly right. But this goes back a really long time. I mean, Gonzalez, US citizen was murdered by the Ukrainian government and like nobody said a word about it. The US ambassador to Ukraine didn't say a word. None of the million NGOs populated by Americans in Ukraine said a word like, I don't see how they're on the side of America at all. Right. Right. Well, the source example is really interesting. Can I share a few anecdotes? I hope you will. So when I went into the Wickeleaks archive to look at all the State Department cables that referenced George Soros or the Open Society Foundation or any of its associated groups, the Open Society institution, the Open Society Forum, I was surprised when I saw the communications in the State Department cables start in 1973 because the Open Society Foundation did not start until 1979. And when I looked at the State Department cables, they were all related to Soros associates, which was the firm operated by George Soros's older brother Paul Soros who is, you know, according to his New York Times, obituary, one of the greatest titans of the ship, shipping and port and infrastructure development world. And Paul Soros is all over these State Department cables in tons of countries, a Gabon, Iran. Remember, this is pre-1970, is this pre-revolution? Yeah. And so the State Department is working with Soros associates, Paul Soros, in order to secure contracts for him, in order to secure favorable loan terms to foreign governments, and in order to intervene on the bidding process for port construction for lucrative port deals, I think one in Gabon was, I think, like, a $700 million to a billion port project, huge money for Gabon, a project in Gabon in the early 1970s. And one of these state department cables is really interesting. It's the US Embassy there. And they are talking about how three senior executives from Brown and Root are going to be coming to Gabon that week and are looking to have arrangements made to meet with, I think, the president of the country and other influential leaders in government and in civil society. And for the embassy to arrange, you know, everything from their travel to their hotel, to introducing them to all the senior leaders in the country. Brown and Root was working together with Soros Associates on this port project, and they were bidding against other foreign infrastructure development companies from other countries. And one of the cables basically suggests that the embassy should relay back to Soros and Brown and Root, the status of the bid going to them and anything favorable that can be done to nudge, though that contract going to Brown and Root and Soros. Now, what's interesting about this is a few things. So this is the example of what you were talking about, which is we're doing this because we want to stop, you know, there's a big fight over Africa with the Russians and with the Chinese all throughout the Cold War. You know, a lot of Africa decided with Russia and the Russian communism was seen as an egalitarian counterweight to a sort of racist United States and there was a big diplomacy push there. So getting Brown and Root and Soros to control the infrastructure and the country and to get those contracts and to get the proceeds and remits was advancing US interests under US national security and US national interests, which means there's a state department interest in doing favors for Soros and Brown and Root. Now, Brown and Root, which would later become Halliburton or Brown and Root is, I guess, Halliburton, I guess acquired Brown and Root. Yeah, Kellogg Brown and Root. Yes. Right. Which of course is, you know, Dick Cheney was the, I think, CEO and president. And Brown and Root and the JFK files, it was very interesting. The ones that were declassified just just a few months ago by Tulsi Gabbard, they have a whole section on the CIA's all the CIA influence nodes over Brown and Root. And it was fascinating. I believe both Brown, senior and junior held covert security clearances with the Central Intelligence Agency. There's a memo in these new un-redacted JFK files. And it was a CIA internal fact check, a crisis communications. How do we respond to this new piece in Ramparts magazine called this called Brown and Root CIA Dimensions? And, you know, so this is the Houston Republican power, CIA power base. This has been the big power base of the Republican Party for almost 100 years now. This oil giant oil zone. Yes, exactly. So no matter how you feel about Donald Trump, it's hard to deny that his second term has been a whirlwind. It's amazing how fast this administration is advancing its agenda, putting illegal aliens, slashing government waste, and entirely new trade strategy, known as ever seen anything like it. They are not messing around. Now, many people are thrilled by this fast start, but it's going to take a lot more than this to achieve the ultimate goal. And that's why our friends, the Heritage Foundation, are mobilizing supporters, patriots across the country to support this administration and the broader conservative movement. And they need your help to do that. You can go to heritage.org-survey to complete their national survey on Donald Trump's second term agenda. What you tell them will help their team work with the White House to make the president's campaign promises a reality. They used to work at Heritage 35 years ago, gave me my first job. I've always been grateful for that. Heritage is not like every other think tank in DC, almost all of which are part of the problem. Heritage is fighting the problem. I can say that. Go to heritage.org-survey to help them fill out the survey. Heritage.org-survey. And so, Ramparts writes this piece, and it accuses this CI of running this vast network through the petroleum industry and through a web of NGOs and trade associations all over Houston. And it focuses on this Brown and Root Network, because Brown and Root also had something called the Brown Foundation, which was a corporate sponsored NGO. And in this, they actually revealed that both Brown, Senior, and Brown Jr. had covert security clearances for work with the Central Intelligence Agency. So while you have one of the world's premier infrastructure and development firms, which would later be going to work with Soros in Africa, and then would later spawn Vice President Dick Cheney and Liz Cheney who started off her career in USAID and comes from that same, you know, Halliburton, Brown and Root lineage. They've direct ties all over the CIA. And I guess I bring this up to say that in addition to that, you had this web of adjacent NGOs around statecraft there. So for example, in that same files, again, the CIA is doing an internal fact check in this memo, where they say, Ramparts is accused of these people being CIA. And it's a memo, I think, to the one of the local direction saying, here's, here's, we've reviewed the files. Here's what's true in false about the Ramparts article. And in one of these, they described something called the Vernon Fund, which was a private philanthropy. Well, it was created by the Central Intelligence Agency to look to the public like a private foundation. And it was set up to fund the webs of teachers unions all throughout the world. They sponsored something called the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession. The CIA was running a initiative at the time to control the education space during the Cold War to stop the spread of communist teachings or communist sympathizing teachings and curricula, especially in Cold War conflict zones all over Europe, all over Africa, over Latin America. And so to do that, to control, to make sure that students and young people and every person in society who comes up through the education system is ideologically aligned against communism. They had to control the teachers unions and what was being taught, what was being promoted. And I bring this up again, I hate communism, but all this was repurposed against right wing populism when Trump won in 2016 to notice because instead of this same blob being threatened from its communist socialist left, it was being threatened from its populist nationalist right. But so the CIA, so in this memo, the CIA says, yeah, the right about the Vernon Fund, Ramparts is right. That was ours. We set it up to look like a private philanthropy. We recruited the daughter of the Texas governor to bundle money to the World Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession in order to influence the National Education Association and create, I think it was like 140 different trade associations that they all work through. Now the National Education Association is the largest of the teaching union associations. And the World Confederation Organization of Organizations, the teaching profession is still around today. It's called Education International. They rebranded the name, but it's the same organization. And by the way, in the CIA files, they explicitly say the president of the World Confederation Organizations, the teaching profession, has a CIA covert clearance to do this work. The treasure, the executive secretary. So the thing is funded by the CIA, by an NGO that was actually created by the CIA, the senior leadership of the trade association doing the work, our CIA at every part of the layer, but how many people in education international, how many teachers in that union, you think, know that story, how many fifth grade teachers, how many administrators at the union level, how many people in the schools know that? So when you see education international today, come out in Germany, because it branches in every country in Germany, education internationals come out and said, AFD, no one affiliated with AFD should be allowed to be a teacher in Germany. And they petitioned the German government to not allow AFD at any of the... Can have a job if you vote for the party. Right. But this is exactly what our CIA has been calling for because AFD has been trying to revive the Nord Stream pipeline and trying to restore relations with Russia. So from the national security side of this, there's a predicate to say, yeah, we're authorized around this operation. But what do you do there? Now you've got the AFD, which is the most popular party in Germany, right now in polling. It's got, I think, 26%, they doubled their votes in the recent election, but since then polling shows that they are now the most popular party in Germany, they were declared an extremist organization by their own national security state, which is effectively our national security state. We gave birth to Germany as a unified country in the 1990s and midwifeed its entire intelligence apparatus. The center of US intelligence in the Cold War was in Germany. And so you have this blob interest in banning AFD, the German government declares the most popular party in the country an extremist group. If the definition of extreme is that it is a departure from what's popular. And so by its very definition, it's a contradiction is what I'm saying it there. But that, and thank God for Marco Rubio and Senator Tom Cotton to his credit was fantastic on this. He directing, he in Tulsi Gabbard, I think directed Tulsi Gabbard at ODNI to threaten to discontinue intelligence, sharing with German intelligence for this domestic surveillance, because it's extremist label allowed the German government to spy on every member of the AFD as if they were al-Qaeda. And so because of US diplomatic pressure from our State Department, our ODNI, our Congress, Germany has temporarily put that in the enforcement of their surveillance dimension on pause. But what I'm getting at is this is a CI proprietary, education international, who's doing active work to do exactly what the Bill Burns CIA, the John Brann and CIA once done in Germany. And of course, who was the US ambassador to Germany while this all played out with the Nordstrom pipeline blowing up, it was Amy Gutman. My dean at the University of Pennsylvania, Amy Gutman, when I was there 20 years ago, she was the dean then, then she became the US ambassador to Germany. I had the State Department in Germany during the Biden administration. And meanwhile, what's the University of Pennsylvania doing? It's housing the Penn Biden Center, which is this major foreign policy coordinating note at the university layer. Again, universities are just super NGOs. The universities will organize the international exchanges of ideas with civil society in all these foreign countries. They will produce the white papers that get picked up by the media. They will liaise with meet with governing officials to advise on policy, economic policy, don't you know, in the region. This is the whole Jeffrey Sachs Harvard Institute of International Development and it's all tax free. That's the part that, I mean, because you began this history of the NGO and thank you for doing it with reference to the tax code, the introduction of the income tax 1913 and then the tax exempt statutes of 1917 right in the first world war. And that's surprisingly, but like isn't the whole idea of it my understanding of a 501c3, it will I know because I ran one, the idea is that this helps America. We're encouraging charity, but you're describing nonprofits that are arms of the Intel community or, you know, working to increase profit to American businesses that may not actually really be American and publicly treated companies not American. That's one by the sovereign wealth funds of nine different countries. You know, it's like, the whole thing is fake. So what in 2025 is the justification for continuing to subsidize these, because I mean, a tax exemption is a subsidy. In fact, someone's got a running government, someone's got to fund the patent office if it's not you, it's going to be me. So, but why should we subsidize these things? They get three reasons. National security, national interest and securing export markets. And, and you know, the idea is, is what does America look like if we don't do this? We're in a competition right now with Huawei in the, in the telecom space in the IT infrastructure space. Major State Department initiatives to try to get neutral third party governments to do away with Huawei and sign up with AT&T or if not that other kind of 5G light providers like like LG and Nokia in Finland and South Korea to, so that at least it's not China Huawei. And there's lots of reasons given for this. But the idea is, if you can, if you can get AT&T to get those contracts, well, ATT is an American company and this will help American GDP and this will help American jobs. And so like a great example, this is what just happened in Syria. So, there's been this big fight over this, this group, the, well, also, in the Syria has, we just lifted sanctions on Syria last month. Yes, how about algalani, the ISIS commander turned al Qaeda commander, turned Idlib rebel, moderate rebel leader, who became, you know, the facto head of state in Syria. rebel uh... moderate rebel uh... leader you know who who became you know they have the fact i had a state in seria now meeting with the was president yes meeting yes me with the u.s president uh... meeting with every every major world leader uh... the u.s. just declared that we're lifting sanctions on uh... uh... on seria after seria pledged to open up its mark it to basically use u.s. and western uh... companies and contractors for its services rather than russian or chinese ones so for example one of the pledges was to use eighteen t for its wireless and telecom services rather than Huawei and where they're going to buy their pagers it's all that it's and yeah it goes that saying that when you know the state department lobbies to allow eighteen t to do your your wireless infrastructure that you know that we're monitoring it of course right but you can see how like what would america look like if eighteen t's not there's i think what's twenty five million people are so in in seria so eighteen t is just secured twenty five million customers effective right uh... at the at the you know barrel of a gun effectively with the they drafted off of the u.s. defense department who funded yep the paramilitaries in seria they drafted off of u.s. a.d. and the billions we've funneled into seria they've drafted off of state department diplomacy on the behalf uh... and you know uh... a great example of this is let me just say i mean i well i definitely don't think that the isis guy is in any real sense better than bishala side you know the ophthalmologist that's just my opinion uh... i don't think that we should be friends with the isis guy or the alkyta guy after they murdered three thousand americans i don't understand that i do understand it but it doesn't do it that bothers me on the other hand since we are doing that i think it's great that eighteen t's getting the contract it don't have a problem with that and it what you're describing is a pretty conventional process for the u.s. state department white house and d.o.d. all kind of combined forces to help american business abroad in general great i don't like the constellation the mushy constellation of quote non-profits that operate in a very shadowy way like why do we need them for this let's stick with the series example for a second and go over one of the shadius of the non-profits which is the u.s. Institute of peace u.s. Institute of peace now by the way if you fly into d.c. international airport just like the closest airport to any city in american it's right there right across the river and you come in from the north you fly directly over the u.s. Institute of peace and it's a kind of clam shell tight it's a beautiful building it's a modern building what's with probably only pretty modern building in washington and you think yourself what the hell is that and where they get the money what is that well international peace is a a funny piece and international peace is a funny history with u.s. intelligence work in the jk files for example in the recent declassifications it showed a group that the c.i.a. infiltrated and directed called the catholic association of international peace and there are all these files that show that yes we we have our assets in here and they're doing this for this the carnegan down there for international peace not the catholic association we're not should be spent second international peace group the carnegan down for international peace um was run from twenty fourteen to twenty twenty one by bill burns the guy who would leave the carnegan down for international peace to run the central intelligence agency what qualifies you as running the endowment for international peace as your very next job you hadn't working government for seven years you were cold what were you need never worked at the c.i.a. formally he was in the political affairs section which according to the jk files forty seven percent of every person in the in the political affairs section in nineteen sixty one uh was not actually working in the state department political section they were actually called uh uh confidential american sources which is the term for c.i.a. agents operating under diplomatic cover saying they work for the state still the case today it's a joke in d.c. what's your dad do oh he works at the state department okay yeah people say that about me yeah i don't i don't blame them for for thinking it be i mean it's it's so pervasive and of course who was the head of political affairs for the bi demonstration victorion unit yeah you know and uh who would then go on to you know be on the board of the national down for democracy which is another group that was spun out in nineteen eighty three by the Reagan administration when they were trying to get the c.i.s old powers back but the democrats in congress were blocking that because of the the c.i.s work against the anti-war faction uh in the the democrat party um during the sixties and seventies so in nineteen eighty three Reagan creates net nineteen eighty four they create the u.s and soup piece the u.s and soup piece has had had this crazy showdown with the u.s federal government recently and it's an unbelievable drama that's been unfolding now for several months so the u.s.s Institute of Peace was you know was chartered by congress in nineteen eighty four uh in order to do sort of uh think of it like the national down for democracy uh but but more is george or well in charge of naming these groups i mean national down for democracy is subverts democracy all these peace groups are like aggressively anti-peace so one of the easiest decisions you're going to make this week is to make your home secure with simply safe the moment you arm your system your family and everything you work for is protected and you can focus on what matters you can leave the house without worrying that someone is going to break in and steal your stuff violate your sanctuary because the best security system in the country is watching millions of americans use simply safe and enjoy the peace of mind it creates now a traditional burglar alarm only goes off when someone breaks into your house that's not good enough smash to window is already in your basement simply safe prevents burglaries before they happen it's got a i-powered cameras and live professional monitoring agents so it leaves nothing to chance plan start at about a dollar per day plus a 60 day satisfaction guarantee or you get your money back check it out at simply safe dot com slash tucker go to simply safe dot com slash tucker to 50% off a new system with professional monitoring and your first month free that simply safe dot com slash tucker there's no safe like simply safe well you know the quote by the national democracy founder i believe in nineteen eighty six new york times was that it was uh... it would be terrible for groups to be seen as subsidized by the central intelligence agency we saw that happen in the nineteen sixties where it was revealed groups were were funded by the ci in a cost embarrassment uh... that's why the endowment was created as little a direct quote saying that the endowment was created to fund the groups that would be it would be embarrassing for them to for it to be publicly revealed that they got ci funding and of course it was conceived in the office of of reggae and ci a and william kacie and uh... rame and green there's a whole ci back story to that the whole net thing but in nineteen eighty four another layer at of gong go so the essence of peace was set up to be to be a national number democracy but really focused on conflict zones in those where's national number democracy operates everywhere though operate in you know very heavily in hungry or um... you know but Brazil places where there's not real dark you know uh... terrorist conflict or super hyperactive d-o-d operations for some so they in those places it's a it's a different track of influence for the angios because they're working with these communities in these they're working with the farmers where the the coca leaves for cocaine are being grown they're working uh... you know they're working you mentioned coffee u.s.a.d is spent hundreds of millions of dollars uh... on the coffee trade sector and u.s.a.d uh... does all this joint work with starbucks all this joint work with kurig they operate in conflict zones in the drug zones in columbia and peru the central afghan republic um... sedan and what they're doing here is sorry they're well i i got distracted by the coffee thought sorry but the u.s.n.st. of peace is doing is they're building giant networks and serving as a backchannel diplomacy they're doing fieldwork so they are if you're in foggy bottom or lany lee vrygenia if you want to know what's happening on the ground in seria you need the people in the field to report it to you you need either the u.s.n.b.c or you need the n.g.o.'s connected to the embassy to provide the fieldwork uh... we want to know what is happening economically in this region which is the economic you know uh... breadbasket that's supporting the u.s. military operations or the mercenary troops so that we can keep them funded we want to keep the industry in afghanistan going the industry in seria in these seconds so the u.s.n.st. of peace will do those surveys will work with the local populations they'll build giant networks and uh... you know in june twenty three the u.s.n.st. of peace uh... after the taliban took over afghanistan they wrote uh... a piece called why the taliban's successful opium ban is bad for afghanistan and bad for the world and they open it called on the taliban we're not going to go to the opium yes mike it's a problem right but the opium was funding that the entire paramilitary network in seria you know everyone says oh isis is traffic and drugs uh... al-Qaeda traffic and drugs well guess what isis now kida uh... with it with the full backing of the biden government just successfully overthrew the bina misterations top enemy in the region and uh... now have opened up all the markets to chevron and atian t and uh... what i'm saying is is they were openly cut this same group that is working with the taliban networks in these afghan special forces and is deeply deeply involved in seria is openly calling and this is not that they got busted paying these taliban officials when when trump tried to assert control over the u s and soup because it's chartered by congress it has fifteen members of its board three of them are mandatory the secretary of state the secretary of defense and the president of the national defense university are three reserve spots so that is the u censtew peace required on the board is the secretary of war the the head of the uh... the war institute and uh... the secretary of state and then there are twelve political point the spots now the trump administration tried to assert control over the u s and stu of peace as it is statutorily entitled to do and the response from the u s and stu of peace was to barricade the doors to delete uh... those said a terabyte worth of financial data which does says it recovered and showed payments to those very taliban networks that they were saying keep the drugs flowing and so that evidently according to to the doge team they found weapons caches inside like a like a full military you know they found weapons inside the institute of peace that was what doge reported as they said back to our well now right the peace people are stockpiling weapons but recently uh... so this is gone to the courts because you know the whole blob resistance has been trying to stop all these shutdowns at every layer uh... the outside general counsel for the u s and stu of peace uh... has he was been the the outside general counsel for since nineteen eighty six just two years so he said the guy in and who's the head lawyer there uh... has been the head lawyer there since just two years after was found it since the mid nineteen eighties uh... so has been you know midwife in the the legal dark dark arts of this thing uh... since almost the day it was born he's one of that who i believe has uh... spearheaded or been leading this this lawsuit to stop the the federal governments because the the trump administration cleared the board the u s and should be so not even allow the trump appointed board members words present even going the building that's where the federal police had to be i had to come in and and but what happened was is that same lawyer also happens to represent the wireless trade association uh... in in the u s and and eighteen t in that whole network so while they are working for regime change in seria while the u s and stu pieces taking u s taxpayer money fifty five million a year to build up this network of paramilitary groups and all these economic assistance programs and midwife in the political negotiations of all and creating a unified cohesive block against the the s o government in seria with u s s u s and su piece funds the same lawyer who's says now successfully sued because judge barrel how blocked the trump administrations attempt now now we're back to square one with that he simultaneously is representing the wireless trade association where seria just you know turned over its idea infrastructure today t t so we just think about that you've got you got the u s instead of peace organizing this regime change in seria including using you know these narco traffic drugs while calling for the narco networks to keep going and simultaneously the senior executives effectively and i was seen you're at these out top outside council but senior executives effectively representing the companies that the direct beneficiaries of this regime change action so it doesn't matter if it's good for u s national security or u s national interest to top of bushel side because they have a fundamentally unique and singular benefit whether it's good for us or not which is that they get rich from it remember reading about uh... the fascists and uh... one of the one of the criticism is that i thought really resonated was they eliminated the difference between the state and you know they were they were socialists truly and uh... in germany and in Italy and there was there was cut you couldn't sort of tell where the german government ended in crops began and you don't mean and that's bad yes i thought was bad then i think it's bad now and i hate to see it happen here what's funny to say that because last week at the council and foreign relations uh... think the panel was tighter reflections on a reflections on the post-Soviet era and implications for the modern day is council and foreign relations and one of the questions asked the panelists direct that would directly was there was a deep state in russia in the nineteen nineties these oligarchs yes and uh... we lost control over russia they're basically now jising trump to pooten and they're saying we'd we'd all this control we total control over russia during the borsie elton period and we had all these relationships with the russian oligarchs but then pooten had a natural advantage as being the head of state was somehow able to take over the russian deep state and then we lost control over russia's is this is right this is like the heart of it that nobody ever says it's pooten's decision to decapitate the oligarchy that's the reason they hate what they say is that he also co-opted it uh... and got the oligarchy working for him rather than for outside in the meantime of russian economy recovery life expectancy went up and alcoholism went down and like became a beautiful country the all-archy wasn't serving russia that's kind of the point well and the punchline to this is at the end of setting this question up the the the guy council farm relations ask uh... so with those lessons given that that's what happened with pooten how can we preserve the deep state against trump to save so that the deep state can save us the direct look and this is sick but again look at like you know to bays in the russian oligarchs that were working directly with the with us a id in the Harvard Institute for national development and it's the same thing with with brown and root we that story of brown and ruten soreau's in in gabon in the nineteen seventies it was the same thing in russia there were where we justified because it was in u.s. national security and national interests to uh... make russia a democracy into privatized all their state own assets us a id paid up half a billion dollars to the Harvard Institute for international development again another one of these universities that's delegated by the u.s. government to go deeper into russian society than the u.s. government was wanted to be seen doing very clever name right u.s. agency for international development pays the Harvard Institute for international development is just a Harvard spawn of u.s. a.d. in order to work with to bays and all these uh... you know russian oligarchs so that the russian oligarchs got rich selling at discount bargain basement prices all these russian state held assets exactly in non competitive bids were only two outside bidders were allowed to participate the Harvard management fund for the Harvard endowment and the george sores quantum fund so it's just looting it's looting and by the way it it really the country what i mean to look at the numbers like the life expectancy for men in russian you know nineteen ninety six was like fifty five i mean it was it was awful awful to do that to people like what did you ever drussian do wrong you know they live through seventy years of communism and this is what you do them once they're quote liberated it's like really a moral crime you and and part of that issue is is as they were driving our own country on a similar path exactly they expressed the exact same contempt that someone would try to do something to stop it and the other thing is is they fully acknowledged it was a deep state before putting they were just mad that they lost control of the deep state which is why they were so white a lot of these actions by the the early trump administration have terrified them around co-opting parts of the business community exactly they hate for example Elon musk they made this whole campaign to drive elan you know uh away or to go after tesla they the reaction to jeff basos for example and you know his posture around reorienting the washington post and sort the bill crystal class was apoplectic that these commercial drivers in the sort of business community but really these are this is the private for-profit sector that they would go along with trumps farm policy agenda with trumps reforms maybe to be in trumps good graces but the fact is is that that state which was such a powerful asset to them they do not want that handed off to somebody who might oppose them the same reason that they didn't want back gates at the justice department they weaponize that justice department under mare garland uh... they don't want that baton handed off to someone else's not that they have a problem with corruption at the justice department they want to monopoly on that corruption so you you're describing the mobilization of you know all the various arms the u.s government but the NGO community against russia and i thought you made a really really wise observation that to you make that prudence original sin wasn't really lusting after poland that's a lot it was kicking out the all-garks and taking control of his own country which a lot of people hated in the west so here's the part where i feel like the NGO's destabilize the united states like the war against russia has been waged for over ten years now really by the NGO's yes completely and and they were you know as we discussed they were authorized deputized to do that we talked about the harvard the harvard and down at the harvard institute for national development uh... by the open society foundation which was simultaneously doing its civil society work funding scientists funding universities uh... funding the intellectual class funding the students and then simultaneously sources operating a hedge fund that is buying up the assets of the russian government and uh... you know it's a little of the failed soviet state yes yes and this relationship is i mentioned to you uh... just now that there's a funny story about sores and mongolia in the state department mongolia that is like almost the perfect encapsulation of this um... to to see how this plays out in every country whether whether it's russia or whether it's poland or whether it's hungry you name it but mongolia had discovered in the early two thousands of the world's largest copper mine scottie we owe to it to you go mind and uh... this was by far the the biggest mind ever discovered in my goal is the biggest mind in the world that primarily copper some gold too and uh... a company called iven hoe went into uh... negotiate a deal for the rights over that mine in tandem with mongolian government and the u.s. so i found this in a state department cable looking up all the soreau senate open society foundation things that i believe the cable is from two thousand seven and it describes how uh... this deal is it could you'll billions of billions of dollars and would can massively transform the entire mongolia mongolian economy could like double their entire g d p with a single mine how there was an interest in making sure that this mine was acquired by western companies rather than chinese or a rush ones and in the context of this the state department references the in the open a pivotal open society foundation mongolia uh... memo that had caught fire in the mongolian press and was weighing heavily on public conversation about whether or not the uh... mongolian government would sign this deal with with with with with the company for this and the soreau's foundation rights and the state department backs this in this cable they basically say yes this is all correct we had these should have done this load basically the mongolian government wanted deal terms and was about to pass something it hastily in parliament to secure a deal that the open society foundation said was too extractive on behalf of mongolian government that basically the mongolian government had problems with corruption uh... they also mentioned that the the deal might have environmental impact in terms of the the the mine and in its environmental impact on the ecosystem of mongolia and they give seven reasons in this memo that that the mongolian parliament should not uh... has to be stopped from from doing this this deal on these terms so this is a and can't assess the mind is in mongolian that's in mongolian and the mongolian parliament is the mongolian government so george soreau's who's from hungry but has pretty shan American citizenship is telling the mongolians they shouldn't be able to do what they want with their own mind maybe i'll start with the punchline first to make it but it's uh... the presumption there is a bit much the punchline is in two thousand nine george sort of the george soreau's management fund purchased in absolutely huge stake in that very company come on yes yes it changes named a reo tinto but it was called ivanhoe while it was negotiating this this deal now the open society foundation at they published a hundred seventy four page document uh... which went through everything they did inside mongolia to kill the the to kill the deal in two thousand seven and what they described is that they networked with all these mongolian members of parliament they use their media NGO there you know there they're non-profit organizations or advocacy groups uh... there they are their environmental NGOs to argue that the deal should be killed on environmental grounds and this culminated in sort the source foundation takes credit for its spawning street protests that destabilize the mongolian government and incentivize parliament the parliament to not not ink this deal and again the source foundation logic was that it was too extractive on the part of the mongolian government the mongolian government was getting too good a deal here from this on their own mind in their country yes in their country and george soreau's did not own enough of it so so the u.s. embassy in mongolia is working with the source network now they're doing a national interest national security grounds they're saying hey if a western company doesn't get this china's right next to our mongolia they're big in the you know they're big in the minerals the nettle space we don't want to lose this mind the biggest copper mine the world to a chinese competitor we want to make sure a wester gets the deal but the open society foundation which is underneath the so now it's the nonprofit side of the soreau's management fund the not the the open society foundation is saying hey that kill this deal because the company is not getting enough money out of this as soon as they kill that and get more profits secured for the the mining company the soreau's management fund buys up the equity way before everybody else you can read about this and it this uh... that that you know i would have with the mind he would have like doubled his profit i think it went from nine cents the seventeen cents before a deal was even inked or before they even got to a uh... one of the development stages of it simply because everybody else hearing the news about this rushed into it but sort of sinner a ball up the stock because his own NGOs were on the ground midwiping the entire process with the full force and credit of the u.s. government driving going to happen in your cranes oh i'm sure it's happened on the crane rebuilt the crane rebuilding fund from black rock i mean this is so if i want a piece of the trillion dollars that's going to be spent to make you create a country again and to you know and and a piece of its resources which are substantial then i'm probably going to use in geos on my behalf right yes and this is where you get this curious line around gongos government organized and geos and on-go's i guess you know these all-a-gargh organized NGOs and where they all sort of meet in the middle and where they meet in the middle is i guess what we just call politics the topography of political factions in the u.s. in the sense that every major company has uh... has an interest in sponsoring NGOs that regardless of whether they believe in the mission of it they advance something that helps that the business side of the so i mentioned brown and root had the brown foundation and the you know the sorros management fund has the open society foundation and you know microsoft has the you know the the bill monday gates foundation now but uh... the last one was it was a little bit tongue cheek but And, you know, Microsoft has the, you know, the Bill and Linda Gates Foundation. It's because, no, but the last one was a little bit tongue-in-cheek. But what I'm getting at here is, like, take the example of this Mongolian mine. They sort of didn't care about the environmental impact of that Mongolian mine. The fact that they could astroturf environmental protesters to take to the streets and to create a human rights predicate as to why the international community should intervene to stop the Mongolian government from signing this deal. Was simply an NGO, or it was simply an, now if the US government did that, that would have to come straight from the sea eye. That's going to be a covert action if you're going to run through exact groups. But if you have an ostensibly public one, but you're not seeing the classified state department cables or whatever's sea eye underneath that, making an argument from their Asia desk. Well, this is going to help US national security because that's less minerals for China. But then, Soros is using that money and sponsoring the... It's unbelievable. So the real fear, though, is that that can happen inside our borders. Yes. That this combination of, you know, government, actress, strict government actress from the executive branch agencies and NGOs collude to, like, take down a president. Yeah. Exactly. And so, well, that's correct, right? So these states will among only are right here in the US. Yes. And there are all the same groups. They're all the same groups. And a great example this way, we have time about the US Institute of Peace. The US Institute of Peace, we talked about in the context of Syria and how they were openly funding the Taliban and lobbying the Taliban to keep 95% of the world's opium flowing after the Taliban took over. Now, high heroin prices would go if they shut that down. I mean, I see their point. Right. Yeah, okay. Good point. Yeah, more further. It's unbelievable. But they... So they are involved in these Astra-Turf NGO rent-to-Riots very heavily. If you go to the publications page, the Institute of Peace, yes, the SEO-sense of peace. Now, you have to understand, they have a term for this. Get ready for it. Non-violent action. That's the term. Now, if you have to say that you're nonviolent, you're probably a little... You know, I'm not like non-violently drinking this water right now. But you have to understand where this came. So this came from this same military network. We talked about how they were at the point for this was 1948. The UN Declaration of Human Rights forbids military conquest. The territorial accession by military force. UN Declaration of Human Rights... The UN Charter that 1948 establishes the NGO framework at the international level intergovernmental. 1948 is also when the CIA inaugurates organized political warfare through the use of NGOs. But right at this time, you have... Oh, sorry, one second. I just had a second thought that just just crapped up on this. We were talking with the US Institute of Peace. So right at this time, you have this move from direct military force to topple governments through military coups, or through military takeovers, or through getting military defectors, to sever top-down attempt to induce regime change. They created a blueprint. This is the famous color revolution blueprint. The people-powered revolution, you have lots of lots of names for this, which is the bottom-up method, which instead of getting at the military level with tanks and guns and fighter jets, you do it at the paramilitary street level. You shut down the country by getting a critical mass of its civil society organizations to not cooperate with that government. So the government can't bring in any revenue, they can't pay their own police officers or members of the military to quell the riots because there's no money in the government coffers, because there'll be sanctioned by the international community for cracking down on the protesters. And because the country itself is not... The hospital workers have walked out. The public health industry workers have walked out. So even the schools aren't open, the hospitals aren't open. The roads are being blockaded. The only way to get rid of these people is either with hundreds of thousands of police officers in every region to drag them or to kill them, in which case you have the human rights violations. And then every person is kicked off the swift system and the international finance system and sanctions and threats of a military intervention at that point. So this was pioneered by the US military, this paramilitary street technique that they call non-violent action. And this was done through Gene Sharp and his cohorts. It was at the Harvard CIA incidentally, the Harvard Center for International Affairs. It's a very cute nickname, but Henry Kissinger was there. They recruited Gene Sharp. They got $50 million in Pentagon funding to develop the playbook that they now call from dictatorship to democracy. The idea that you can use mass NGO action to organize the unions, the trade workers, the laborers, the media organizations, the every aspect of civil society in order to encircle the government to cut it off from its own sources of power. And then with the sitting government effectively, paraplegic quadripleg... basically cut off from its arms and legs, it would be ousted by a street protest that effectively surrounds the Capitol and takes over the building. I mean, this is basically it's a January 6 blueprint if what they said about January 6 was actually true, which of course is not. But everyone can watch bringing down a dictator, the PBS documentary, about the State Department and US Institute of Peace, the work getting the oat poor movement in Yugoslavia to topple Slobanam, Milosevic, that was nonviolent actions what they call it. Now, the ending scene of that documentary, you hear the whole documentary, it's this is nonviolent action, nonviolent action. The climax of the documentary, which has soaring violins, as if this is an amazing thing, is the parliament building, the Capitol building in Serbia being set on fire, its windows smashed, and a throng of hundreds of thousands of angry street protesters flooding into the building and declaring themselves the new government. This is cheered on by the State Department, USAID, the US Institute of Peace, the US Institute of Peace was actually on the ground training them. Meanwhile, the narrator, Martin Sheen is the narrator in this documentary, and he goes on to say it's all about nonviolent action. That's the oat poor wears all black. They have tight leather, they have a clenched fist as they're symbol. It is all intentionally sinister. It's like intentionally sinister, Molotov cocktails and police cars, setting the Capitol building on fire, breaking the glass, forcing the Democrat and elected president to flee by hell of act out of the country. This is what they call nonviolent action. And just again, nonviolent action just means mob violence action. But to them, that is less violent than bombing Sarajevo. For, just really, they're saying it's like it's mostly peaceful. Yes, mostly peaceful arson, mostly peaceful. So I mean, you're describing black lives matter. Yes, it's kind of weird. I'm listening to this. I'm like, if black lives matter was not a synthetic group if it wasn't astroturf, what happened to it? It disappeared as soon as its usefulness ended. And that's exactly what happened. And I can talk all about the connections of this network to that, which is but I mean, it's the same. And I remember Darren B.D. saying at the very beginning of that, this is a color revolution. And I love and respect Darren. And I'm, but I didn't quite fully appreciate how true that was. No, it's literally the exact same network. I have all of their planning documents from starting two weeks, you know, after the riots popped off, we can get into that whole thing with the transition integrity project. And the US Institute of Peace program on nonviolent action. Oh, incidentally, that's a, they were involved in that too. Yes. And the International Center for Nonviolent Conflict was a big part of these, you know, how to leverage the BLM protests to, to shut the country down in case Trump won the 2020 election on election day 2020. This is, they also work through the union groups, especially the AFL-CIO, which is the top CIA conduit in the union space around the world. Left us in the 1960s used to call it the AFL-CIO. Remember the AFL-CIO had a secret agreement with a chamber of commerce about, uh, protests to shut down the country. This is published in Time Magazine by Molly Ball. But on this US, you talk about, talk about the uni party when labor and management are both colluding against you. Right. But the chamber of commerce, I mean, that really is everything is the final scene in animal farm when the pigs and the farmers are indistinguishable from each other. It's like, that's the deep truth. Yes. Yes. But both of them were threatened by Trump's foreign policy. The unions get hundreds of millions of dollars from the state department, from USAID. We have, we have multiple bureaus just for funding them. The Department of Labor as an international fairs bureau. We spent $20 million funding unions in 2023 alone in Brazil, the AFL-CIO's union groups, in just one country in one year, $20 million to the union groups there. Kind of weird. There was an election that year. Yeah. Kind of weird there. And, uh, and it was specifically for labor for mobilization of the unions and organ, it helped them better organize themselves. Do you remember that Lula was the head of the workers party? Yeah. Number who broke him out of jail was the AFL-CIO. Who did the AFL-CIO named the man of the year? I think it was in 2021 or 2022. They named Lula the man of the year. And what is the AFL-CIO? It's not only was it, you know, directly sponsored by the Central Intelligence Agency for 30 years during the Cold War. But now they don't even need that because they have the CIA spin-off national down for democracy, which has its own union branch called the Solidarity Center. The Solidarity Center is a formal part of AFL-CIO. It is inseparable from it. And the Solidarity Center kicks them money. So what I'm saying is the Chamber of Commerce was threatened by a potential abandonment of cutting the wind for them of Trump doing, you know, liberal interventions, military interventions, humanitarian interventions in every country, on God's green earth. We would just go in, replace the government, and then what would happen to AT&T if they couldn't get those contracts? What would happen to AMEX if we didn't have, you know, USAID's DIA app in Ukraine? I'm sorry, I think it's visa. So that visa gets all the credit card processing for all the transactions there. What would happen, you know, just to Starbucks if we abandoned the USAID coffee programs in Peru and Colombia and the Central African Republic? What would happen, you know, to the petroleum companies, if we didn't, you know, militarily step up our presence to, so the Chamber of Commerce and the unions, labor and management had a common enemy, the same way Democrats and Republicans did when Trump first came on the scene because anyone who wants to put America first is going to run straight into everyone who wants to put their own interests first. America be damned. And nicely, nicely put. So let's end by, well, I hope you will end by explaining if you were to, I don't know, de-fang these groups, drain the swamp as we say, who would you go after first and how would you do it to restore democracy to the country, the premise that the people rule that elections matter, that there's the changed people want when they get a new leader. That is democracy. There's three layers of it. There's the executive branch layer, the legislative and the judicial. On the executive branch layer, an unbelievable amount of positive accomplishments have been done through the executive branch. And I think that the Trump admin deserves credit, even as we're unsatisfied with how big this is, and how many problems have been with Congress and judges blocking things. Took a lot of political capital to do what they did, and they were aggressive at almost every layer of it with some very big asterisks and exceptions. The idea of the firing of 14,000 people at USAID, the closure of the offices, the funding pauses was absolutely massive, both symbolically and in very, very real terms. The restructuring that Marco Rubio has led at the State Department is absolutely massive. Like 135 sub-agencies are being rift, totally killed. The reduction in force, totally laid off so that you don't even need the congressional approval, because there's no job for fire people to go back to because the division doesn't exist anymore. Those include the democracy rights and government, the democracy rights and labor bureau at the State Department, which is the number one coordinating web, I guess, in tandem with the international organization bureau. But the democracy rights and labor is the main place at state for the NGO plaques, because they're all getting this funding, and they're all coordinating with the State Department, getting the protection of the State Department, because they are promoting democracy as the State Department wants them to do. The rights and it stands for the human rights, because human rights violations in foreign countries, and then labor is the unions and this is where you get the rent of riots and all this. You can go online and see weeping videos from people from the democracy rights and labor bureau that they've been working there for 15, 20 years and suddenly it's gone and it is going to have a devastating, of course, never has a devastating impact on these things. I mean, great example is the AP RANNA story about, I think the initial title for it was Trump's move to NUSID, AID, crushes, cocaine programs dedicated to combating the cocaine trade. And the article is the biggest self-own you'll ever read. It's all about how we've all this money that goes to Colombia and to Peru and to Bolivia to stop drug trafficking in the Colombia's number one, Peru's number two, biggest cocoa leave cultivation in the world. It goes on to say we spend hundreds of millions of dollars every year to the cocaine is going to flourish. Then they have a statement that they include, because they reached out to the President of Colombia. President Colombia says we're thrilled that USAID is gone. They made the problem worse. They go to Peru and the number two, sorry, coke leave, cultivator. And they said the Peruvian government refused to comment, but we talked to the former head of the National Commission on Narcotics Prevention, you know, the former head of the part of the Peruvian government that handles this. And he said, thank God the USAID programs are on combat and cocaine here are gone. They were the primary problem in this whole thing. Actually, he gives an example. He says actually not only did none of the money actually ever reach the groups, but they only slowed down action that the Peruvian government tried to do. When the Peruvian government tried to do something to stop cocaine, USAID would step in and they would delay things. They would drag things and someone's like they want to the cocaine. And then he gives the example of these. He says, and in Bolivia right next door, Bolivia banned USAID in 2013. And they drastically reduced the cocaine trafficking. And because there was no USA cocaine program keeping the cocaine flowing. And so anyway, what I'm saying is this is all done through these these state department, Bureau's which are now being reorganized. And one of the at the executive branch level, I would say there's when we huge wins at the National Science Foundation, which is a major NGO and university sponsor for this. A couple of big misses though. How the National Endowment for Democracy remains fully funded. They were talking a big talk, Trump administration about defunding the National Endowment for Democracy, which I would say is one of if not the worst of the worst offender in this entire space, especially with Damon Wilson at the helm who came straight from the Atlanta Council digital forensics research lab, which was the censorship super center of the Western world. Seven CI directors on the Atlanta Council's board funded by the Pentagon State Department and USAID. The Atlanta Council working at that time, the Atlanta Council was running training seminars to get journalists to flag Trump tweets, including one seminar called I call bullshit, where the Atlanta Council digital forensics research lab with where Damon Wilson was the head, they are training schools of journalists holding up Trump tweets on a on jumbo Tron that says two words, which hunt? This is this one month before the Mueller hearing. So, Russia gate was at its apex. They wanted to censor or call disinformation Trump's attempt to present his own case around Russia gate. And they provoked journalists to hold up Atlanta Council sponsored placards with the word bullshit on it. And that means sponsored by you and me because we pay for them through 11 different government agencies, pay the Atlanta Council. Why are they why why is Ned National Endowment for Democracy in Atlanta Council? Why are they still getting government money? I'm not privy to those internal conversations. I have actually seen the IR so there's four cores at Ned. There's the two political branches, NDI for the Democrats and the Democrats and the Dragons to IRI for the Republicans here in national. I can't ran for years. Yep. McCain ran Mitt Romney's on board. And that on all bright by the way, is the head of NDI Hunter Biden was on the chairman's advisory board of NDI, NINA, Jankovitz was at NDI. But the so those are the two political branches. The and then the other two core fours are the exact other two groups who signed that secret agreement around organizing destabilizing street protests in case Trump won. The third one is called the Center for International Private Enterprise, CP. That's the US Chamber of Commerce branch of Ned. The fourth one is called the Solidary Center. That's the AFL CIO Union arm of Ned. So what do you know? The never Trump Republicans, the Democrats, the Chamber of Commerce and the unions, the exact group behind the transition integrity project, which explicitly plotted in the height of the George Floyd riots, ran a war game about how the Biden campaign in case Trump won in a clear win scenario, clear Trump win was the name of their scenarios. In Arrow three, this in June 2020, how the Biden campaign could get racial justice activists from these riots to be, quote, receptive to a Biden call to take to the streets and plotted what needed to be done to resource them and to cultivate relationships with black lives matters, senior leadership and community leaders so that they would owe the Biden administration favors in case they need to be called on and long behold, let's say something billion dollars, the Chamber of Commerce then flooded them with $50 billion in contributions. You remember that? All the different Chamber of Commerce companies just flooded billions of dollars of donations to BLM to destroy our country. Yes. I mean, while the AFL CIO and SEIU were all on the streets with them, just like they are around the world when we went riots in Georgia, we went riots in Serbia, we went riots in Hungary, we go straight to the AFL CIO branch. But those are the four corners of net or the exact four corners of the effective insurrection against Trump during Trump. I don't understand how that can remain. I know IRI has made reforms. Let me say this to the credit. In full disclosure, they have reached out to me. And I think I've mentioned this publicly before, but I haven't really been able to say all that much because it just doesn't really come out much. And I have seen them attempt to make reform. This is the Republican side of it. And I've heard from folks around its senior leadership that they recognized how elements of what they were doing before were inappropriate. They'd gone rogue that certain people who were there are not there anymore, that they're trying to align the actions with the foreign policy set by their sponsors, the US government. And I've seen genuine good faith. They're trying to participate in democracy now. Look, I'm not weighing into whether or not they're doing it for cynical self-serving reasons or what. But frankly, you could argue they may have been doing the other, the bad stuff, because the Biden administration wanted them to do that. Or because Trump was on shaky ground in his own first term and didn't really control his own Congress or budget or or had a very strong coalition. But the point is, as NDIS not made those, as not made those reforms at all. The Saudi Air Center has not made those reforms. And the issue is, is if you say, okay, IRI has reformed. The Republican branch of it has, but these other three are still rogue. Well, then what happens? The whole purpose of Ned is that it's bipartisan and that it therefore sort of synchronizes US policy, US foreign policy on both sides of the political aisle because everyone's on the take. So everyone is a reason to invade Ukraine. Everyone's a reason to topple the side. But if IRI reforms, but NDI doesn't, what happens to Ned? Do you see what I say? What I, this is my last question, but you will know the answer. So when I hear you talk, it's like it's my childhood. I just grew up around this stuff and pre-91, the assumption was we're locked in an existential struggle with the forces of darkness, the Soviets, on board with that. Post-91, ultimately we came to realize that we run the entire world and that's like a huge management project to keep everything in our control and sort of moving in the right direction. But we're in charge of the world. Post 2023, there's no way you can tell yourself that. It's just not true. And the bricks is now, it represents a bigger economy, bigger population, bigger military than the West. So I guess my question is, do the people running all these different groups understand that their 1980s era assumptions are just like overtaken by events? Do they see the world clearly? Do they know the limits to their own power? Do they know it's up? I think they do actually. Good. As I mentioned, I'm reading Bill Burns' autobag for the CIA director for Biden. And very close friend of Epstein's, her, by the way. No, just a fact. Yes, I know. I just saw emails from one Epstein to him. Yes, that's the one showed me. Doesn't, I think Bill Burns is a very smart guy and I'm not for Bill Burns, but I'm not, I'm just saying, right? I've seen. Yeah. Right. But I think there is recognition of that. And I think this is also why you see this, everything is alliance based and why you see, for example, the Biden administration moving so deeply in tandem with the EU on all things. And using EU regulatory action to box out, you know, populists like the Biden administration was totally behind the EU digital censorship act that is going to become that's completely yes. Literally, I think I've had their internal documents from their White House information integrity working group, planning the whole thing as well as the USA programs to beef up the terms of it so that it can be used against domestic enemies in America. But the fact is, is I think this is, this is part of the global alliance structure. And I actually don't think that the Biden administration really moved unilaterally assuming unipolar power. Almost almost every major foreign policy decision, you know, would have the buy-in of the UK, France, the in power parties in Germany, in Canada, and paid very close attention to, to, and in fact, partnering with in many, many ways China, I mean, Trump blocked China from being able to import oil and gas from Iran. It blocked that for four years, two months into Biden's term. China, in the Iran deal for $400 billion of oil and gas from Iran. It's just, I don't think there is a kind of, as much of the unipolar, there is some of it, definitely. Like you hear the John Bolton types, you know, talk about, you know, almost presupposing that we can just bully everyone around. But I think even that is done with an expectation that it's going to be NATO-wide, it's going to have, you know, allies around the world. But to your point, I think that the Ukraine, Russia war and, you know, has been a humbling period, which I think is why there actually is an appetite for peace, even within many aspects of the blob. They just want peace on terms that are beyond their leverage to obtain. And, you know, that is a war of attrition that, you know, gets back to the efforts to cut USAID and the NGOplex. USAID spent $15 billion. I think it was one year alone on Ukraine. On this, the USAID NGOs are funding the pensions of people in Ukraine are funding the salaries of municipal workers. There's more welfare for people in Ukraine from USAID than, you know, effectively, American citizens who live here legally. And, but the fact is, if that USAID spigot gets cut, things will go south very quickly. This is why the EU is creating its own army, a trillion-dollar budget that they've announced that for the EU to, you know, effectively create a parallel NATO in case Trump gets out of that. But in the heat of this, you know, I mentioned a few of the failings. One of them Ned, another one is a trillion-dollar Pentagon budget, is is hard for me to imagine that that does not go to prolonging the war, but the Trump administration is a tough choice. If you totally deprive Ukraine of the lifeline that they've had everything crumbles immediately, but then you lose the deal terms. You, in the sense that there's no hope to have territory in Eastern Ukraine, you know, flow back to control by the key of government. There's no hope to recover all the petroleum resources in Ukraine. Ukraine is the You know, flow back to control by the key of government. There's no hope to recover all the petroleum resources in Ukraine. Ukraine is the third largest shale reserves, I believe, in all of Europe, especially in the Donbass and off the offshore in Crimea and the Black Sea. And so I think Trump is between a blob and a hard place. We have to, if you want some budget done, he needs Congress to approve. We do not have a populist super-majority in Congress. We have, there are more populists now in Congress than there were under Trump 1. So I don't think Trump will get as rolled as he was by Paul Ryan, but there will be rolling. Undoubtedly, as we've seen 26 members of Congress, I think, have said that they're not going to approve the Doge cuts, just the Doge cuts. While you're getting handed even more money from a trillion dollar Pentagon budget, and how much of that trillion is going to be civil military, i.e. NGOs, because the military funds these NGOs. As I mentioned, the Secretary of War is on the board for the U.S. Institute of Peace. The Pentagon pays the Atlanta Council. The Pentagon pays for NATO, which has all the societal resilience and social cohesion grants to the NGO's space to do all this. A lot of, you can shut down the USAID, but you can just call it civil military, and the civil society NGOs will be funded by the Pentagon. Trump has to keep his coalition together. He can't get everything he wants, just as we're not a unipolar power anymore. Trump is not a unipolar president. I'm happy with singles and doubles as long as the direction line is towards a better country. The question is, are we even going to get the singles or doubles? Is the blob going to get enough home runs and triples on the other side of it that on net? Nothing comes to pass. When you next come back, I'd love to hear what a trillion dollars a year buys, considering that we're separated from our enemies by two oceans and face-to-in-phasian threat. I'm thinking that's a pretty big budget, and I know that I'm probably not a good Republican for pointing that out. But I guess I'm not a good Republican in general, but what is that? So, here's the problem, it buys votes. No, no, no. No, no. It's boats in Congress. If you want to fire people, the Justice Department, if you want to get people approved by the Senate for their positions, if you want to get rid of the Department of Education, you might need to give them a Pentagon bond. And it's a very dirty soup. Mike Benz, a very clean man. I appreciate it. Thanks, I bet. Thank you. So, it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, it's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. That is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So, we hope that you'll do that.