The most interesting and newsworthy television show of the year is coming here to TCN. We are not bragging that's actually true. So our long time producer Justin Wells and a team have been embedded with no publicity at all with Donald Trump on the campaign trail for months, though the only crew capturing what is going on on the campaign in real time intimately. They're with Trump as he campaigns for the presidency across the country and they've shot some amazing footage that shows you what it's really like in there. So if you're a member, you will soon be able to get this docuseries covering the historic campaign, the fall of Joe Biden, never before seen footage from the assassination attempt at the Butler Township Pennsylvania Trump rally and a lot more. It's going to pull back the curtain completely. They are embedded inside the campaign. I can't wait to see it personally. But to get it first, go to Tucker Carlson dot com, become a member. The greatest television event of the year. We're proud to offer it. I can't believe I'm here. Thank you for having me. This is wild. It makes me feel much better. Thank you. Oh, yeah. Thank you very much. I can't believe I'm here. I woke up yesterday morning in the little rural town where my wife and I live with our many, many dogs. And it was 40 degrees. And I woke up at like five in the morning. The dogs were like, what do you mean? You stir early. The dogs resent it, particularly the females. Very entitled. But anyway, and I thought I can't believe I'm getting on the road for a month to coast to coast 16 different cities. And weirdly, it put me in such a good mood. It put me in such a good mood. And I just couldn't. I love where I live. And I'm totally happy there. But I just couldn't wait to see other people who I'm on the same page with. I just couldn't wait. I couldn't wait. And I feel like it's really important. I've spent a lot of time, I've been fishing very intensely recently trying to think this through. And there is something about being outside in the quiet, running water that opens up your brain. I do think that the two things that hold people who have my beliefs, your beliefs back, is one, the feeling that you're totally isolated, which is by design. Like they give you the feeling that all the things that you're upset about are totally fine, and it's always been this way. It's always been this way crazy. Like you're nuts. There've always been like all these vagrants. Like, look, on the sidewalk. You don't remember that? You're freak. You've got a fastest shot up and you're like, oh, maybe there's something I'm with me. And the second feeling that they give you by design is that there's nobody else in the world who agrees with you. You're just this island alone, like sitting fuming in your living room. Yeah, well, that is. I don't want to repeat the profanity someone just used to describe it, but it is not true. In fact, the opposite is true. You are not a freak. You are not a fascist. You're not a malcontent. There's nothing wrong with you. You're not the crazy person. You're the normal person. Your desires are totally normal. You have no desire for like world domination. What? You have no desire to tell your neighbors what to do. You don't stay up late worrying about the sex lives of people in Brooklyn, whatever. You don't really want to know that it's hails of the sex lives of people in Brooklyn, because it's weird. But you're kind of happy to let them do their thing. They don't feel that way at all about you. They stay up late worrying that somewhere in some small town, maybe in Alabama, or here in America, up in county Arizona, there's somebody who disagrees with them and they want to control you on the basis of that because it's not politics, of course. It's a religion for them. And I would guess that a lot of people in this room already have a religion. And they don't need to worship politicians as gods. They don't think political parties or churches. They're instruments to give them space to do the things that really matter to them. Like find a mate, have children, do something useful in the world. Maybe have grandchildren, maybe sit at the head of the table as a patriarch or matriarch, like these are the things that matter. These are not freakish desires. That's the essence of what it is to be normal and well-adjusted, where you have a personal life that you don't necessarily share on Instagram. Because not everything is for public consumption. You're allowed to have your own eccentric little opinions. You're allowed to have relationships with other people that aren't on public display. You're allowed to live a life without being spied upon because privacy is a prerequisite for freedom. You'll notice that they spent decades telling you about the right to privacy, which is really why you're saying abortion is great. But they had no interest in privacy whatsoever. And anyone who does have an interest in privacy would be a little concerned by the fact that your phone is literally listening to you at all times. And that your every movement, your every utterance, is being tracked by governments, by business, is that privacy? No, that's like something that the North Korean government would like to achieve, but can't. And our government has an external problem for them at all. Because they don't care about privacy because they don't care about the individual. And they don't care about your interior life or your right to have one. No, they believe in the collective. They believe in the group over the person. They don't acknowledge the individual as a meaningful category at all. And so when their president is revealed to see now, no problem. Slipping somebody else. It doesn't make any difference at all because it's not about the person. It's about the group. And if you're wondering like what that was, where what everyone in this room has been saying for four years, which is the president has no idea where he is, they were forced to admit that. And all of a sudden the guy just disappeared. Like never saw him again. Once in a row, but they never came back. And they throw in this other chick who like 20 minutes ago, we were all making fun of for being Montel Williams' old side piece. And now she's not just the single most accomplished human being in the history of Western civilization. She actually created Western civilization. But she's also a religious figure at the level of say the Buddha. She's a font of joy. You feel joy that comes from her. She's a living river of joy. Give her thanks for your joy. What? Montel Williams' side piece is the source of all my joy, really? Does anyone really believe that? Well no, normal person believes that. But people who could care less about the individual, the distinctions between people, the sort of person who doesn't even acknowledge that individuals have names and souls because they are created not by the government, but by God. If you don't acknowledge that, then it doesn't matter who the person wearing the crown or holding the nomination. It doesn't matter. It's irrelevant. Because it's about the organization. It's not about you. You are irrelevant. You live as a worker, be only to serve the collective. That's a totalitarian worldview. That's not a normal worldview. That's a diseased worldview. That's sick by definition. If you begin to think of other human beings, not as people, as individuals with names and souls and hopes and opinions, but as instruments, as little widgets waiting in a bin to be assembled for your greater glory, if you start to think of people like that, there's nothing you can't do to them. There's nothing you can't justify doing to them, up to and including really hurting them. And you've seen that in movement after movement throughout world history, where leader decides these aren't actual people. These are whatever. They're voters. They're cannon fodder. They're worker bees. They don't matter. That's the mindset. And this country of course was founded on the opposite precept. The precept that God created people and the land and the birds and the deer and the dogs, over whom we have dominion, but we did not create them. We didn't create animals. We didn't create mountains. Somebody else created them. God created them. We can't destroy them because we didn't make them. And the country was based on that true idea. And if you didn't make something, if you don't own something, you have to show respect to it. It's not yours. It's not a simple long to you. Actually. There's a limit to what you can tell them to do, because they're not objects. And it was on that idea that this country flourished as the freest place in human history. That idea was a pretty simple idea, but again it's an acknowledgement of what is true. We don't have absolute power. We have some power. We have a standing army. We've got a massive legal code, but there are limits to what we can do to you because we don't own you because you're not slaves, you're free people because God created you. We didn't. And that's often described as a radical idea. I don't think it is. I think it's table stakes. I think it's reality that's just fundamentally true whether you acknowledge it or not. And our government was forced to acknowledge it because of our founding documents famously. So I would say that people on our side have completely misframed the debate over say free speech. It's not just annoying or awoke when someone punishes you for giving your opinion. It's totalitarian. It's the first step to hurting you because it's a sign that they don't consider you human. You can't tell another human being what to believe because you don't own that person. It's literally that simple. So this is just a long way of saying what I really wanted to convey which is how grateful I am to be in a room full of thousands of people who know that. I just know that intellectually but feel it. And I just hope that you remember no matter what happens after this and it's the beginning of September of an election year. So I can promise you America will not look as it does today in two months. It won't. A lot's going to happen that we can't control or predict but trust me it will be a different place by the first week in November. But no matter what happens and I'm praying for good outcomes of course I know everybody in this room is. No matter what happens just remember that you are not weird. Weird. Weird. So weird. Say the castrate your children people. It's just weird. Okay. Say the people. I love you too. But what I wanted to say is everyone, every kind of normal person which is the overwhelming majority of people in this country and this world actually particularly in this country that no matter where they're from no matter what they look like or who they voted for in the past they know that and they all want the same things. And I would say 80% of the ruling class's time is spending convincing us to hate each other. And you know one reason such a thrill for me to travel is that there's so little actual experience of hate when you're wandering around. I mean I think of myself probably correctly it's one of the most hated people in America. And no I'm not whining about it I don't care you know. Badger of honor. I don't want to make it on me. But I'm just saying like just ask yourself one is the last time that you were I don't know on your front lawn or at Walmart or standing line to DMV and you heard one person attack somebody else in the bases of like race. I'm 55. I've never heard that not one time. I've lived here the whole time. That's actually not what the country is like people are really nice to each other by and large. People are really warm to each other. They actually have a lot in common with each other. And if you watch the way the country is portrayed, driven by racial tension, the horrifying legacy of America. Alright stop. You're boring me. But trust you lying to me. That's not the America I live in at all. People are pretty nice. You sort of deal with people individually and you don't kind of see them as some alien. They're like Americans are just like you. Kind of distressed about inflation and their mortgage payments and other kids are doing things and they don't want to castrate their kids, please. It's like nine freaky rich ladies in Santa Monica want that. That's it. That's not a common thing. It's not, it's not, it certainly happens a lot. I would say it's a disproportionate amount of like fourth grade school teachers I happen to notice. Someone who married a fourth grade school teacher. I don't know what happened to that group. A lot of them have gone insane. But sorry. Just true. I used to love fourth grades. I was proud to marry a fourth grade teacher. They're so sweet. This is pre-castration. Now I'm kind of freaked out by them. But whatever, outside of a couple small pockets of truly unhappy miserable people who've never had a sound night of sleep in their life. Who don't have a single functioning personal relationship. Who hate themselves so much that they have to transfer that hate onto strangers. Aside from them, most people are like, they think it's a bizarre. Because it is. They think all of this is bizarre. More drug addicts like, who wants that? Nobody wants that. There's nothing sadder than addiction. There's nothing sadder than watching people kill themselves. Like it's just awful. And it's being pushed on us by people who are truly in misery who deserve our prayers. But their desires are not an accurate measure of what the country is actually like. And so to stand in a room full of people or to travel across the country from my weird little remote place where I live. And kind of not a single person who yells at me or just like, hey man, I don't agree with you but it's great to meet or whatever. Everyone's just so nice. And I have to say that someone who's spent his life in the media and I won't go on about this but 33 years in the media really makes me despise them. Not just for lying but for the divisive nature of their lives. If you make people hate each other, I'm not sure there's a grave or sin than that. And if you're a parent, you know. Can you imagine anything darker than convincing your own children to dislike each other? It's the deepest hope in the heart of every parent that his or children will love each other. That's the thing that you leave behind is the love between your children for each other. Now for you, you're going to die. But for each other. And that's the thing that gives old people comfort as they pass out of this world is the knowledge that certain knowledge that their children will continue the family through their love of each other. And so as a parent, an any normal parent, you don't have to read a parenting book to come to this inclusion. It's a product of your deepest instinct and desires. You want the people in your care to love each other and get along. And it takes a truly sick puppy to want the opposite. Did you know that there are multiple companies, big companies whose names you probably have never heard of, they keep a living profile, a dossier on you based on everything you do on the internet, which is most things at this point. This actually happens. It's not a crime show. It's not some fantasy on television. This is the world that you live in. Everything you do online is recorded and sold to big companies, advertisers, and even the US government. What are they doing with this information? Well, in some cases, nothing good at all. It's equivalent of looking through your window, filming you, and selling what they see to someone you've never heard of. Who's doing this? Data brokers are doing this. They're vultures who make billions selling something that doesn't even belong to them. Your private data, again, like filming you through your bedroom window. Some people know this already, but they can see nothing about it. In fact, most people, sadly, have given up on the idea that privacy even exists online. It's depressing, and it's scary. Because remember, without privacy, there is no freedom. You don't want to live in a country with no privacy. You don't want to live in a place where people give up and assume everything they do is being watched by some creepy company or the government. You want to live in a place where people take privacy seriously, where they take back control over their own lives. We've done that with the product called ExpressVPN. What is it? Well, it's a virtual private network that re-routs 100% of your internet activity, doing encrypted and secure servers. That means that nobody can see what you're doing online, knowing can steal your information and resell it or use it against you, including the government. ExpressVPN also hides your IP address. That's the number that personally identifies you on the internet. You think you're anonymous. You're not. So when data brokers buy the data, they know it comes from you, and they use that to build a profile and you would dossier. But the internet was supposed to give us the freedom to explore, but data brokers take away that freedom by selling your info to marketers and big tech companies who then limit in control of what you can see online. It is incredibly dystopian, and it's happening right now. So ExpressVPN is a pretty good idea because it protects you from all of that. It's got secure servers all over the world. You can use the internet as if you're in 105 different countries, just pick the country. You go into a place that blocks websites and censors the content you can see. You're in China, for example. Well, you can read whatever you want through ExpressVPN. It gives you back your right to explore the internet freely to read what you want to read, to say what you want to say. So no matter what you do, you can do it privately with ExpressVPN. You can use to protect your entire family. It only takes one tap to connect. Even your kids can figure out even middle-aged talk show hosts can figure it out. You can tell you firsthand. And it works in all your devices, phones, tablets, televisions, desktops up to eight devices at once. That's more than enough to protect everyone in your household. So right now you can get three extra months free when you use our special link. Go to ExpressVPN.com slash Tucker and get three extra months for free. and it's ExpressVPN, eXPR, eSSvpn.com slash Tucker. So I would just say two things. And we're going to sit and do a show with one of my all-time favorite people, Russell Brand, who's such a, by the way, if I can just say not to digress, can imagine having dinner with me. It's like no one can stand on topic. But Russell Brand is such a perfect example of what I was just talking about. Russell Brand and I have about zero in common. He's from another land. He's used to call a foreigner. When I was at CNN, by the way, I love the word foreigner. I think it's hilarious. And they came into my office one day. I worked for CNN for years. I was never liberal just on the record. But you know, it was a different time. It was the 90s and I called someone a foreigner. And the standards and practices check comes into my office. She goes, well, I just want you to know it's seen on our standards prohibit the use of foreigner or foreign. There's no such thing as foreign. We call it international. And I wanted to say you are a wellian freak get out of my office before I vomit. But I was like 29. And so I did. And I was like, oh, Kurt. So over the next week, I must have used the phrase, I have an international object in my eye like six times. When you work in television, particularly for like a humorless fascist regime like the cable news network, you find ways to amuse yourself. It's like the Vietnam POWs blinking SOS with their eyelids. Like you just want, you want to feel like you're still human. It's these little acts of resistance that keep you joyful inside. But anyway, so Russell Brand is a foreigner. He's from a foreign country called the UK. Russell Brand was a movie star. I haven't seen a movie since the late 90s. Russell Brand is obviously kind of like alternative. If you haven't seen Russell Brand, you'll see you'll know what I'm talking about in just a minute. And Russell Brand has for his whole life been a man of the left. And so like I didn't know that much about Russell Brand other than he's like international pardon me, foreign famous person. And somebody sent me a YouTube clip, YouTube clip about three years ago of Russell Brand talking into cameras remarkably articulate. Like God given eloquence that the rest of us just really envy. But he was explaining what was going on with the COVID lockdowns. And it was so resonant. It was like something it was like a tuning fork. When you hear something that's true, even if you don't have evidence to support that it's true, the truth rings in your head differently from a lie. If you've had this experience, when you hear the truth, it has an effect on you. And you just know, you just know in your soul that's true. You couldn't defend it in court, but you don't need to because you know. And I'm watching this guy and I'm just, I don't think I've been that thrilled watching a YouTube video. Most of my YouTube videos are about tying trout flies. So, you know, I've got a pretty boring diet on YouTube. But this video, I just thought this guy, we have nothing in common whatsoever. I'm sure he hates me. I'm sure he's on the record hating man. I'll Google myself. So I've never checked. But this man is on the same page I'm on. We're hearing the same music. He knows what's true. And he's in that weird, very small percentage of people who know what's true and are brave enough to say so, who've made this decision like I just don't care. And maybe I do care, but I'm going to do it anyway. And of course, the definition of courage is not being afraid. People with head injuries are not afraid. They don't know to be. The definition of courage is doing something when you are afraid. And jumping out of the airplane anyway. And that's what I was watching this man. I thought to myself, this guy is really famous. And he's famous in the entertainment business, which has no sense of humor about dissent whatsoever. They'll cry. He'll never have beat him with me again. And he's doing it anyway. And by the way, people on the right don't even like him. It's all like he's jumping to his natural home among American conservatives. It's got to be like a freak, are you kidding? And like, who's the long-haired Brit? Like no thanks. And then all of his buddies are going to be like, oh, you're a fascist now. We hate you. You're dinner party invites like you're done. And he's doing it anyway. And that really has been my experience for the last four years, which is the world that I lived in has gone. And if you live long enough, you'll experience that on its appointment experience. All the institutions that you loved and believed in, people you were close to, the rituals you had, the places you went to eat, lunch, the places you walked with your wife, they're all gone. They're changed unrecognizable and you can't go back. It's like going back to your hometown, you know, as an adult. Everything looks so small and sad. And I'm like, wow, I thought we were kind of impressive. No. If that doesn't happen, you don't do it. It's super sad. And so that happened, I think not just to me, but too, an awful lot of people during a very short period starting around Memorial Day in 2020, when the revolution began. And very few people knew what it was. It seemed like just some guy was getting roughed up by the police in Minneapolis. that we didn't know, what it was the overthrow of our civilization. And I think it's pretty obvious now. So you look back at the cost to you and your own life, the people you're alienated from, who just like won't invite you to things, giving the family members, who are mad at you and won't talk to you, and all the things that you've lost. And I bet a lot of people in this room know exactly what I'm talking about. And the sadness that accompanies that, the feeling of loss, like I really lost something I loved. And I feel it very strong. I'll never get over it. But there is a countervailing force as there is in the universe. It's called good, by the way. It's called good. I heard someone's really brilliant the other day say, you know, as a minister said, you know, people always ask me, what do you make of evil in the world? But no one ever asked me, what do you make of good in the world? And if you think about it, why should any of us be surprised that there's evil in the world? Right? No one should be surprised that there's evil in the world. Whether it's the five-year-old with leukemia or it's a world war in innocence die, you know, it's evil. It's so obvious it's right in front of us. More inexplicable, harder to understand, less predictable is the existence of selfless good. Is it, is it like unexpected altruism that people literally laid down their lives for their neighbors? Which happens all the time. You see it all the time. It's small and large ways. And I guess the point I would make, and I will stop on this, is you see it now more than ever. And I'll just, I'll give you my testimony on this, which is, as sincere as I can be, that for all the friendships that have been destroyed, certainly the acquaintance ships that no longer exist, all the people would never text me back ever. There are so many people I've met who I never thought I had anything in common with at all. In fact, there are some who I really disliked or thought I disliked. And it turned out we had everything in common. We had everything in common. And the relationships that I have with people that I'm including myself brand are so much deeper than any relationship I've ever had in my life. It is such an abundance of blessings right before this. I shouldn't even say this, but it's true. I've given a lot of speeches and good amount of lot of stages and a lot of people, you know, not all of whom will return my text now. In fact, none of whom will. But anyway, whatever. And so you sort of know the protocol backstage or whatever and you sit until dirty jokes or wherever you do talk about it when I show whatever. Russell Brankers up me and he goes, well, you come back and pray with me. And it made me emotional. And by the way, if you had said to me five years ago, if Russell Brankers come and be like, well, you probably were like, no, I'm married dude, I'm go that way. You know, I just wouldn't, I don't know. I wouldn't even have understood that language at all. And I wouldn't, I would have been so ashamed just in self-conscious. And I never would have admitted it. If I'd prayed with the man backstage, like, I don't think so. I'm not telling anybody about that. That's too weird. And we did and it was just beautiful. And now I'm so proud to say it, not because I'm like any kind of role model. I'm hardly a role model. And that's kind of the beauty of it. I'm the opposite of a role model. I worked in cable television for 30 years. Do you think I'm a role model? No. And that's OK. I'm not going to speak for Rosa Brank. I don't think he's always been a role model either. But when you have a really honest relationship with someone and you have confidence that the opinions of strangers don't matter at all. Because you're loved by a force that's bigger than Twitter. You don't care. You can admit it. And you can take deep joy from it. And that is happening to me on an almost daily basis. I'm not always praying with Russell Brank backstage in arenas and Phoenix. I'll be honest. But I am having conversations that I bet you are too. If you think about it, I bet you are too. You're having conversations that are so much more honest than anything that would have been possible five years ago. Anything. And all I'm saying, and I will stop on this, is that is something to be grateful for. It's something to acknowledge. Yes, evil exists. Yes, it is more obvious than it's ever been. I can't say if it's more prevalent or not. I'm not God. But I can certainly say it's more obvious. None of this is political. It's political. It's political. No, it's not. It's spiritual. Obviously, there's no rational explanation for anything that we're seeing. The only explanation is the oldest of all explanations, which there is a battle all around us at all times that we cannot see between good and evil. Obviously, obviously, I first came to see a few years ago and I was like, wow, it's such a revolutionary concept. I don't know if I dare tell anybody this. And then I realized, oh, it's the oldest concept in history. Every book I've written is about that. I'm 55 and I finally figured it out. Okay. Kind of a genius. But anyway, the point is, for all the time that we spend looking at things and saying to ourselves, or I'll speak to myself that I do it, I'm like, I can't even believe that's happening. That's just evil. Hirting other people is evil. Period. What a evil. For all the time, I spend marinating in that and feeling sad about it, which is a lot. I spend so little time relatively speaking, marveling over the displays, the open displays of love and kindness and selflessness and honesty between people, which is another way of saying, I spend too little time being grateful for all the good around me. And there's so much, so much more than there is evil. And that shouldn't surprise us, because in the end, good will win. Period. I don't know where this goes. I can't even guess where this goes. But I know who wins in the end. And that's good enough for me. Thank you. I can sincerely say you're one of the people I most admire. I grew up in Southern California in the 70s and people who set barefoot Indian style and chairs were considered not on our side. And it's such an incredible thing for me to feel this soulful and real connection to to you and to feel like we have the same instincts about things. How would you describe, I'm just going to throw it out because you're about to find out how much more articulate he is than I am. How would you describe where we are right now as a world? It's a bit weird. Oh, scenarios are all the weird. Thank you so much for having me, a foreigner. In your country. Obviously, it was quite easy to get in. No passport, just traipes, stand across the border. Traffic to few kids over. I'm sorry. I laughed at that. Yes. Yes. So it feels weird. So I guess the question is, I have felt a mixture of emotions over the past couple of months experiencing things as I do like a dog does, which is instinctively by smell. And I have felt great hope as I express what I've also felt anxiety about where things are going. So you are spiritually in tune to put it mildly. Are you hopeful about the future or despondent? I was listening to you just then. And I don't just mean the bits where you were very kind about me. I paid attention to everything you were saying. In fact, it was quite difficult because I needed a week quite badly. And I was listening to you talking about me. Oh, no, I'm going to miss what would otherwise be. A wonderful experience. Listening to someone I've my talking in front of an arena of committed spiritual people about me because of a primary function. In the midst of it, I felt after I've had the we now, I've had the we. After I felt a great wave of optimism because this has been a time of bewilderment and delirium, perhaps I suppose the recent Olympic opening ceremony was a good example of how despair and annihilation can come about from the bold desecration of things that we vividly understand to be sacred. As your great comedian George Carlin says, when interests converge, there is no requirement for conspiracy. There seem to be a great many interests that benefit from as you addressed earlier at the podium that has mysteriously disappeared now. Probably because of the deep state. Probably in area 51. Alex Jones predicted that would happen. The podium will be taken away. It's all come. They'll say, yeah, podium man. There's estrogen of the water supply. Change that podium's gender. I'll true by the way, that's a crazy part. I know it's extraordinary to do it with Alex Jones. If anyone else was on the film saying that 9-11 would happen and then 9-11 did happen, you'd have to give that person a few passes. I think there'd be a national holiday. It would be called Nostradamus Day if you actually called it in great detail. And instead people go, he's crazy. Really how do you do that? He's a source of mystic. And I suppose that our culture makes no room for mysticism. Because if you worship rationalism, rationalism and materialism have at their apex human kind and the individual. I spoke briefly by text, actually. It wasn't even a proper conversation. I don't know. I'm pretending it was more intimate connection than it was. I had a text message with Father Julian of the Brompton or a tree. And I asked him about it. I guess he's a Catholic priest. And he said that the enlightenment in spite of the obvious, many miraculous achievements of science could also be regarded as an amplification of false light, the false light that drowns out the true light. Now a character like Alex Jones is no question. Alex Jones has said some pretty out there and crazy things. But when you have an undue reverence for just the rational, just the material that and that's not to say that the material and rational don't have their place for they too are a creation of the one supreme creator. It's what happens, I believe, is you end up relegating and negating the mystical. You end up in fact, if you, I suppose, replace the state as the apex of our hierarchies of meaning, then you can start to replace all of our values. And by one, you can start to remove ideas that are sort of sacred, ordinary, presumed with new ideas. And this state of bewilderment, I mentioned at the beginning, is beneficial, I suppose, to power power, the powerful appear to benefit from chaos. The more there is chaos, the more there is conflict, the more there is bewilderment, the easier it is to assurl authority. And I suppose the clearest example we got of this, or a clear example, was during the pandemic period where the convergence of interest included, well, one would have to argue pharmaceutical companies appeared to benefit. It would seem superficially. Yes, sir. As measured by share of price, I think that's fair. Governments appeared to benefit from the ability to regulate. It seemed that there was an opportunity to denigrate and marginalise and condemn people. So I suppose that's an example of how crises and chaos benefit powerful interests. And I suppose that if you have that kind of polarity, a kind of tension where crisis is beneficial to the most powerful interest in the world, it's likely that you will see a perpetuation of crisis, endless crisis. If the military industrial complex benefit from war, you will have war. If the pharmaceutical complex benefit from ill health, you will have the perpetuation of ill health. If they require you to eat food that's bad for you and take medicine that's bad for you, then you find that this great wonderful nation in which I'm a foreigner, traipsing willy-nilly back and forth that border. Or most not will popping in them cages that are bad in the built. Then I suppose that what you have is that of this wonderful nation, even though, you know, of course I'm still somewhat agitated by your victory in the Revolutionary War. And instead of the greatest nation in the world, you have a kind of conveyor belt where we're sort of turned into larvae with parasitic tubes attached to us. One end being pumped full of sugar and sea-duel, the other end being pumped full of needless pharmaceuticals. As many amends as I can muster to that, but as a long time pizza enthusiast, lifelong really, I've lived on pizza actually almost exclusively for many, many years. If you had, I know it's disgusting, I know. But if you had said to me that five years ago, I'd be like, come on, there's nothing wrong with wheat thin. That'll down. It does seem like just in the past, I don't know, year or less than months, even that what you just said is resonating with people, even people like me, the pizza enthusiast, who have never thought about this at all. That seems like almost a movement in America, acknowledging that we're incredibly unhealthy, that unhealth is by design, and that an unhealthy nation can never really be free. You feel that? Yeah. It's really good, isn't it, that you're doing this live tucker. One, because of course, when you're making live appearances like this, you are able to be in the obvious presence of your audience. You're able to hear immediately how people respond to what you're saying, and I hope that you are able to agree to feel the tremendous and warmth and love that these people have for you. Oh, that's funny. As a wasp, I'm never going to acknowledge that. But I feel the love they have for each other, which is way better and very, very obvious. Our economic and embarrassment bar issues to death up here. Yes, you could, that's tough. Embarrasses to death in Phoenix, and you would have to rise with metaphorical perfection from your own ashes. So this is a stressful time here. The kids are going back to school vacation. It's over. It's the height of a presidential election season. There's a lot going on. You need a good night's sleep, but it's never been harder to get it. So we're talking about this in the office the other day, and a couple people who work here were raving about a product called Eat Sleep. And I want to know more about it. It turns out that temperature has a lot to do with whether or not you sleep, comfortably and wake up feeling rested like you actually slept. Now the makers of Eat Sleep Pod figured out that if you make a climate controlled mattress cover, you can add to your existing video and have to buy a new bed, there's the cover. That it changes everything. You get far fewer problems with falling asleep and staying asleep, and so you feel rested the next day. Sleep actually has its desired effect. The Eat Sleep Pod can be used to warm up or cool off your bed. And that matters because temperatures change seasonally. We have climate change in this country. It's called winter. And so you can feel comfortable all night long. It even adjusts to different preferences on either side of the bed, which might be helpful in your relationship if you have one of those relationships where the different partners want different temperatures. And those are pretty common. The Eat Sleep Pod has been studied. It's been proven to improve people's sleep and health. Mark Zuckerberg's end to an Elon Musk on the other side, many others use this product, including people here. So try it. Go to eightsleep.com slash Tucker. We use the code TUCKER to get 350 bucks off the Pod for Ultra. Recommended. Yes, I mean, I suppose look, they took a terrible risk with that internet because the power of the internet grants immersive surveillance, incredible opportunity for censorship, almost totalitarian control. And that's plainly the trajectory that they prefer. totalitarianism and technological feudalism under the sort of peculiar veil of kindness and protection in order to protect you. We're going to have to control and sit us and manage you to within an inch of your life. It's so peculiar that the characteristics of our Lord omniscience omnipresent, some depotence of being emulated by the state, that they are emulating the glory, that they are replacing the glory, truly loose of theory. And then, for I see is offered the apostle John, the apostle Paul and our Lord and Savior, all say that Satan is in control of the world. In material there is Satan and I suppose technology is the advance of material. We are in a sort of heightened moment, I suspect. But whilst the technology I refer to, I suppose in particular instantaneous communication and thus grant the opportunity for total surveillance, it does also grant us the ability to create a movement in which we can defy in real time their assertion that we are governed by bigotry or prejudice because if there is and it seems among them there is at least this offering, one message of Christianity that I find deeply haunting of course the salvation, the redemption, the eternal life, but the kindness, the non-judgment, the absolute radical love of our Lord. There is no tribunal higher than his, there is no judgment that I am in a position to offer. We are all in the same category together as fallen and perhaps in this moment with this miracle of communication that could be used for totalitarian control, this message may spread the message of deep tolerance, deep love and a great ability to oppose while I consider now to be, forgive the radical metaphor as satanic force. Amen. So how did I mean if you don't mind describe how you arrived at what you just said and your, I hate to use the word journey, but tell us what happened in your life, mental illness. Good old fashioned. Oh well, I suppose, Tucker, what it must have been is that I am, this is my apostasy. As a devotee of materialism, as a devotee of culture being accepted into the hike, a cathedral of Hollywood, being granted access to the deep privileges of the headonic of epochurianism, of making pleasure and privilege and prestige and all earthly things my God setting up false idols in high altars, worshiping them, placing myself at the center of the universe, always worshiping myself, placing myself before him again and again. I've been shown that there is no answer there, but the culture is predicated upon serving that impulse. I was fortunate, I suppose, to have an extreme example of it. If you grow up a tubby, tubby, ordinary little boy in an ordinary little town like Grey's in Essex in the UK because we're in Phoenix, Arizona, you may not get the reference. So think New Jersey. If you are plucked from that obscurity and granted the opposite of the shame and ignominy that it can be to be a part of a blue collar community, to no normalness, normalness, and to no neglect and suddenly to know the lure and light of attention, to suddenly feel beautiful, you can feel, I felt, elevated. I suppose temptation is not a trivial thing, otherwise the battle would be done, but temptation I'm pretty weak and I was easily tempted and easily overwhelmed and easily conditioned. And I suppose because of that, because at my heart I am devoured, at my heart like all of us I suppose, I worship and love, I worship and love false things. And if you have, as I have, a deep, deep need for God and the culture will not tell you that you have a deep, deep need for God, then alcohol is your God. Hero in is your God's fame is your God's money. Is your God's sex is your God. Pornography is your God. They will offer you a vast pantheon of deities to prevent you from seeing the real life. recidly as a drug addict, I had to get clean and that's the beginning of an awakening. As I say, I'm a very, very slow learner. I'm a fast talker, but I'm a slow learner. Eventually through suffering, through seeing the fame and sex that I had so eagerly worship turned and metastasized against me by a machine that loaves those that speak out against it, I was forced to recognise my deep, deep foolishness. Thankfully, at the same time as I was enduring, deep, vociferous and vehement attacks from the culture that I had once worshipped at the false order of, my little beautiful son was born and at 12 weeks old he had heart surgery at the famous great Ormond Street hospital. When you hand over your baby to the Anisotists knowing that he will undergo a 10-hour trial, it looks like it feels deeply biblical. It felt like some sort of slab that he was being handed over to. The Anisotists seem unusually large, these sort of giant and towering men. To see a doctor apply gas to this 12-year-old baby's face and the tears of my wife, his mother, to be in the room downstairs having left my little son and to see the milk come through her top, the milk she could not feed because as with adults, before major surgery, you cannot feed the infant. I experience such powerlessness and pain, but also such a blessing to be shown that amidst the tumult and maelstrom conducted by the spilled and nefarious ink of the desperate liars that operate in the central institutions of propaganda and deceit that once I was happy to break bread with and feed at, I was shown a deeper truth, thankfully by the excellence of those surgeons and by the grace of our Lord God and my personal savior, Jesus Christ, my son is well. I am a slow learner, so I was shown, I was shown, he showed me. This is what is important to you. What is your former God's, what is your former God's done for you, where is it brought you to what is it delivered you? And the reason that I am honored to be able to pray with you prior to coming out here is because I need to continually recognize that as the great Pastor Rick Warren wrote, the first four words of his book, it is not about you, it is not about me. And I think you are a great testimony to that because before you never seem nervous, you never seem concerned, I see you from time to time, I consider our friendship to be a great privilege and like, you know, maybe you are being massacred in the media, Tucker Carlson spoke to Putin, kill him. And I might be okay, you're, yeah. Right. Hi, he's not taking it seriously, Tucker Carlson is not taking it seriously, Tucker Carlson is doing what he believes in. Tucker Carlson is not a racist, Tucker Carlson does not believe in dividing people, Tucker Carlson doesn't believe in supremacy of any individual race or group. Tucker Carlson is a patriotic American and it pains me to say this is an Englishman and there's a red coat, there's nothing wrong with that. But then you took, well that's such a wonderful description of what happened to you, but then you took this amazing step of talking about it in public and just feel like there's nothing more radical, I mean you had a drug problem, you've talked about it a million times in public, there's no sanction against that. I used heroin, I'm now better people like, oh you go Russell Brand. The other you start throwing the j word around, man, was that a tough decision for you? Well actually I didn't really make any decisions, I don't know, I didn't make a decision to get back ties, I didn't make a decision to start talking about Christ, actually I don't know what the hell I'm doing, I've been making, if I'd have thought about this more carefully, I probably would have done things differently for a style to put shoes on. But in the midst of the crisis that I described to you, the existential crisis, and I know Christians, it was a lot of Christians that appeared out of the midst, now in my country, I don't know about here, they do their level best to make Christianity as absolutely tedious as possible, like to make it like there's nothing to see here, there's nothing of interest, you don't need to pay any attention, but it's quite amazing that God came to earth in the form of a man and was sacrificed, sacrificed himself that we may be redeemed. But somehow in England they make it somewhere rather boring. So what happened to me, I mean I just thought I read that book, the pastor Rick Warren book purpose driven life because I saw him talking about his son taking his own life and I saw the way that he spoke about that and now unabashed and unapologetic he was and how he was just in the pain of it without any sort of pride or me because I've been so attuned to ego, I imagine that if you were, and this is how I would have categorized him, a sort of personal development person, but that's of course not what a pastor is because there is a difference between personal development and becoming a servant and becoming a servant of our Lord. When he was saying like the son had taken his own life, wow he doesn't seem like sort of embarrassed, all he feels is sad because you know the loss of your child none of there will be people in here that have experienced that of course, there will be people that have lost children, there will be people that have lost people to suicide them, sensitive to that. He just seemed to feel the sadness of it, now at that time I was feeling some pretty profound feelings, the person has to the old man has to die, the Adam has to die, that Christ may be reborn. There's an argument indeed for saying that if we don't make our body a temple for his dwelling it will be a dwelling place for the enemy and I think you know as a drug addict you are trying to synthesize spiritual experiences, you are trying to find meaning and connection and purpose, you are trying to transcend self, quick talker, slow learner. I read that book, bear grills of all people, you know bear grills like running wild with bear grills, bear grills of like appeared in my existence, coming out of the shadows and like I said, would you like me to come and baptize you on the 28th of April and I sort of went, yeah, but I meant no. I would not like you to come, you know, you sort of make plans, I'm not very good at temporal reality, I'm always agreeing to things on the basis that those things will probably never actually happen, that will never actually happen, and if it does by the time we get the oral of form and excuse to get out of it, and oddly I was in Florida tucker, near where I visited you previously, and like I made this tentative plan to be baptised by S.A.S. elite soldier, bear grills, which was seen God even as I was mulling it over, and it was it, I was at an Easter ceremony where three churches I guess like a Baptist, Methodist, and Catholic church were all doing the sermon at dawn on Easter, I was standing right next to you, yeah, and like these sort of kids said, hey we've been like this sort of gang of kids, hey we're from North Carolina, hey we've been following your Christian journey, hey you want to get baptized and I was like oh yeah, I'm gonna get baptized, I think, whoa, we can baptize you, yeah we baptize each other, I baptize her, she baptize me, you're not gonna gang baptize me. But I could feel it, you know, went back home to England and sure enough, 28th of April did happen, that's how calendars work. Came immediately after the 27th of April for those of you that have a nerdy interest in such matters, immediately before the 29th right there it sat, and there came Bear Grylls, and Bear Grylls does he sort of like S.A.S. survival thing, he does that like all the time, like even when he's in your he's sort of surviving there, watch out for that candle, he said at one point, your friend isn't high enough, he bought some hymns, I mean he's excellent, he played the piano, he bought hymns, sort of amazing, I was very overwhelmed, it's very difficult to have any pretends about being an alpha male in the company of Bear Grylls, I just let it go, you know, we're on a row boat, we went and picked up a pasta from there to do the baptism and everything I lived by the river, and that was the river that was going to get done in it's the river Thames, and of course the Thames war and municipalities been sold off to multi-national conglomerations who because it's more profitable to dump sewage in the beautiful and sacred river Thames rather than provide a sewage plant, do dump sewage into the Thames companies that are in sort of like Hong Kong and Canada, it's not to shame those particular nations but probably the water municipality should be owned by the community of people that live there and shouldn't be a for-profit entity really, the people should run that, not corporately, it's just a thing I've been thinking about anyway, like when I was put in that water, you know they baptized me backwards and I came out there and I sort of felt the Holy Spirit although you know given what in that war it could have been E. coli, something was happening, so there was never a deliberate choice the book of crit. Christ chooses us, we have been chosen, I wish I had known earlier, I wish I hadn't thought that I was too clever for the religion of my grandmothers, I thought that I was too smart, I thought somehow that I knew what was in the Bible even without reading it, well I get the idea you know angels, Jesus reading it, it's blowing my mind on a daily basis, I can't believe the profundity, the depth, the incredible beauty, the deep truth available to all of us and I know there are many ways of receiving the Lord's truth and the Lord's wisdom, like it's transforming me very quickly, I didn't make a choice Tucker and I mentioned the way that you operate as well, that there is a a kind of surrender, I'm not saying that I'm without shame, I'm not saying that I'm without fear, I'm not saying that at points I don't feel compromised and uncertain, I'm saying that since being baptized since becoming Christians, since surrendering to him, I feel his presence continually, I feel it now, I feel it in this moment and I feel free and like you said, I mean I'm studying that Bible, there's no where he says specifically, Russell I want you to overthrow the government, there's no, it's not in there specifically, keep reading, revelations 13, there's some strong suggestions, but Romans 13, he seems to be saying, I don't know, we're going to have to work out probably by the end of the evening, how it seems like a precious increasing. So what I had a similar experience where I thought I knew it was in and I had no idea I'd never read it and I read it took me a while 18 months but it I was shocked, completely shocked by what was in there, are you? Yeah, it's act, first of all, because of course the gospels are incredible the accounts of our Lord and Savior, but in particular acts because he is past and the kind of fervour, fibrillity, evangelism and zeal of the apostles, like the absolute belief, like early on with Stephen, like being torn apart and just gone, oh yeah, I'm off, like and Paul, like I thought that Paul was like sort of the first among conformists but there are trials and shipwrecks and jail breaks, it's incredible and marvelous, Paul put a real shift in in establishing Christianity, this just in, he was in jail so many times and it never bothered him, it reminded him that shipwrecks all chained up on a ship, there's going to be a shipwreck, it seems perfectly relaxed about it, but right another letter seems to have been his primary response. So how different was it from what you thought it was going to be? Well look, in my country we have a thing called the Church of and the problem is in the name, is that there are not a hierarchical implication in the name Church of England, there are some of the people in the Church of England have been sort of instrumental in educating me in my very nice and early new journey into Christianity and it's certainly not a criticism of those wonderful ministers and teachers and men and women of faith, but the secularism is all well and good as long as the state doesn't behave like a god, as long as the state doesn't give you some new edicts, as long as the state doesn't set up some new apostles and doesn't deliver a new liturgy that seems to be designed to inhibit and prohibit the freedom of the individual and to diminish and dilute the sanctity of the individual and the beautiful space that can exist between us when we live in good faith with one another. True diversity is a glory but superficial diversity to mass-comogenuity, I feel, yeah when there's homogeneity of one idea, one globalist idea, centralizing power by their fruit shall you know them in the pandemic period, wealth transfer, guess which direction it was that way, wasn't the it wasn't the diversification of wealth, it wasn't the empowerment of people, it was the centralization of authority, it was the centralization of wealth, it was the centralization of power. I suppose what it doesn't seem that there is some sort of a nerd paradigm that continually tries to reassert itself, the revolutions take place and then curiously after the the revolutions, power structures somehow superimpose themselves once more on the amorphous super state of potentiality that exists in the beginning there was the word and the word was God and the word was with God or as they might say in quantum physics a super state of potentialities that could become anything that can be spoken into being by us but through faith can be bought into being by us that requires God does not require us, the trilogy, the Trinity, it's not a movie set franchise, I've only been I've only been christian about three months, I've I've got a lot to learn, I've only been christian 10 minutes I had to take someone down the hospital, I was doing christianity within no time at all, I've been eating that christianity so hard, it's exhausting, thankfully there's eternity for me to recover, what does your what does your friends say? My friends say well even though I'm sort of here because I feel that the circumstances permit it and you've been kind enough to ask me here and people are kind enough to listen I'm proselytizing and talking but like I don't like to impose myself you know like if people don't ask me I won't like start eating them up with the christianity like wait for a moment where they seem sort of a bit weepy and vulnerable and sort of leaning and go have you considered Jesus? But if they ask they're getting it my wife cradle catholic my wife's father very devout catholic my mate most of my mates are people in recovery and we have to believe in God otherwise we can't cope and we'll kill ourselves so we've got no choice and like it's funny it's funny because we're talking about it more it's becoming more explicit among us and it's lovely to hear working class British men getting into Jesus it's sort of like my mate my mates like started watching the chosen and goes I'll tell you what only thought we'd done about 10 miracles, he's done 10 in one episode damn annoying I don't know what I'm gonna do with any early Mark I'm starting I like him I gotta say one of the highlights of my summer maybe the highlight of my summer we were in Milwaukee last month maybe I shouldn't say this but we were in Milwaukee for the Republican mention and Russell was there and he texted me and he goes do you want to go to a meeting I've been sober 22 years but I don't go to any meetings because I always thought it was weird and like you know whatever sure so we go to this meeting at seven in the morning in Milwaukee in a tough in the hood in Milwaukee and we walk in and I would say at least 50% of the people they're the men there were from a men's shelter or some post prison facility and I walk in with Russell they're like Russell what are you doing man he'd been there like I don't know three times or something before I got there and watching you watching your total transparency with the people there watching your love for them their love for you it was just like it was so it was so wild it was like I've not stopped thinking about it so we finish and I'm coming from the hotel and I had someone driving me and I said I'm doing it right back to downtown or hotel and he goes oh no I'm going with this person it's driving me it's like random person for the meeting and Russell gets in the car and I said where are you going is I don't know we're going to have to breakfast or something I thought I've never met anyone in my life who's more open to other people this morning I'm walking through the hotel lobby I look and there's Russell in the gift shop talking to the gift shop owner like this and they're like look at each other's really intense he's having like the world's deepest conversation with the gift shop owner and I think there's something about that that is truly Christian seeing every person as a human being not as a sum total of whatever badges the person has or achievement but seeing the person who got created the god and the other person and being totally open always to the possibility that god is trying to speak to you through that other person I was telling the people I was in the car with said they're like don't want to wrestle brand I was trying to explain what you're like and I said you'll never see Russell brand walk down the street with his head down like focused on the destination he's always totally alive to the possibility that god's going to like jump out in the form of some person and like give him a message he's looking into the eyes of every single person he passes and like half of like Russell brand hey how are you taking by the arm look right into their eyes can you imagine experiencing life that deeply all the time it's just beautiful to watch that I just want to tell you I noticed that well this is a lovely holiday I must say I'm really enjoying this I probably won't sneak back across that border I might stay here I mean listen I suppose one of the great opportunities that we are afforded by bringing our faith to the forefront of this conversation is the possibility of deep unity and of forgiveness because an election by its nature is a time of conflict and competition is an election it is a choice it is a decision but after this election you are going to be the inheritors of the new United States of America my hope is that it will be a period of reconciliation and coming together and I suppose in particular I'm encouraged by the joining of the of Trump's Republican magma movement by Robert Kennedy because I've known Bobby Kennedy for a while not as long as you of course but I believe Bobby Kennedy is a very decent and beautiful and kind man and I also note that since he has joined the campaign he is brought to the forefront and I'm of course not claiming to be an expert in your politics but I know it that he spoke about free speech and the integrity of that ending war and children's health from which I can only conclude he must have become some sort of right wing fascist I think the children's health was the giveaway you evil man Bobby like you seems like one of those people who had to give up a lot to follow his conscience and he does seem liberated in a way he seems like he's crossed some line where he had to do the most unpopular thing and in so doing he became kind of a different person that's the feeling I get from I just saw last week and I was really struck he seems different he just seems like liberated well yeah I watched that episode of your show and he was so lucid and articulate when he spoke about nature and our connection to nature and his own love of nature even though well formally you know I think you guys like to hunt stuff don't you and I know I do not judge Americans for hunting I've had that argument and I'm never having it again well we but to be clear we hunt and release they release them just get it you release their weak corpses fly oh non-judgment no judgment no higher tribunal than him no point in arguing I'm not arguing if anybody at all it's it's it's most liberating but yeah I to your point I think that your recent interview with with Bobby your interview with Callie Means has been fantastic Callie Means is contribution to the conversation about health and nutrition has been invaluable and counseling for the pizzas in this room by the way should I add her and I don't know where he is because I don't have my glasses on but I just ran into him and anyone who doesn't know about Callie Means and a sister Casey Means that is worth a Google search and their new book is a transformative book and I think it will change the country wait a minute there is he's he's drinking Coca-Cola he's drinking seed oils right now oh Callie no another hypocrite yeah he's pretty fantastic isn't he so I do I suppose you know when I'm doing my own well I'm continually saying is because I still have the sort of remnants a kind of Pompey of former of liberal friends the sort of sort of frozen there in time I sort of the do you say I have a Pompey of former liberal that's like so brilliant I just have to stop in a dollar chummering that is unbelievable that people frozen in place in the dinner table that is what I was trying to do with language it's so good so I'm like how can it be how can you consider this to be an advocacy for freedom how can the word liberalism a word that's so the etymology of it is so interwoven with freedom how can it mean more and more state power how can it mean more and more advocacy for war how can it mean more and more day of vacation of celebrity an empty vapid language how can it be more and more condemnation of ordinary people more super silliness and happiness and damn nation how can it be but that only the most superficial nod to kindness and compassion but a negation of the deepest compassion and love how can it be that's why I came up that one pay thing thank god you appreciate it I love it so I guess when I'm interested in the Bobby thing I love Bobby Kennedy personally I think you sincere for real and I think his love of nature and his description of why we love nature we love nature because it's the highest expression on the planet of beauty because God created it and and so we should preserve it and we should enjoy it and the same goes for animals I feel that way strongly but but it does seem like his entry into as good as dropped out you know or he could have endorsed the party that his family has been associated with for over a hundred years but he didn't they didn't want him by the way but I don't think you do it anyway it does seem like the moment that you've been talking about since I started watching you about this kind of convergence of people on the basis not of party identification but the basis of what they really believe shared values shared interests and that should be the basis of any movement were together because we have something real in common not something fake like a label but something real like a temperament a goal a dream an aspiration and it does seem like that's happening finally maybe I would think so because he's an extraordinary character to incorporate into that movement and I think it will be very difficult to come up with continual condemnation to such varied characters Trump it's easy for them to condemn him indeed as a misogynist or to continue the law fair Bobby Kennedy oh he's a coo keys a crack pot he seems to think that the pharmaceutical industry have some interest beyond your wellness and your general health the mad conspiracy theorist but what are they going to summons up about Tulsi Gabbard I mean as they sort of they're they you know what is it going to be they don't like that streak in a air that's the sort of thing a supervillain would have she's a lady zod they may say general zod Superman too sorry it was obscure I'm just wondering how the this is sort of the creeping condemnation and the lack of clarity when I watched that DNC and it's sort of a good the excitement for celebrity which by the way when I was the recipient of it I would have happily sort of guzzled down like a narcissist knit with easier to observe its ridiculousness on the outside but it's there was a fella that came out you'll know his name but he was a sort of a somewhat portly billionaire and you saw something like priest krig or something like that and he came out to say sort of like you know trumps not a billionaire I'm a better billionaire you know he said something like that but just before but what a message just before Bernie Sanders had been out to all billionaires all billionaires of every chill one person should be stopped and then that guy came out and said there's good billionaires and bad billionaires and I thought oh no they don't have any sort of central defining argument just the desire to win an argument and that's what happens I suppose when politics has been captured by the donor class and the lobbyist class I wonder when we will see donations extracted entirely from politics the profession of the lobbying entirely removed and nearly rated annihilated radical the centralization radical federalization I wonder when because surely at some point the possibility would exist to have the experiment that I understand your fire founding fathers were interested in unique experiments in republicanism or democracy you can use whatever term on offend anybody but you could have principalities that were responding to the will of the people and if the people are guided by god if all of us are attempting on our own not on our own but via throughout selves and throughout community to connect with god then it's more likely that we will create communities and states and nations and a planet of peace and prosperity from the bottom up not from the top down not like the imposition of power structures you can see its homogeneity on every matching high street or main street you can see that it's like it's landed on our cultures it's no different really in my country we have a similarly globalist leader an authoritarian who claims to care who wants to protect you from you yet another macron Trudeau stama these kind of characters that come out often with wonderful haircuts to tell us that they care for us and they care for us so much that we have to have a we have to remain in our homes and cover our mouths and we must not travel more than 15 you sort of get the sense that some dreadful revelations like mark of the beast is about to be implanted under and all for your safety of course you understand and I feel like come we just we'll I'll look after myself it's all right I don't need your continual care I don't want to be medicated cared for progressively do you I mean last time I was in the UK my the driver actually in the way to your house was going on about how much he loved you couldn't believe he was driving me to your house he couldn't believe him he was so thrilled and I said his his Russell brand popular here and he said with people like me it was actually a from Bangladesh this guy and he said people like me he's popular but everyone in charge hates him and that's true I could see why but do you feel like people you know in your country are waking up to what you just said I think so I wonder in the problem is and I suppose it's something that you've been very articulate about is the primary vessels of communication appear to be controlled by a particular class of people and that class of people are somewhat reluctant to unhook themselves from a rather satisfying illusion the illusion that what they're doing is valuable and important and that it's really vital that they continue to defect or to protect whatever target whatever nominated group it is that's convenient for that purpose from what they regard to be the sort of spilled and disgusting mass of ordinary people and if for a moment they were able to consider that that's no longer the congregation that's not the world they're dealing with anymore I suppose there was a for a brief moment after the cultural and civil rights movements of the 60s are kind of a alliance between working people and the intelligentsia and bourgeoisie it's kind of been steadily breaking down there's no question that the party of ordinary Americans working Americans is the Republican party under Donald Trump in my country there's a sense of vagrancy the party the party my country is meant to be the party of ordinary British people it's supposed to be the Labour Party but they hate ordinary British people you can kind of feel the loathing dripping in seriously from their venomous saliva as they angrily or rate from their secular pulpits condemning you for being you annihilating the culture from underneath annihilating the culture from on top and wondering why people feel bewildered desacralizing nature desacralizing the land put in a screen in front of every face filling every belly with sugar and then wondering why people are weary and discontent I'd feel a feel that once that class of people once and for all lose the battle of communication which seems to be happening unless censorship laws radically increasing it seems that that's a real possibility because platforms like ex are banned in Brazil those rumble the platform that I'm on there's a there is an obvious attempt to legit my censorship not to protect us but to control us they have no interest in protecting anybody and you can sort of see how protect any parent knows that protection and control are on a continuum and that's maybe fine when you're an adult looking after children but when you're a state claiming to protect a population that becomes a nefarious and dangerous ideology the only value that the state could offer I suppose is international security and I conceptually one might assume protection against rampant corporate advance and globalism but give it that there's plainly an alliance between the state and globalism in most of the countries and the fauna countries western countries call them what you will then that is a moot point plainly what's required is radical decentralization radical individual freedom radical new alliances and that's why I was so when we first started communicating I felt like oh my god Tucker Carson it felt like a kind of apostasy I felt like oh my god what am I doing coming on like Fox news and stuff but now I feel completely relaxed probably because you're not on Fox anymore I think some economic miscalculations were made over there at Fox I'm so grateful so my last question is where do you think we are in a year do you have a clear picture of that no I don't actually tucker I mean I'm worried about where we're gonna be an half an hour yeah I'm thinking about sprinting off this stage into the Phoenix night we're gonna get dinner because I'm starving my hope is there are for some time technology has created the possibility for further decentralization of power it is clear that this is being resisted by the use of crisis to legitimize decentralization I wonder like you when I see that there was of course naps that was created disarray in the record industry then there was under the Arab Spring it was clear that the online technology social media in particular could create revolutionary moments then through then through commercial ingenuity in the assertion of power the wild west of online spaces became piled over by the familiar logos of corporatism well I wonder if the technology and ingenuity there's granted for example uber or air b and b might be deployed to create more decentralized and localized democracy where people would have more control over how budgets were used in their region whether wherever budgets were spent on education or health or migration or security or military industrial complex I have a great faith in fact and you alluded to this earlier yourself in the wisdom of ordinary people populism is being purged as a term and being a quite it sort of kind of cleverly they're very good at this the way that they can start using terms like joy or weird but you know we can quickly gure and bring together like packages of people doing it again and again these points being reiterated and there's an attempt to make populism a kind of dirty word a dirty term but populism simply means as far as I can tell listening to people and forming government on the basis of consensus from the bottom up not from the top down so there is a possibility with the great work that you continue to do particularly if it's conducted with an open heart and radical inclusivity and the willingness to form new alliances there is a possibility that something extraordinary could happen in America and America's the one country where it really ought happen new alliances that absolutely defy their language of condemnation we must be radically open-hearted radically loving radically forgiving for who was the most radical being that we have ever known who loved more than anyone else who forgave more than anyone else who gave themselves that we might live I can think of I can't see in secularism any solution I can't see in politics anything other than the green shoots of possible change in the alliances that we've touched upon but in our Lord and Savior I can see the hope and redemption that was promised us and that will be my path so I I've never asked this before we haven't talked about this and I mean this in the most open possible way not everyone's going to share your beliefs for my beliefs but would you close in prayer oh yeah oh I call in the name of Lord Jesus Christ I'll heavily save your Lorda humbly in this great congregation in Phoenix Arizona with my host Tucker Carlson in deference to him but in ultimate deference to you our Lord and Savior to whom we are all your younger siblings and your children I pray in your name that the forthcoming election being opportunity for unity for America and for Americans for forgiveness and for grace that the dark and demonic forces that appear to operate at the level of the state the deep state and the corporate and global world to experience your light Lord that we are guided that you guide all of our tongues and all of our words and all of our hearts that we feel your forgiveness and that we feel your grace thank you Lord for the many gifts that you have bestowed upon us thank you for the glory of consciousness itself in which we can experience you and live you thank you for the beauty of nature in which we see your wisdom and your creativity and your infinite glory thank you Lord for the many leaders and thank you Lord that you were born and died that we may be forgiven and that we may have eternal life not through merit or anything that we have individually achieved for surely all of us are fallen but in your holy name we are forgiven by your act of redemption by your sacrifice in your name we pray our men our man Russell Brand ladies and gentlemen thank you the big tech companies sensor our content I hate to tell you that it's still going on in 2024 but you know what they can't censor live events and that's why we are hitting the road on a fall tour for the entire month of September coast to coast we will be in cities across the United States will be in Anaheim California to make rama swami Colorado Springs with Tulsi Gabbard Salt Lake City with a Glen Beck Tulsa Oklahoma with Dan Bongino Kansas City with Megan Kelly which at all with Charlie Kirk Milwaukee with Larry Elder Rosenberg Texas with Jesse Kelly ran rapids with Kid Rock Hershey Pennsylvania with JD Vance Reading Pennsylvania with Alex Jones or where Texas with Roseanne Barr Greenville South Carolina with Marjorie Taylor Green sunrise Florida with John Rich Jacksonville Florida with Donald Trump Jr. You can get tickets at Tucker Carlson dot com hope to see you there