Go, Roman, find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe, Rogan, podcast, by night. All day. Ben, you see, Jimin. Last time you were on, we barely scratched the surface of all the things that we wanted to talk about. So immediately, we're like, we got to do another one quick. Because you want to talk to about the Sphinx. This Sphinx, yes. Yeah, we were on. We got into the world. The labyrinth was kind of the big thing. Labyrinth is nuts. I still haven't been able to get over it. The 40 meter metallic shaped tectectic. Tectic. Tectic shape thing. Yeah. That's in the ground. Like, what is that? Well, I hope we'll find out. I mean, I don't know. It's the wheels do turn a little slowly. But the point of that was to try and drive some awareness. Maybe we'll get some sort of angel investor in there to go and look at it and solve the problem. Do something good. Someone needs to talk to Elon. Yeah. I'm not the guy. I talked to him much, isn't it? He's too busy. But someone who can all the way have them. Yeah, he's good. Someone, or maybe Bezos would like to be the first guy to get in there. Someone has to get in there. You have to figure out what that thing is. That's crazy. This might be one of the biggest mysteries in the entire human civilization record. Yeah. Who's the guy? Who's the director that went to the bottom of the off? Oh, Cameron. Cameron. I mean, he likes going places that nobody's gone before. They get a little home, get there. Maybe, maybe he can't do it. They just, I don't think enough people know. For the lot of people know that we're listening to this podcast, but not enough people that would do something, that can do something, get it out of me. It's like we reach a lot of knuckleheads. We reach a lot of widths of wide variety of people. But the percentage of people that have the resources to, you have to make something happen. They have to work something out with the Egyptian government, right? So they have to do something with those dams. Yes. Well, and you don't have to know. I don't think it takes the dams. You would have to remediate the water on the site, at least like somehow box it out, right? You got a drain. You'd have to drain this massive area. Or at least if you were targeted enough, you might be able to drain a smaller area to then excavate in that area, which probably explain to people that didn't listen to the last podcast. Just a real quick synopsis. Real good, it's, so the labyrinth, it's, we're talking about the great lost labyrinth of ancient Egypt, which was described by figures like Herodotus, Theodore, Ciculus, plenty of the elder. Figures from antiquity, these authors, and they've described it as being greater in magnificence than the pyramids like they had these, just mind bending descriptions of what this site was, like multiple levels, 3,000 rooms, you would get lost in it, had giant courtyards with pillars that all made from, I mean, one guy, I think it was Stribo described the roof as being a single piece of stone, which I don't think it was, but it's describing those perfect joins that you see in the real megalithic work from Egypt. So it's his giant mystery, we know it's there, and it was kind of lost to time, until we found it again, basically. It was discovered, it was always known about because there were clues about its location. It was always theorized to have been at this place called Hawara, which is near the phyum in Egypt. And, you know, Petri went there and dug it up, a flintest Petri in the late 1800s, early 1900s, and he found massive stone slabs, and he thought he was standing on its foundation, like it'd been quarried and taken away. And it's rather than that, that he was, it turns out he was most likely standing on the roof of like the top layers, like 10 meters, but I'm going around. He's so- He never got nuts. Quite in, but then in the Matterhark's position happened, I think in the mid, like 2017 or 2015, there was an expedition run by a guy named Lewis T'Cortia in partnership with the Egyptian government. They used ground penetrating radar, sonic techniques, like well-established subsurface techniques, and they found it. They found these massive cyclopian walls that were meters thick. It was a labyrinthy in structure. It's well verified, it's below the water table level of what's on that site now. So you have water table, sort of five meters below the surface, the labyrinth starts at nine, 10 meters. And that was, there's some controversy, and controversy around that report because it was buried. Like so, he found it, they never published a report. It was squashed by Zahi Waas. This is according to Louis T'Cortia. He threatened him and his team with national security sanctions, if they talked about it. It just was put away. He waited a few years. He finally released the report. It was like holy shit, we found the labyrinth. And then this then spurred some other companies to use some of these new space-based scanning techniques. There's been at least two that have been done very different techniques, but they found the same thing. They found that there is, in fact, a massive underground structure at this place called Hwara. It goes much deeper than what you could reach with those ground penetrating radar and those established techniques. 60, 70 meters below the ground. There's multiple levels through your full levels. And they correlate, they say one scans a statistical model. Another one is a, that uses the high frequency photography along with, I think, seismic data. Very similar to the Doppler tomography work that's being done by the Italians at places like the Giza Plateau now. And they both correlate, yes, there's a big structure, but one of the most interesting facts that came out of this scan was it seems like in this massive central atrium that says one big giant open rooms, 40, 50 meters long, that connects to all of these levels, there seems to be this unidentified metallic object that's freestanding in this room. It's about 40 meters long, and it seems to be ticked, ticked, shaped is what this report said. So it's a fucking UFO. Is it UFO in Egypt? Yeah, I don't know. I mean, it's tantalizing. Could you imagine, can you imagine if they get in there and they really do find a recovered spacecraft? Then what do we do then? Because if this is a public excavate, that's the question. We had to bring in the seals. We need to lock that place down. Maybe we need to occupy Egypt just to figure out how to fucking get this done. Okay, bye, Hawara. Let's just, let's just, just to walk. You have to, you have to have time. You have to have the whole country. You have to bribe them, something, give them money. Whatever you got to do, like if I was a president, that would be like my number one priority. I mean, you know, yeah, it's, it has the, I think there's been a little bit more of this from Egypt, they, the, I guess the establishment there, they seem a little more willing to engage in some of the, the mystery. I genuinely do think that, that, that discoveries like these can only help and boost tourists, like it's going to take us to bring people in. It will bring way more. Could you imagine if they actually figure out how it would have drained all the water out of the lab or not? They give you a tour and show you the spaceship. How much you paying to see this spaceship? Bro, I'm paying a ton of money to go see that spaceship. That's a special permission. Like that's the way we do. They're very good at that. Like there's, there's a lot of places you can now go in Egypt that are these special permissions. It's thousands of dollars. But we know we go much money. They could charge like 10 grand. They could charge like a lot of money just to go look at the spaceship. Might be like Mecca. Like Mecca for UFO dorks. It would be insane. To see what, who knows what, well, the guy did say too. It didn't seem like any metal that he'd seen before. Like it, it couldn't identify what type of metal it was. Because it's alien. Right. It's element one for sure. It's alien. It's made, uh, it's same stuff that comments made out of. AI Atlas. Oh yeah, it's three to three. I Atlas. Yeah, whatever it is. The thing that's offgassing some nickel, nickel alloy or something. It's a giant nickel. The size of Manhattan. It's yes, it's it's jetting towards the sun. Although they didn't didn't NASA came. They think they released their images, I think recently. There's some images that came out and said, oh, the comments doing this and doing that. It's doing a lot of weird stuff. But it definitely seems to be a comment. Yeah. Unless you ask Avi Lobe and he's like, anything can be a thing. It's got to be. It's got a point. He does. We don't know what one would look like. We've not seen. Yeah. I mean, it's a small sample size as it is for interstellar object. Right. Three to compare. But two of them have been really fucking weird. So I think the point we're getting at is, and this is the point of all these conversations, is that there is some stuff that is yet to be discovered that has previously been discovered that might be like it might blow the dam down on all this stuff to the point where like, OK, whatever you think happened here, a lot more happened. And it seems way crazier. If the stuff underneath the Giza Plateau is correct. If the stuff, which is like what? And if the lab or not, if they can show you that this not only was Herodotus depicting an actual place, but we can show it to you and it's preserved and it's been under the water for 50 years. Yeah. It would be amazing. And yes, I think some of these things would knock down everything. It's a house of cuts. Right. I think there are elements of that that are in that are obvious, but there people can explore them and it starts to knock down the house of cuts. It's how people end up with this. Just looking at the contradictions in ancient Egypt, but there are other examples of what I would say like these things like the matter-harrish position that have been discovered, but then sort of cover it up and kept secret. And a lot of them have to do with you have the same tie in with these ancient stories and and and accounts from history, not just from the the Roman and Greek, his, his stories, but also the Arab stories like Alma Sooty, for example, the Herodotus of the Arabs, they called him, you know, he talked about tales of these tunnels and chambers beneath the Sphinx that there were, you know, there were ruse beneath the Sphinx that then led out to like three different tunnels. You have a number of other Arab historians from his far back is like 600 AD that that have stories of getting into the pyramids and then getting lost in tunnels and chambers beneath them. And yeah, I mean, there's a lot of these, here's these stories of like the whole of records, people like Edgkeysy, the American psychic in the 1940s who, you know, he would, Edgkeys, you heard of Edgkeys, yeah, so he would fall into these trance-like states and he'd have these visions, he's called like the the sleeping prophet they would call him or he's like one of the American's psychic. And he wasn't just about things, around Egypt, he did he did prophesies and talk about locations for three halls of records, which were these Atlantian cases of information like a pre-deluvian civilization. He did call it Atlantis, but he would also have these predictions about the stock market and a lot of people made a lot of money based on his predictions and that led to the he was really good at it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So apparently when, I mean, whether it was luck or I don't know, I mean, I have, I does that's always the question when it comes to like psychic, if you were real psychic, why wouldn't you make all the money in the world from the stock market? It did happen. There was a lot of people made a lot of money and he did evidently too as well and so that led to the formation of something called the Eggy Casey Foundation, the ARE, the Association for Research and Enlightenment is the name of the nest who are going strong today. And they've been looking to try and find his halls of records and they've been trying to verify the Casey's predictions. One in particular that they've been chasing down is the famous hall of records, which he said was beneath the pools of the Sphinx. So there's not, you know, the stories of this hall of records and these rooms beneath the Sphinx go back thousands of years, like, I mean, just just not just the Aries, but also Herodotus and these other guys also talked about that whole area of the Sphinx and everything else being vastly more ancient even than the Pyramids. But there was some work done that happened in recent times, like in the 1990s. It's been a search going on since the early 70s that the ARE has been involved in. And a lot of this is quite secretive. None of it, a lot of this has never really come to light, but there's some, until very recently, in fact, there's been some footage that came up that showed that there are, in fact, tunnels beneath the Sphinx that may well have been explored. We're not quite sure. It's an interesting story. So it does involve Mark Lainer and Zahi Huas, who are the authoritative figures involved in Egypt. Are they bottlenecking this as well? Well, do I have to go over the given the hug? Maybe. Come on, guys. Join us. Allegedly. We'll blow you up. We'll make you like so much more popular. Well, it will help. It should be more tourism. That's, and that's, I think the, the current guys that have been running the Department of Antiquities are embracing a little bit of that idea, but I do think there's been a little bit of gatekeeping that's happened. Well, I think it's a generational thing. I agree. You know, and I think when you are an academic or you are a person that's in a position of power like Zahi is, and you've been running things for so long. And this new thing comes along. It's very threatening. You know, and when there's a lot of movement and momentum behind it, it's very threatening. But that thing will just embrace you. If you say, oh my goodness, look what we've learned. We've learned more new, amazing things about way for it. Egyptians. Because the same people, it's just older. It is older versions. This is why it's so dumb. It's like you're just, you are only allowing part of the narrative to go through about how magnificent this culture is. It's already the most magnificent culture in human civilization. And in terms of history, when we look at it, nothing is anything like Egypt. It's crazy. No, and it would imagine it's bigger and crazier and richer. It would, it would, it would just, it richer in a longer history in this place. It's still like it is, it is the most magical place in the world. Yeah. It's, it is unfortunate. I was just talking about this. Yes, that I in fact, the, the, the nature of establishment being to resist change, right? It's, it's unfortunate control. Control into resist change and it's. Maintain control, not lose control. That was the fear. The fear is if I am a self professed expert with an institution behind me with a nice name. And then all sudden some fucking asshole with an Australian accent comes along. It comes along a tech guy who becomes a YouTuber because he watched some assholes podcast when he was younger. Yep, pretty much. That's true. But it's you and Graham and Jimmy Corsetti and all these other amazing people. And you guys are, you're, you're showing the world that there's another side to a lot of these stories and it's a legitimate side. It's not just a legitimate. It's an unfathomable side. When you're looking, you're looking at some of the stuff like ballback, you look in those, those stones, it's unfathomable things that no one is, no one is saying they're unfathomable. No one's saying we don't know. Everyone is saying don't worry about it. We got it all figured out like that. That's, I agree. I think embracing them and I think I've made this point before, but it's this is, it's the nature of the discourse that's changed that has forced I think a stronger reaction from the establishment. Yeah, the, the general debate used things differently. Well, the general public involved in the discussion now, if you go back more than 60, 70 general public didn't have access to this information. They were, I mean, these discussions only happened in societies and in universities, but with the rise of firstly alternative authors and then the internet now everybody's got a chance to have a platform and a set of ears to hear this information. And it becomes more popular guys like you have had a huge impact on the popularity of these topics. And that's I think what is threatening. It's been popular. The problem is they haven't been legitimized. Like these ideas have always been popular. It's just nobody gets, it's like there's a food that you want that no one's serving. You know what I mean? That's what it's like. It's not like it wasn't popular. Yeah. Like I'm not unique in my interest in ancient Egypt or in ancient civilizations. There's everybody have, look at, let me ask men, like what do you think about it? Ancient room. Yeah, right. It's just a normal part of being a person that lives in a current civilization, wondering what it was like in the past. And then when you see something like Egypt, you're like, none of this makes sense. No, there's massive contradictions and I think so old. Well it does. And I think what's made this, well it's called an alternative perspective. Much more possible, even plausible is all of the adjacent fields of science and work that is basically providing a plausible context for these ideas that there was an ancient lost civilization that is responsible for the roots of some of the things we see in these civilizations responsible for some of the technological enigmas that we find on these sites. And that, you know, this is all stuff that's happened in recent years in adjacent fields of science, things like the extension of the human timeline, the evidence for severe erosion on these sites, our understanding of climate history and... The extension of the capitalism timeline is huge. That's huge. Because, you know, we were just Jesse Michaels and I were just having a conversation about this. I was like, imagine if you would not lose any cognitive abilities, no decline at all and modern science figured out a way to let you live a thousand years. Imagine if you're a person who's working on material sciences and you're doing like 3D printing, you get to live a thousand years and you're a researcher and you still show up at work every day for a thousand years or 10,000 years. That sounds nuts. But it doesn't. Because if you can extend life, you can extend life for a very pro law, especially with gene editing and a lot of the other crazy, who knows if they already figured that out back then? Data brokers are invading your privacy. They're recording everything you do online and if you live in the US, they're selling your information to anyone and everyone who's willing to buy it. Thankfully, there's a way to stop all the tracking and spying and that's with ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is an app that hides your IP address and re-routs 100% of your online activity through secure encrypted servers. This keeps data brokers from tracking your information, protecting you from invasive advertisers, scammers, and even criminals. ExpressVPN is now offering three different plans, allowing you to customize your VPN experience. The basic plan starts as low as $3.49 a month. That's less than 12 cents a day. Or if you want all the bells and whistles, including identity protection, credit monitoring, and a dedicated IP, just choose one of their more premium plans. It's up to you. Plus, right now, you can get four extra months of service if you tap the banner or go to ExpressVPN.com slash Rogan. That's a price as low as $3.49 a month plus four extra months of service. Go to ExpressVPN.com slash Rogan. If you're watching on YouTube, get your four extra months by scanning the QR code onscreen or by clicking the link in the description. I mean, this seems to be some evidence that they might have because I mean... What about me? Well, this is a big part of it. I mean, not just them, but almost every civilization that talks about even the Bible. It talks about pre-deluvian or pre-flood civilizations often talks about people living for hundreds of years. If not longer than that, thousands of years, you have an Egyptians king's list that does the same thing. But even in the Bible, you know, Noah was 600. So you have... Yeah, I think something like that. You have many examples of these what they would describe as pre-cataclysm or pre-flood civilizations that where people live for a long time. But you just... I mean, not just... There's an extension of individual human timeline, but we also know that there's an extension of the human, like how long humans have been here. Right. Right. Because that's going back further and further all the time. We have skulls and fossil record evidence now where it's just slightly more than 300,000 years genetic and studies into teeth morphology. You make the possibility open to... Oh, whatever, 700,000 years ago. There's a skull found. Yeah. I mean, I think that was more... I think there's more of a homo sapien clay to skull. So it's like a may not be homo sapien exactly us. Right. For a variety, but that's a whole other aspect on this too is that where the last humans left, right, there were other types of humans that we know live for in some cases a couple million years. Yeah. Similar, like even bigger brain sizes than we did. We don't really know what their capabilities were. We only can work with ourselves and then you combine that lengthening of time of like, okay, you have an intelligent social species that has the ability to build on knowledge of your, you know, your ancestors. So, you know, one guy spends his life making the spear. The next guy spends his life perfecting how to throw it. It's just, we have this unique ability to stand on this knowledge that's passed down from our direct ancestors and therefore build up our capability. And it never be leads towards civilization. And if you stress that way back in time and now you look at things like the climate history and the history of cataclysm on this planet, this possibility that this may, these civilizations may have arisen and then been completely destroyed at some point over the last several hundred thousand years. You can't, you can't just dismiss that. There's a strong possibility that it's just, it's possible. And in fact, there seems to be a lot of other contextual evidence to support it in origin tales, in stories in the echoes of sacred geometry and advanced mathematics and knowledge of the cosmos and also, you know, planetary dimensions and geodetic data, all this stuff that's encoded into these, into these monuments and into these stories and tales that we can't explain how these so-called primitive civilizations like the Egyptians or the Sumerians knew this information yet. It's there and it's encoded in their monuments and in their data. But we can't explain even the Greeks, you can't explain the precision of some of the aspects of things like the pyramids. Yeah, I mean, you just, and again, with the cataclysm that we know have happened, the younger dryest just being the most recent. But if you go back several hundred thousand years, you have these massive, you know, interglacial periods in glacial maximum periods, right, that these cycles that we go through, where you have this big glaciation build up and then you have just, you know, these what must have been catastrophic floods and then interglacial periods. In fact, there was a period called the Aeolian period, it was about 120,000 years ago. That was very much like the Holocene that we're in today. In fact, it lasted longer than the Holocene has currently lasted. We've been in the Holocene, maybe 10,000 years. 10,000, 11,000 years, I think the Aeolian period was more than 15 to 20,000 years where it was stable weather. Sea levels were like three, four meters higher than where they are today, but it wasn't like the Holocene, it wasn't like the height of, you know, a glacial maximum where it's a difficult place to live. It was a calm period. I mean, the only reason our civilization is here today is because of the nice weather of the Holocene, right? We have warm weather. We haven't had like massive catastrophes that have been like, you know, extinction level events kind of thing to get in our way and knock us back to the stone age. There was a similar period like that that lasted longer than we've been in this nice period about 120,000 years ago. And if you consider after that the cycles of glaciation and flooding then particularly the younger driest, that'd been just almost nothing left. It just, this, the stone in places that survived what happened afterwards. So I do like my range of possibilities for okay, when did these artifacts originate? Like when did some of this architecture originally be built? It's not to me just 15,000 years ago. It could be 100,000, 200,000 years or even more. And again, more contextual evidence to support that is things like the erosion that we can see on some of these sites. One of my favorite topics in the last couple of years has been looking at the erosion on the Giza Plateau. Yeah, I wanted to bring that up. And of some of the big monuments in particular like the whole middle pyramid complex on the Giza Plateau. Let's show some of the images that you used in some of your videos because it's pretty, it's pretty fascinating when you look at it. It's kind of undeniable. It is. And what's fun about this is too is that we don't have to guess. We know how long it takes. We studies have been done about like limestone erosion. Turns out there's almost an endless number of conveniently dated limestone slabs all around the world. There are tombstones in cemeteries, right? So you can get dated, they get cut, they get inscribed with the date when it was put up. So you can measure it and you can come back over whatever decades and measure erosion. And so how long does it take for this face of this limestone erosion to recede? This is the nutty stuff. Yeah. And because we're assuming that unless something happened to the outside of that, that this was at one point in time flat and smooth. 100% because there are still blocks that are protected. So a lot of this has been rebuilt. This is tricky to see. So you can actually see that the less eroded sections are actually modern restorations because this is so eroded that it's falling apart. And this isn't even the exterior of this structure. This is the interior core masonry. All of this was also for God knows how many thousands of years encased in granite. It also points to a trend. It points to a pattern that when human beings find ancient things, they do renovations try to keep them up. Yeah. Which is one of the things that's been, you know, over and over and over again. We've talked about that. Yeah. There's so many structures that seem like there's multiple timelines working on the same exact ground. It is 100% of human tendency to renovate and restore all of these to reuse these sites. If you don't own a gross way, like what they do with the spinks, like the paws. That's gross. It is. We're renovating it and restoring it to use it as a tourist attraction. Like the Romans renovated and restored it to use as a ceremonial center. But it's a very shitty version. Oh, I agree. The original. And there's a lot of assumptions. You're assuming you knew the form of it. You're making your own form. Yeah. Over the feet. I have a problem. Yes, that was one of my problems with the, they were talking about restoring the middle pyramid, like the third pyramid, like the main car pyramid, the small one. Yeah. Small. It's monstrous. But it has these granite casings don't dry. And the last of the top four or five courses are still there. But it was at least 15, 16 courses of granite. And there's all this granite, these massive granite blocks and rubble. And the staff of Missouri, who was at the time, the head of the department and tikka, he's just talking about, we're going to rebuild it. We're going to put it back together. And I know this and I'm like, please, no, because what an asshole. Well, he did something cool, which was he excavated in front of it. He did show that the courses keep going down. But then he's like, we're going to restore it. I'm like, do they would use concrete. It never, it would be a facsimile of what it was. Is he still around? No, he actually, because he said that there was a lot of international outcry for that very reason. And then in fact, the government formed a tribunal to figure out what to do. The tribunal was headed by the U.S. and he lost his job. So yeah, don't he's not in that. Yeah, that's not how it's crazy. It only wants to see the restored pyramid. I'm also seeing what's left. Yes. Well, we can use our imaginations to they are restoring a lot of the, I don't necessarily agree with this either. Things that are actively falling apart short, you need to buttress on like, a lot of this wall. So this is part of the middle pyramid complex at Giza. And there's a lot of blocks like this. There are limestone blocks that are 11, 12 meters long, like four meters wide, you know, two, 300 tons that were stacked up on top of each other. And they eroded so greatly on the inside that they've actually fallen over at some point in and tick with their fallen off. And so they are trying to buttress and support things that are going to fall. I'm off for that. I mean, there's a lot, just the amount of erosion that it takes for that to happen to blocks like this of this muma litic limestone, which is a very hard form of limestone full of fossils. And it's, it's you're talking like two, three feet in some places of erosion of limestone. And if you look at the studies that have been done into like limestone erosion rates and there's been several, they've studied them in coastal wave action environments where it's like getting battered by waves, they put in rivers, you know, they put limestone cubes on the top of one of the governmental buildings in DC and left there and studied it over decades and like, okay, it's tiny amounts. But in a normal weathering environment, right, this is assuming a lot more rainfall than what happens in Egypt, which gets very little rainfall by the way, but the place like Washington DC or somewhere where you get like 40, 40 inches of rainy is something like that. Just normal weathering erosion to do two feet of erosion like this more than 100,000 years. And so, and that's I think you can extend that because if, well, the thing is maybe there was more rainfall here at some point. We know there was, after since about 4000 BC, the African humid period was, was, was in place. That's another big, I think, tell for, for what happened, particularly on the Giza plateau and the sites in Egypt in that, you know, one of the things that always mystified me about the, the Sphinx is like, it's spent so much time buried and sand up to its chest over the last several thousand years. More time than it hasn't been. We have to work pretty hard to keep the sand out of it now. In fact, there were multiple attempts to dig it out of the sand in the 1800s that failed. And then they just literally two or three years later, it's sort of buried up to its chest again. Seems like a design flaw. Right. If you build this thing in a low spot in a windy desert where it's going to fill with sand, it's just I don't think it's attributed to it again. Cuffra. That's right. And then it wasn't there an inscription that were Cuffra said that if he could uncover the Sphinx, he would be the pharaoh. This is right. It's actually thought most is the fourth, that's called a, there's a still A in front of the, in the chest in there in the Sphinx. So talk most is the fourth about 1000 years later. He was the one that was said if he uncovered it. We knew it was buried in sand during the domestic agenda. That was what I was going to get. So, talk more than the fourth about thousand years later. He was one that was right. If he uncovered it. We knew it was buried in sand during the domestic adjutants of what I'm going to get to. Yes. So that's the, so that during that time, no erosion. Well, this is a whole, yes, so there's a whole other, um, so it's protected. Right. So this is another big issue with, uh, the wind and sand erosion. When you talk specifically about the Sphinx enclosure, I mean, this is, this is one of the big controversial, I mean, where is the big dynamics? The face is eroded. Exactly. And the, if it's wind and sand, that's the only thing that's exposed. And that's not as eroded. It's been one of my major points for a long time. It is to be fair. It is the yarding that the sedimentary layers of limestone. It is a slightly harder form of limestone, but still you're talking thousands and thousands of years where that the only thing above the sand level was basically the face. And it's then, and they explain all of this deeper erosion on the body of the Sphinx and the Sphinx enclosure to wind and sand. I know obviously Robert Shock is different interpretation, but yes, you would see erosion on that. But you just don't. I think the most plausible explanation for that Sphinx is that, yes, that the face was recarved in the dynastic period, probably, but I could have been by Cuffra. Well, actually, may well have been before that as well because there's other evidence that suggests that the Sphinx was already buried in sand at his time. Um, what the, the the trip, the attribution to Cuffra comes from two main sources. One is its position. So where the Sphinx is, you have the middle pyramid, you have the causeway that runs down and you have the middle pyramid. You have the pyramid temple, the complex where we were seeing that erosion. You had this massive causeway that runs down to then the valley temple, which is this, you know, very famous massive megalithic structure. And right next to the valley temple is the Sphinx. And in front of that is the Sphinx temple. So they sort of attribute it and make it well. It's part of the middle pyramid complex. The other attribution comes from what's been written on that dream still a between the in the legs of the Sphinx at its chest. It does say Cuffra on there, but there's a lot of it's a controversial statement to say that that means Cuffra built it. There were several Egyptologists who had different, and this is back in the, you know, early 1900s, they had different interpretations for what that said, what they they believe it said was Cuffra was trying to do what his ancestors had done well, had done before and all that thought most of this was trying to do what his ancestors had done before and Cuffra has mentioned there, which in terms of dig it out of the sand and become king. Like excavated from the sand. That's the move that everybody goes through. Well, it's always, I think it's a proper, it could be a great explanation for that dream. So it could also just be like governmental propaganda, right? So he could be, you could put that in there and say, see, I'm divinely ordained to be king because I dug this out of the sand. Just in the interest, yeah, just the interest of keeping this stand alone, please explain to people the whole deal with Dr. Robert Shaw from Boston University and the water erosion. Yes. I know. And if you've heard this before, I'm sorry. I just want it for people that are like, what? The, the water erosion that appears to be thousands of years of rain. Yeah, it's actually good, it's good background context because it does apply to not only this thing. So it's the most famous example, I think, and well known example of, of a, of again, an adjacent field of science coming in and challenging some of the doctrine that's been around Egyptology. But it was actually swallowed a little bit originally, I think proposed that his work was followed up by John Anthony West, who then brought Dr. Robert shock, who's a, who's a professor of geology at Boston University to the Sphinx. This was, I believe, the late 80s, early 90s. And he went and looked at the erosional, Pat's, I just think sits inside an enclosure. It's carved from bedrock. So it was originally what you would call a yardang, which is like a limestone outcropping. And they, so they cut, they cut down in this big enclosure and they cut the floor and then they, they sort of shaped the Sphinx from this natural outcropping of bedrock. So you had, and we know this because the, the destruction next to the, the Sphinx are in front of it called the Sphinx temple is actually, you can line up the sedimentary layers of the blocks that are in there from the Sphinx enclosure. So we know that there were blocks taken from here. So this is all predictably sort of cut walls and the Sphinx would have been nicely finished when it was. And he looked at these patents. If you go there today, I think I have pictures of the walls of the Sphinx enclosure in there. And it's just these deeply eroded vertical channels. And, and the Sphinx bodies harder to tell because it's been restored so many times that the ancient Egyptians restored it, the Romans restored it, we restored it a couple different times. Yeah. Yeah. It's fine. But the nice thing is the walls of the enclosure really hadn't been touched. So you can see the natural erosive patents. And he looked at that and went, that's rainfall erosion, but not just some rainfall erosion, literally the result of thousands of years. It's the only way you would get these patents in the stone is thousands of years of rainfall erosion. Obviously, geezers are really, really dry. I mean, Egypt's a really dry place these days. You have to go back to time periods pre 4000 BC when the Sahara was a savanna. It was grasslands with lake basins and river systems. And it had a lot more rain. You didn't have this annual flood, you know, cycle that you have now. It's, it was like a lot more rainfall. It was much more verdant and green. The Giza plateau would have been green. Which makes sense. That's why they would settle there in the first place. Exactly. Yeah. Why you, when they didn't build in a desert, I mean, you went because it would fill up a sand. It also makes sense why they would flourish because they had so much resources because it was like so green and furred, probably plenty of plants, plenty of animals. Well, there's, you know, there's a really other good point associated with that that I wanted to bring up. And but first just to finish on the, this finks erosion. So when, when shock came out and said this, he really thought he was, you know, moving the story forward and he took it to an archaeological conference and they literally laughed him out of the room and they said, this is, you know, this is, this is ridiculous. Like where are the pot shirts? Because I think Mark Lane is comment saying, like, where's the evidence that something's at least 12,000 years old marking them? Yeah. So he was, he got his good taste of the, I guess the old boy network of the, the archaeologists on that day. But he's, you know, he's being very conservative in that dating also of saying, well, 12,000 years, it could well be tens of thousands of years. In fact, it seems more likely to me based on the erosion evidence that we see not only in this finks enclosure, but, but elsewhere, on the Giza Plateau, it's, there's many places where you see just a huge amount of erosion that you can't really explain within the timelines and the climate of dynastic Egypt as we know it from, you know, roughly 3000 BC till even now, like because you've still, it's still a roating, right? But yeah, he, he could be vastly more ancient. I actually, I actually think there's something else that came out. Was it the earlier this year? I think it was much earlier this year or maybe late, late last year, but there was a study done that showed that during the African human period, so this period of time before the desert desertification of Egypt, the Sahara becoming a desert, when it was green and there was more consistent rainfall, there was a lot of, there was a lot more water in the Nile, as we call it, and it had different channels. One of the things they discovered was that there was a branch of the river Nile, then it's called the Aramat branch, and it was in places up to a kilometer, most of a mile wide, so it was quite a extensive branch, but it turns out that all of these valley temples on all of these pyramid sites, from Dasha or in Sakara, Abhisia, Abigurah, Giza, all of those valley temples were built on the shores of this extinct branch of the Nile. So it's like pyramid, you know, pyramids, when you look at a pyramid, it's not just a pyramid, there's a whole complex associated with it, there's a temple, there's a structure at the pyramid, there's a causeway, there's what they call valley temples down, and it's like, these were all built on the shorelines of this branch of the Nile that went basically disappeared 4,000 somewhere between 4,000 and 3,500 BC, but it was in place for thousands and thousands of years before that. And today, if you go there and they say, well, you know, the valley temple, yep, they would ship their stones from Asswan, and it'd be like three months of the year, it would flood enough where you can get a boat in, I mean, I've seen pictures, there are pictures of when that flood happened before they built the dam and stop that process. And it's, and some years, it's a puddle, like it's, there's not, I mean, you talk about boats that were carrying hundreds of tons of granite, and only in a three month period of year, can you get them in there? There's many, there would be many years where there's not even remotely enough water to get it anywhere near the valley temple. I don't think they even use boats. Oh, I know, I don't either. I mean, sounds crazy to say, but I think they had a technology that we haven't even begun to mess with yet. Did logistical achievements of the ancient Egypt, of what is represented in ancient Egypt is like, like nothing you can see anywhere. I mean, there's Balbek, and then there's, to me, the best example is the Statue of Tannis. There's a statue, I mean, there's several of these thousand plus ton statues. Like half a dozen of them, they get remnants of them, but there was one that was, there was moved to thousand kilometers, like a thousand kilometers, and it would have been, it was a single piece granite statue easily a thousand tons. Show that image, Jeremy, if you would, please. I think it's giant objects in there or something. There's, I mean, and this is Tannis in the Delta, Aspond down here at the quarry. I mean, downstream on the Nile, there's, there's another example of the one at Kannak that's the whole shoulder and arm of a composite quartzite. Again, try again, it's size of the Statue of Liberty basically, like single piece granite solid statue. I mean, there's all these pieces, that's a small one, which is insane. That's that. Yeah, that's look at the people in the background and say, that's a small one. Yeah, it's only 200 tons. I mean, it's 250, maybe. It's not. You have 10 times almost that size. The crazy thing is also how beautiful it is. Oh, like how symmetrical it is. The workmanship on these is, is a stonish. And you can still feel like this is one of the signs, I think, when you get to the finishing on some of these statues. That's a, yeah, that's a joint kneecap. There's one with an arm and a shoulder sort of poking out that's a really good example. And that's Balbeck. Yeah. The point is, when you, when you talk about how beautiful that like how, that one that's lying down, Jamie, there's a, the back one couple that one. Yeah. The look at the, the finishing on that, like how incredible, you see his nipple. You can see all the, you know what I mean? Thousands of years later, you see the detail on the headdress. You see all, and then you have to realize like this was done with people that didn't have steel. Yeah. And you can supposedly, right? Definitely. I mean, they did, yeah, later periods, like in the new kingdom, they had some more iron knots necessarily steel. But you know, you know something else here, like see that cartoosh. See how poor that is, relative to the finishing of the face and the chest. So this is the other thing that happened. This is why no one's sort of like you don't get archaeologists saying, well, that's, that's who's, we don't know who made it. We know who made it because they put their name on this. That is literally Ramsey's the second car to short. They all recognize it anyway. But that's awesome that you recognize that. If you come to Egypt, you'll recognize it too. He was, Petri called Ramsey's the second, the great usurper because he put his name on, I can, everything. And he counted in deep like this too. He would have it have it be him and his father said he the first and his son, Marin Patel, they were all, they were all in that business of rebatching the sum of this stuff. So they would find all things and they would put their name on it. They would claim it for themselves. I think it's the nature of, I mean, during that period in the new kingdom in the 19th dynasty, you know, it's all I did this on me. Yeah, it was the height of dynastic Egyptians, Egypt's power and wealth. So they had all of this, I think hubris and arrogance to make themselves one of the gods. And it's one of the, I think these statues are, there's a lot to unpack in these because I also happen to think that when you look at these massive statues, you can't really explain with the capabilities of the dynastic Egyptians. I think it also explains their iconography because if they inherited these giant statues, like it's those are the gods. Like you're looking at this, imagine a statue the size of the Statue of Liberty standing out in the desert and it's just sitting there looking at you with this face. And the crossmanship on these are amazing. Kind of see it here. See how the eyeballs are like tilted down almost? And it looks like a smile on the face from here. But when you, it's perspective, when you stand beneath them and you look up at them, they're looking at you. And it's not so much, it's not a smile. It's just like a straight line. It looks straight. They've built, they've shaped these faces for perspective as if you're viewing them from the ground. If they're absolutely incredible. And there's also been studies done on some of these to show the faces are pretty much perfectly symmetrical. Again, that's crazy. Not something that you can achieve. Or not something that's done in modern artwork, the perfect symmetry, that's not a, it's not even a characteristic of a human face. Like we aren't like that. Our nostrils are different sizes and whatever. But because we're hybrids, we could be. We're just, we're imperfect. We're imperfect beings, Joe. I think they made us. I mean, they made us. I think something came here from somewhere else or something was already here. And intervention theory did something with lower harm and it's, uh, have you read Lloyd Pies work? I've heard of it, but I haven't read anything of this. Everything you think you know is wrong. Fun lecture, rest in peace, Lloyd. He was in there some interesting genetic evidence that's this, I think suggests that as a possibility, our chromosome, all difference between us and other mammals of our type. Almost like we've had these, the teleerides have been attached. We've been genetically engineered. We've got bread and talks about that. Yeah, we have some real strange characteristics for being on this planet. Like we dive exposure at 80 degrees in the shade. We can't look at the sun. You see dogs, you get a dog stare at the sun like this and like, what are you doing? Like I'm fine. Why can't you do that? I can't even see it it. Not we have no bad for the television. Yeah, it's interesting. Also when they look at all these other versions of humans that they find, almost all of them were more durable. Oh, broom sticks to ax handles doable like it's multiple gaps of that. Isn't that kind of in the Bible? When doesn't the Bible say the meek shell and hair through? Well, where the meek when it comes to like where the meek yeah, we're just the meek maybe where the meanest where the meanest and the tricky is because we had to be, which is like all animals. When you know, you have to, you're small like hyenas are fucking ruthless. Oh, yeah. The reason why they're ruthless is because lions are bigger. They had to figure it out. You know, they had to be fucking mean and nasty. And I think I think we probably wiped out or inner bread with everything that wasn't us. And that's a wrap. Sorry. Sorry, your big bones don't work on arrows. Yes, you do. Dummies didn't figure out catapults yet. The real tactics. Yeah, real tactics, technology. I mean, I think that's also probably one of the reasons why we're so obsessed with making better stuff, including weapons. Yeah, you know, yeah, I think so. I mean, there is I don't rule out the mean personally, my opinion, I think there's a either via pants, spermia or intervention theory like that where we've been there is a huge mystery as to as to both our species and then how life itself kind of kicked off. Like that's even pants, boom, he's like kicking the can down the road problem. Like how do you, how does DNA happen? Because it's one of the most interesting things to me is like DNA as a technology has never changed. Right. So from single cell organisms right down through to us, the way life is expressed as a technology DNA, like the how it expresses life has changed, but DNA, I don't think has changed. Like it's like there's one way that life expresses itself and how it forms is like the actual origins of life. It's does. It's it is a possible human operating system. Yeah, life life life operating system. What is that? What is your take on those trideactal mummy? I have I don't know. I think there's I would suggest you, Michael's episode on it. I literally, I'm not all of it. I've seen some of it. Yeah, the scam. I've seen the scans. Yeah, I saw some of that. I've seen all the information. I don't want to get tricked. So I'm like, but Jesse said that seeing them in person, I just talked to him about it. He said it was otherworldly. He said it was incredibly strange, like very, very surreal seeing them in person because it really does feel like it's a different species. Like you're looking at some different species. My take on that stuff is honestly, it's it's like sure. Right. It's I to me, the whole, the whole alien, other life in the universe was settled. I mean, it's a mathematical certainty. Like I just, the capital mission showed it, like it's a mathematical certainty that life has to exist other in other places on the planet and in some form, but and then you multiply that out across the span of space and time. Is it possible that we're being visit? Is there something to these phenomena? Yes. I think so. It doesn't I'm skeptical that will ever really, I hope maybe my lifetime will will know, but I'm I would it change what I'm doing if we had that realization, not particularly, I don't think it's just like it could be part of the galactic federation. I'd be like, oh, that's cool. I think it'll give additional perspective. Like let's just let's go way out there and put that fucking tin foil hat on tight. If they open up the the labyrinth, if they figure out a way to drain the water and they can find out that that 40 meter long metallic thing is something from another place. Something from another place or maybe break up civilization, you know, there's a lot of people that think that there were like, like there's us and then there's Neanderthals, right? And then there's, okay, they all co-existed at one point in time. What if this thing co-existed with us as well? And this is a different version of what we will eventually be. Just like if let's imagine human beings, we maintain a presence on this earth for the next 30 million years. Let's just imagine that could be crazy, but it's happened before with crocodiles. If we did, what would chimpanzees be like 30 million years from now? Evolution would stop. Right. It's not going to stop. They're already using tools. Right. There's speculation. I mean, there's various scientists that believe that you can make an argument that many primates are in the stone age. Yeah. That they've entered into the stone age. So let's assume that this keeps moving in that general direction without our intervention, which I'm assuming we're some foreign countries probably would engage in that. And one of them might be America. It does secretly like if we're if we're like if we're doing this gain of function research on viruses that one of killing a million people, you don't think that we're going to if there's some sort of like there was talk during the, I believe it was World War II, where Russia was, there was talk of some sort of a hybrid between a human being in a chimpanzee trying to devise that for soldiers. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's real. Yeah. There's some very strange and interesting experiments that happen. So what if those little fuckers keep going? What are those little fuckers are like the, the OGs like they're us like a million years from now. And what, what we, you know, the chimps are a million years later. Right. That's what we are right now currently. They are what we're going to be. Yeah. And then they went fuck it. We're going in the ocean. Right. Well, right. Yes. I that's that's a possibility. In fact, to break away civilization concepts, not a new one either like there's there are a lot of ancient cultures looked at places like even the moon as a, as a refuge. They would call it a refuge. Like that's a whole other theory. Like what's going on with the moon is there? Are there, is there something happening up there? Was there something that happened with it in the past? Right. Um, yeah. I mean, this is, it's, it's, to me, the whole, it's all of these things are completely plausible. Like I just, I don't, I tried actors or the, the, um, yeah, I mean, the UFO phenomena. I mean, this could have been going on for a long long time. I wouldn't, I mean, it, I certainly would include some sort of otherworldly craft has potentially one of the explanations for what that thing is beneath the ground at, at the labyrinth. Well, even if it's not another world of craft, whatever the fuck was going on where someone could make a 40 meter long metallic thing, thousands and thousands and thousands of years ago, 40 meters is to have the dam football field. Yeah, it's this big that's big and stick it underground for some reason. Yeah, in a corridor or in a huge atrium. Okay. Yeah. Like what, all bets are off. If what those Italian scientists are saying is underneath the Giza plateau, yeah, all bets are off. You're looking at something that is like, is as cookie as the pyramids are, that's the tip of the iceberg. True. Yeah. It's in that's, that's why I wanted to, the labyrinth was so interesting because, you know, that, that their announcements around what they these, you know, 800 meter shafts and massive cubes, kilometers deep under the plateau is kind of came out of nowhere, but there is, there are these accounts for these other places like the labyrinth where there's, there's some like historical legitimacy to them like there's been accounts of them. Although, you know, over time, I, what they're talking about beneath the, the Giza plateau, maybe not to the full extent of what they're saying. I'm still having trouble with, with that, but there's certainly a lot more, we know there's a lot more down there, right? That that we at least the public has never discovered. We know that there are, so beneath the bottom of the saar shaft, for example, we know that there are further tunnels that that go off from there that go underneath it, the saar shaft, for people who don't know is, is one of the, it's like a, it's this three passage like three rooms and it goes down a little over a hundred feet or so beneath the ground beneath the causeway on the, the middle pyramid complex. You go down this big ladder, you go into one room, you go down another ladder. There's a bigger room with boxes in it and you go down a further ladder to the bottom room, which also has boxes in it. Today it's the water tables way up high, but we know in the past, this is one of the things that has recently come to light is that, that down there in the bottom in the 1990s, that was scanned with ground penetrating radar at the bottom level. And they found yep, they're actually like four meter long, eight feet high tunnels with dome ceilings below that, even even further that nobody who's as far as we know have ever explored. They're also tunnels leading off from that bottom level that head off towards the Sphinx and they head off towards the pyramid. And in fact, they fork because there was a little known exploration done by a team of Japanese scientists in the early 2000s that got like a camera on a long pole. They shoved it down through the mud and they stuffed it about 20 meters into one of these tunnels. And they found these man-made structures like tunnels and it forks and that it actually forks off and one seems to head towards the Great Pyramid and one keeps going up towards Kuffra. So there's tons of stuff below there. In fact, if you ever go to the Giza Plateau, like that that calls way, if you're heading up towards the middle pyramid, you've got the Sara shaft on the left. But on the right, you have, I mean, a 10 of these massive shafts that have, that we don't really know how deep they are, whether or not they've ever been fully excavated, but they just go way down into the ground. So it's, this could be like, you know, it's like the very top layer of things that are being claimed by the, the Italian scientists and their, and their scans. But there was, we know that these tunnels extend down to beneath the Sphinx, for example, like there's long wind rumoured that there's a tunnel and entrance at the end, at the back of the Sphinx. In fact, if you go there, there's little box and a little hole. It doesn't go anyway. I've stuck a camera in there and had a look, but this is what happened in the 1990s. So, you know, John Anthony West, I'm sure you've seen the mysteries of the Sphinx right. Yes. It's been on his talking. Yeah, I know. I know he has, but you've seen his work. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Wonderful documentary. Charlton has something. That's the one that archaeologists was mocking. Yes. Graham Hancock and John Anthony West. That's right. Do you know about the three T's of Thanksgiving turkey for eating table for gathering and touch downs for winning with Draft King Sportsbook and official sports betting partner of the NFL. Every touchdown could bring you closer to cashing in before dessert with Draft King Sportsbook, all the actions in your hands. First touchdown, anytime TD live bets every play, every snap, every game counts, big plays, bold calls and bragging rights when the games get good, the bets get better. And here's the best part. New customers can bet just five bucks. And if your bet wins, you'll get $200 in bonus bets instantly when the touchdowns happen. We feast. Down though, the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code, Rogan, that's code, Rogan, bet $5 and get $200 in bonus bets if your bet wins in partnership with Draft King's, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLER in New York, called 877-8 Open Wire, text Hope in Y-467-369. In Connecticut, help is available for a problem gambling called 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhill, Casino and Resorting, Kansas passed through of per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over, age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction, void and Ontario. Restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinema mods required. For additional terms, a responsible gaming resource is cdkng.co slash audio. Limited time offer. Yeah, so he did that research, I think in 1991, 1991, it came out in John Nantee. He was here. He won an Emmy for Best Documentary, I think, for it, totally warranted. But so he, he is part of that work. I had a guy named Tom DeBekki who was a grandpen trading radar expert. And he did work around the Sphinx and he found the existence of like large regular chambers beneath the Sphinx. And then when that documentary came out, I mean, allegedly, Zahi was incensed by it because it talked about Atlantis and it made the suggestion that this might be, you know, a haul of records. It talked about E. Gokasey. And he then denied after that, John Nantee, Western Robert Shock, any permits to do any further work. But what's weird is that Zahi and Mark Lane, I had this long-standing connection with the E. Gokasey Foundation, which is like a, it's this weird dichotomy. It's like on the public facing, they decry anything Atlantis based. But then on the private side, they seem to be enabling explorations by the AAR in fact. They've been enabling the AAR to do drilling experiments and other things that the Sphinx since the late 1970s. And there was an expedition notorious one that no one ever knew what happened. It was called the shore expedition. Dr Joseph Shaw, Joseph Jehoda. And then a guy named Boris Saeed were running the shore expedition in Boris Saeed, was a friend of John Anthony West. He was the executive producer for Mysteries of the Sphinx. And this happened in like 95 through about 97, 1997. And they partnered up with Zahi. He gave them a five year unlimited permit to do whatever they wanted up at the on the Giza Plateau. And one of the stories that came out of that was a story. So Boris Saeed, who unfortunately has also passed away since, but he talked about filming Zahi. He said, well, we've got to the back of the Sphinx. And he said, you know, we want to make another documentary like the Mysteries of the Sphinx. And he said, well, what if we open up a tunnel that no one's ever opened up before? And he's like, that'd be great. What sort of tunnel? He said, well, a tunnel under the Sphinx. And Boris Saeed said, that'd be fantastic. So I actually filmed him going into the rump of the Sphinx, standing down in there and saying, you know, the quote is something like even Indiana Jones wouldn't believe that he was, he was here. We're standing inside the body of the Sphinx. Nobody knows where this tunnel goes, but we're going to open it for the first time. And he's down in this space with it, with basically a blocked up tunnel beneath the Sphinx. And this he filmed all of this, but then this, this footage all disappeared. So during the expedition, it was kind of shut down. And then they got into a legal dispute like like Boris Saeed and Joseph Shaw got into this battle. The footage was never seen, but he went on Art Bell in the late 90s and talked about it. And we're like, damn, so this, you know, they also talked about this stuff at the Asara Shaft. They did that grandparent training radar work that it's sonic experiments in the Great Pyramid. There's a lot that happened at the Shore expedition, run by the Ed, it was, they're all ARE members like, and they did state a goal, Joseph Shaw was always to find the Hall of Records, right? I mean, this all continued into 2002 with that, that organization. But there was all this tantalizing mystery of this footage, like, where the like, is this footage? Apparently the department of justice had a copy of it because there was this lawsuit that was going on. And nobody knew. So this is, it's kind of out there. And then, and then it was only like earlier this year, it turns out that so what happened? So Boris Saeed was, was sick with liver cancer, but he was trying to raise funds to make this documentary. So he put together this tape with some of this footage from this expedition. And he was selling VHS copies of it as a way to invest in this documentary. And then a couple, like a year later, he just, he, that's when he passed away. So there was, there's been a handful of these VHS tapes out there in random homes from the mid to late 90s, just sitting where this tape and then eventually someone this year actually digitized it, put it up on YouTube as a, out there in random homes from the mid to late 90s just sitting where this tape and then eventually someone this year actually digitized it put it up on YouTube as an unlisted video. I found out about it and so all of a sudden now we actually have this footage. We have day going into the Sphinx at the back saying this works. Yeah, it's if you, Jamie, if you pull up my I think it's the latest or the couple latest videos about the rare footage found from the Sphinx it opens with that with that footage. To thank God you're out there. I'm so excited to do this. It means so much to me that you do this. It's, I love doing it. I know you do. Fascinating when you find like I've known about this footage for years and years and I'm like oh my god somebody found it. Yeah, this is it here. So there's a he. Yeah, so he's going into this tunnel. Yeah, so you can still this still exists, but then this is yeah this where he is now doesn't. What happened? Well, the story gets more and more intriguing. So yeah, this is the him saying the line saying we've never opened this tunnel before. We're in the body of the Sphinx and we're going to figure out where it goes. So yeah, so after that. So Boris, they filmed that. This is the early days. So yeah, I'm walking around the back here. I think I poked my camera in there, but I talk about it later on. It's it's so Boris Said who had filmed this with Zahi goes. He talks to them about let's make a contract. Let's let's have Zahi open the tunnel. Like we'd make the documentary about him opening this tunnel and we're going to show it to the world, you know, and they talked about it. He went back to New York and he never heard from them again. They never mentioned this contract. Nothing he never had any further contact with Zahi about it. And then funny thing happens in Egypt about I don't know eight, nine months later. And this is as reported by Robert Bovall and Graham Hancock in their book, Heaven's Mirror. And also I found it in the Arabic publications. But about it, I think it was six to eight months later. Zahi makes an announcement in LA Ram and these Egyptian publications in Arabic that says, I've made this incredible discovery. I've discovered tunnels and chambers beneath the Giza Plateau that's going to change everything we know about the ancient Egyptians and the pyramids. And he talked about finding three tunnels. One that was like on the north one on the south and then one that was yet to be determined where it went. And he made this announcement and then never said another word about it ever again. And this is just in the Arabic papers. And here's the funny thing is, but it could be because there's nothing there. I suspect something else. I suspect that that even if there was nothing there, you'd still stick. He would have stuck a camera down, looked out. I suspect I think it's more likely that yeah, they found something that might have upset the apple cart and it doesn't. Because you don't imagine if they are sitting on information. Oh, I think you think I did. Yes. Yeah, I do. I think there's been plenty of excavations and discoveries that I think were inconvenient for one reason or the other that have probably never seen the light of day. That's a crime against humanity. A little bit. I think so. I mean, it's you know, the funny thing that he's what he said to when he's when I read that comment, he makes about three tunnels. That's that's that's that's what Aladresi and Alma Elma Sardi said as well. Like these these horrata of the hours like six to eight hundred AD when they went, they described the same damn to three tunnels like chambers and rooms. It's like lining up with these just same as the labyrinth like it's lining up with these historical accounts. And then it's just you don't hear another word about it. And when you go to this thing today and you you finally pop that little box off its butt, it the whole thing's been backfilled. Like the whole it's where you see that camera of where's where's he was standing that's still beam still there. But where he's head level is where he's standing. Hey, this tunnel goes. It's like the dirt levels here now. Like it's it's all been backfilled. That's so crazy. Yeah. That's so why would you do that if there wasn't something in there? You would only do it if there's something in there and where's it it keep it in. Yeah. To be honest, it's it's my concern also with the great pyramid and the chamber there is that I first of all have my suspicions that they may have already taken a peak with an endoscopic camera into that hidden void. So this is you know, the scam transmission on the beast on anything in particular. No, no, I just know just just my experience with how they do things. Yes. So it's always I mean, I just there's very little transparency when it comes to a lot of these digs and stuff. And this isn't just the idea. This is I think I mean, it's not a criticism. It's maybe more characteristic of archaeological digs everywhere. Sometimes the way this works is you might have to wait 20 or 30 years for or decade for information to come out because it then it has to get perfectly someone has to publish a paper. You know, they sit on that information until that point or maybe it never sees the light of day. I mean, because it's inconvenient. Well, I do think that I mean, anything that's going to like seriously upset the apple cart, like if you came out and found something that was damn, we found the whole records, you know, we found this this evidence that is in controvertible that suggests that there was a predecessor culture and a predecessor civilization to the ancient Egyptians. I think there would be some long and hard thinking about whether or not we actually released that because it's going to make everybody look back, you know what I mean? Like it's it up says I don't like crazy though that it is make everybody look bad would be the motivation to keep one of the most important discoveries ever from from the human rings. I I agree. Yes, I fucking nuts. It is. We're even thinking about this. And I love your approach. I think you're absolutely right to is it even if these figures all they have to do is embrace it. All they'd have to say is look at what we learned. And everyone be like that's amazing. And if you still want to, what is it? It's Egyptians that go back 30,000 years or whatever it is more more. That's so crazy. But also wouldn't that excite more people to be more interested? Wouldn't that increase the economy? Wouldn't that increase the tourism? It would increase everything. Yes, it would make everybody more excited about archaeology. I think you got to embrace the mystery. There was a there was a trend towards squishing it for us. There's no way you could know everything. It's not possible, especially when you're finding these new things. It's clear you don't know everything. Yeah, if they're finding new things, you don't know everything. If there's a 40 meter long metallic object in a lab or net that's in a giant atrium that's under the fucking ground. Yeah, you don't know everything. Yeah, I think it's worth taking a look like like jeez, you think? Yeah. I mean, let's at least take a look. I was still like a halt. Like get figure out if we know we're in this game. Kind of where it is. Like we were take a bullhole down and we were talking before you were saying that there might be a possibility of digging a tunnel under the water through the bottom because the actual area where it is is not in the water. That's so the scan seemed indicated. It is likely free of water is that is the terminology I heard from the scan interpretations. It's true to say that the issue with the water on at Hawara and the lab earth is is the ground water. So it's this seepage that's coming in from the north and it's so presumably at some point you do get to a formal bedrock that may well be impermeable. And if it's sealed and you're cut into that structure, then yeah, you may well be free of water or it might be, you know, it's it seems like they're on the fuck up and let the water through the whole of the trade digger tunnel and flood that to for sure some of it's in the like the upper levels of the lab. So from the ground penetrating radar scans at the matter higher expedition. I mean, you have these granite blocks that are like three four meters wide and it's huge labyrinthine structure. That's sitting in, I mean, I'm sure it's full of sediment too. Like it's not like there may be some cavities and open everyone's like, can we dive on them like it's full them. It's literally mud and sediment. A lot of it. And if that's sitting in this sort of salty brackish groundwater that I suspect is not going to do great things to that granite if it's left for another 50 hundred years or more. So it's there is a pressure to to remediate this problem and I think to save what's down there. The deeper layers however seem like there's a possibility that they're free of water. I mean, has there been any proposal to do that? Is there any proposal to figure out a way to reroute the water? Dave, so they, this is what I, I talked about in the video. There were some studies that started to happen to try and do that. And then the guy who was running the study got thrown in jail for talking about it. And then nothing since that. Nothing since as far as I know. Tell Zahi, come on again if he does it. I haven't backed up on it. I would love to, I would, I would, I mean, I think it's a solvable problem though. That's the thing. I think it's ahi to do mushrooms. That's what we have to do. Yeah. To get him to just drop it all. Interesting. Cut the bullshit. Become the suncoat. Yeah. No, I don't know. Yeah. Just let everybody love you for doing that because they would if we just change turn turn to new page. Yeah. Just said, all right, let's just let's go crazy. I think yes. Yeah. He's, yeah. He wants to be loved. He wants to be respected. Everybody does. So open it up. Maybe let's go. Give me a hug. Open it up. Start digging. Yeah. Let's go. Let's let's let's let's think some bullhalls and get some pumps in there and like give this water out of here. I mean, these are those moments where I wish I was Elon Musk because you you want an engineer to get involved as well. You want some of that. Yeah. You did need like army core engineers. Someone who's going to be able to figure out how to move water. Take a real big French drain. You know, just figure it out. It can be done. It may take decades, but it can be done. I think it can be done. The result would be insane. I think you could do it too in a targeted search. I think you could start in a small area. Well, you know, you do some more, I mean, more surveys too. Like more more more GP are more surveys, more scans. And really narrow in on like a section. And then like, let's see if it's, if we're, if what we're seeing on these scans is there, then maybe do the site. I have a feeling it's one of many. I really do. Oh, no. Yeah. I have a feeling that whole area, that whole complex, you're going to go as if they can really prove that there have been civilizations that have been there for 10, 20, 30,000 years. I think it's going to reveal itself one layer of the onion at a time. Right. And it's today, it's like it is a symptom of the climate that we only really look in the null valley. Right? Because the domestic Egyptians settled in the null valley because when they started, it was a desert. That was the habitable part. But if you, if you open up the possibility that there's a precursor civilization that was existing in the millennia prior to that, now you've, now you've got the Sahara. You've got the figure out where the lakes, the river, river systems, the lake basins were. And there's very little of the Sahara that's fully, you know, we're not looking under the sand there. We're developing new scanning techniques. Let's start looking there because I think there's a, you know, the Assyrians is crazy place in at the back of temple of city, the first in, in Abidos. And it's sitting on top of this aquifer. It's like this big subterranean granite structure. And I'm like, I bet this is, this was, I think clearly some sort of functional thing. And I bet there's a bunch more of these, but we just don't know where they are because they're under the ground. We just found this one. Well, city found it when he built his temple and he's like, holy shit, we found giant granite subterranean structure. Let's turn the temple this way. But yeah, I think there's, I think there's a strong possibility as well. There's a lot more of that stuff. And even to the, to the cray, archaeologists suggest the same thing to the scope and scale of what is under the sand in Egypt. I mean, I think even most mainstream archaeologists will tell like 70% of it still as yet undiscovered at least that is so crazy. That's such a crazy thing to say when you look at what has been discovered. That's nothing quite like it. I mean, Luxor, what do they say the stats around Luxor is like, so one third of the worlds antiquities in this one area just at Luxon. It's not even the Giza plateau. That's just, that's upper Egypt down at Luxor with the West Bank and the Valley, the Kings and Khanak temple. And it's astonishing. And they're still digging stuff up. There's a Ammon, hope the temple of Ammon, hope that the second or third is Nick. No, Closse, I've mamnon these giant 600 ton statues are like the front door to it. And they're slowly excavating this monstrous temple behind it. And they keep finding these remnants of these colossal statues. I've had rumors, just rumors. I'm going to Egypt like next week. Hopefully we can, I want to get a look at this. And I've heard rumors that they found like a hand from a statue that's even bigger than the biggest ones we've found so far. So they might have found a segment of a statue that was one of the largest ever, which would be astonishing because who knows. I mean, that there's some evidence that they made stuff like that. I mean, we talk about a thousand tons and that's mind boggling enough. But there's actually a quarry in Egypt called Minya. It's like the unfinished oblitistobelist, right? It's like the unfinished oblitistobelist still attached. They never pulled it out. It's 1200 tons. But that Minya, there's these, it's like limestone and these, they've cut these blocks out. They're still attached. They've made these blocks and there's even in its description, like a rough inscription of a seated fair, like a seated figure on a throne. So it's drawn on that's what they were going for. But if you take the density of the limestone in the Minya region and you calculate its volume, it's in the rammelt 5000 tons. Oh my God. Yeah. It's, who knows what they, what was there originally? I mean, I just, I think it's, it's baffling enough that we have this, you know, these logistical achievements in that, in that anything above really 3,400 tons. It's crossed above 100 tons over any distance is a massive challenge for, for anyone. I mean, us to move that sort of a load over the roads and things we have now. I mean, shit, even in Peru, you, you find similar logistical achievements. I was just, I spent just came back from 5 weeks in Peru. I want to talk about that, but I have to be so bad. Okay. So it's paused real quick. I'm gonna be right back. Sorry about that folks. And we're back. Have you speculated like why they wanted things so big? Like, or was it just that they had the the ability of a sudden at the one point in time in their development? I mean, it's, I can't make to me any argument that these giant statues are functional. They're clearly symbolic. Yeah. It's, it's, it's, it's almost like a challenge to history. It's a, it's a monument through history. I mean, there's some indication that things like the pyramid, the great pyramid are markers and, you know, they're, they're demonstrations of their knowledge and capability. We can talk about that. I mean, but there's, uh, but the statues, it's, no, it's to me. It's just like, look at us. Look how mighty we are. Like it's, it's a, it's a, like the same reason we, I mean, why do we make Mount Rushmore? We make some big mon, it's like to leave a monument or it's some sort of marker behind. I mean, the Sphinx, for example, could be a marker in time when you look at it in terms of the great cycle and the fact that it was likely a lion and, you know, it's facing you east. So that it could well be a marker for a particular moment during the processional cycle, which could be either like 10,500 BC or 35,000 or plus 25,920 years. So it's, it's, it's, it's cycle of that. So this is the, the thing. I mean, the Sphinx, I mean, it was, it's been talked about even, like again, we go back to Dioris, Ciculas and Stravo and Herodotas, as they talked about the Sphinx being vastly older, they're hearing things about it being older. Gaston, Maspero, and a lot of the archaeologists, the early explorers for that region also mentioned it being 12 plus 1000 years old. It being this ancient monument and there's strong evidence to support that in that, I mean, you have statues of Sphinx's that predate Cuffra, for example. So when he apparently built it like there's already, we see statues and imitations of Sphinx's also lions. Before that time, you have the, what's called the inventory stellae or the stellae of Cufus daughter, which was a statue that that Cufu being Cuffra's father. It's a Cufu great pyramid, Cuffra middle, middle pyramid. This, this, this is rarely acknowledged, but it tells the story of that that Cufu was trying to repair the Sphinx and dig it out of the sand. He's Cuffra's father. So this is Cufu, but also the name like the the oldest name for the Sphinx is, is Routine. And it's, it's the, it's the two lions. It's, um, uh, segment and what's the name of the other lion? I can't, I have it here. Um, well, that is it. Uh, I can't remember the name of the other lion god, but it's, it literally means lots to two lions and gates. So it's like this lion's gate. It's, it's guarding a, a gate, but this is one of the oldest names for it. So if it, if it was indeed a lion and it's facing Jew East, and we know that the things like, uh, procession of the processional cycles, processional numerology is deeply embedded in many, many cultures all around the world. This is one of the other key bits of context that seems to point to a consolidated origin point for knowledge and data of the cosmos and of geodetic data. Um, but knowledge of the procession of the equinoxes is one of those, which is the, you know, basically you mark this by what constellation is behind the rising sun on the Vernal equinox facing East. So as, as we look east today, it's, it's somewhere between the constellation of Pisces and Aquarius. And, and big, it's, it's a, it's a cycle that denotes or is, is due to the earth's wobble. All right. So we have, we have at least three motions of, of the planet. We have the, you know, or like the rotation of the earth. So 24 hour cycle, we have the orbit of the earth around the sun, 365 and a quarter days. And then you have the processional wobble, there's a couple more actually. And that is, and that is basically the, the earth as it spins does this, it describes this little, like it's, it's, it's axis, it describes a circle in space, which changes the constellation. And it's, it's a cycle that takes around 26,000 years, 25,920 is the typical description for it. And what that means is the backdrop of stars, you know, as we're looking at any, at any time is, is slowly changing. It changes only one degree every 72 years. So if you're looking at the horizon, like the width of your thumb over 72 years, the, basically the relative to the sun, the, the constellations behind the sun shift. So today it's Pisces. And we're moving into the age of Aquarius. And before Pisces was the age of areas. And four areas was the age of tourists. And you go back for another, get to Leo, the lion, which is another, I mean, this, the, the symbology and, and certainly the, to nasty conditions as well as many others had, had very similar constellations and names for all of these constellations that we do. So I think there's a good indication that Sphinx could be a, a, essentially a processional marker talking about a specific time, which in our current cycle would have been, I think, year around around 10,000 something BC, but you could potentially add a whole cycle onto that to go back another nearly 26,000 years. Which is, it would just an interesting possibility. Well, it's interesting, but it's also nuts. It's, it's nuts comparative to our conventional timeline. What is the conventional timeline for the acceptance of astrological signs? That amistellations. This is, I mean, there's no doubt about the, I mean, the processional cycle is an observable thing. It's, it's, it's, but naming them like cancer Leo. So I don't, I don't actually know, it goes back. It's, it's, it's very common across multiple columns. It's one of the craziest things actually depicted on the, the ceiling of the temple of Dendero in ancient Egypt, the same constellations that we have, Pisces, the fish, Ares, the ram, you know, let's say the line like what do you think is the oldest accepted? Like if we put it into perplexity, what do you think is the oldest accepted? I would suspect it's either, it's either the Egyptians or the Sumerians, because that's about as far back as, as written knowledge goes. I mean, it was a Sumerians followed by the Egyptians. I don't know what there. If the Sumerians had as the die call acknowledgement, but certainly the dynastic Egyptians did. And that seems to have progressed from there down every, everyone. And, and the interesting thing, this, we have a sponsor perplexity. Yeah. Yeah. I sponsor. So Clay tablets from Mesopotamia, Sumerian later Babylonian in the late second millennial, BC give the oldest secure written constellation names, including the figures like the lion, the bull and scorpion. These early star lists, such as Babylonian, three stars each catalogs and later the MUL.APIN tablets, what is that? You know what that is? No. Systematically record stars and constellations and were compiled roughly between 1200 and 1000 BCE drawing on an even older tradition. So it's at least 1000 BCE. Yeah. Let's see here that the iconography of star animals similar to these constellations appear on prehistoric seals, vases and gaming boards from Mesopotamia. May go back as far as 4000 BCE. I think, I think if you go to like go backly tepe and Martin Swetman's theories that that a lot of the animal depictions on there may be just maybe showing constellations. I don't believe they're the the typical zodiacal constellations, but it's, I mean, what's what's interesting is, let's see, are they finally go backly tepe? Let's see what perplexity thinks. No clear universally accepted constellation names have been identified at go backly tepe, but some carvings appear to depict animals in positions that may correspond to parts of later constellations such as Scorpius Sagittarius or Cygnus. Cygnus. Cygnus. Cygnus. Cygnus. Cygnus. According to a minority of researchers, most archaeologist remain cautious. Yeah, and minority being Martin Swetman probably. Seeing these are powerful symbolic animal figures like a scorpion, vulture and other birds of prey and arguing that firm links to a true zodiac or named constellation, they're speculative. But interesting. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, it's remarkable. I mean, and more so even just than those markers is one of the, I mean, for me, the it's sacred geometry and and in processional numerology, that's encoded. I mean, this is Hamlet's mill, what's what's in the book Hamlet's mill that that essentially shows you that this a lot of the sacred geometry, which is a it's like a numeral system or these sacred numbers that are repeated through geometry, time, distance, even cosmic cycles as we measure them. And then they appear again and again through ancient cultures and in their origin stories. And even in their architecture, I mean, you know, the great pyramid's probably the best example of being the, I mean, I'm sure we've heard that it's like a scale model of a northern hemisphere at a ratio of 43,200 to one. It's absolutely insane. And it's it's in encodes so much more knowledge when you, when you consider it from that perspective, knowledge that we can't explain through the dynastic Egyptians or by any capabilities that they had. It encodes geodetic data. It's in terms of the, there's very specific shape of the earth. It being an oblate spheroid like it encodes that information in it. Well, so, so 43,200 is an interesting number to start with just because the number of seconds in a day is 86,400. So in 12 hours of the day in like a, it's the amount of sunlight, basically the the amount of time on a hemisphere in half of the day in exactly 12 hours is 43,200. It's it's 432 is one of those numbers that shows up again and again and again and again. So the great pyramid at a ratio of 43,200 to one is essentially a scale model of the northern hemisphere. If you take the height of the great pyramid and this includes the cycle that it sits on, but you take that height, you multiply it by 45,200. You get the polar radius of the earth. So from the center of the earth to the north pole, almost exactly within a couple hundred feet. And even more impressive is when you take the, the perimeter length of the great pyramid and you multiply that by 45,200, you get the equatorial circumference of the earth. Within about 300 feet, which is super interesting because it's flexible, it changes. So as we've always known, there's been multiple surveys since the only hundreds of the great pyramid and it's once the base was cleared off and we got its perimeter length. And then we've also had surveys looking at you know, how big's the earth Aristotle is in like 500, 600 AD in in Greece. He was the first one to give it a go by measuring sort of the angle of you know, the shadow in two different places over a few years and he got the circumference of the earth to win about 500 miles. That was as close as we got until, you know, the 1800s and then the advent of modern satellite surveys in the 1970s and 1980s. And the funny thing is, is that the more advanced we got as we step closer and closer and right up to the modern satellite surveys, the closer the number came to what the great pyramid represents at this ratio of 45,200. Right up to the point where it's like the most modern, I think the surveys done in the 80s are still the ones we use today looking at the, you know, the actual circumference of the earth is within about 300 feet of the measure of the great pyramid, which makes, I mean, that's within the margin of error. It's within the variability of the margin of the earth because of the circumference of the earth because you have like the moon and the sun on one side, it literally would, you measure it every day, it's going to change about 200, 300 feet just because gravitational forces are pushing on the earth. So that also means that it's what interesting is, is if in two seconds of time, if you were standing on the equator, then the earth rotates precisely the length of the perimeter of the great pyramid. So in two seconds, it goes basically the earth turns, the same length as the perimeter, the greater great pyramid. What's even crazier? And so you have, you have this measure expressed in distance and in time, given that it's this significant number that measures them in, you know, in the amount of seconds in 12 hours, it also encodes geodetic data. So the earth isn't a perfect sphere, right? We deviate from being a perfect sphere because, and this is thank Christ because it's like that rotation that the oblate sphere, right nature of the earth, the, what's it called? The spend the, I wouldn't die, the spend motion of the earth essentially, like the, like a dryer, some reason I can't think of the word. It's flattening our tops a little bit and we bulge a little bit at the center around the equator, right? So we'd like that, that that's that, that, that spin force is making us bulge a bit. So what it means is, is that if you measure the earth this way, like north to south around and then east to west, it's going to be slightly longer east to west. I think it's, I think it's, it's something like 70 or 80, no, 40 miles, I think the difference, something like that. Maybe that's the radius difference, but it's, it's, I think getting, yeah, radius or diameter might be 30 or 40 miles difference. It's just this, it's this slight equatorial bulge. And what it means is that, you know, when you draw latitude and longitude lines on the planning and that latitude being north, south and longitude being east west, if you get down to the equator, no, obviously they, you know, the shapes of them change as you go up towards the poles, but the latitude lines are straight. So this is where I don't know how accurate it is. Well, that's accurate. That's, that's out water. That water. That's nuts. Yeah. Rocky, little bull in it. Pro. That's crazy. Yeah. It's some of those oceans are deep for that. Yeah. You think? Yeah. That's cool. That's bananas. That's, that's, that's, almost looks exaggerated to me that a little bit. Wow. The most accurate model of earth shape accounting, not only for its rotation, but also for the distribution of the masses inside the planet, the surface slightly uneven and deviating from a perfect sphere, unlike a school glow, which depicts earth as an ideal ball, the geoid resembles a slightly flattened at the poles and bulging at the equator potato, with the height variations of to 100 meters due to the gravitational anomalies. This shape arises from the centrifugals. Yeah. That's what I was looking for. There it is. Of course, the earth's rotation, which inflates the equator by an additional 21 kilometers compared to the polar diameter. Yeah. Interesting. Interestingly, the geoid is used in GPS navigation and geodecy geodesy geodesy geodesy to precisely measure elevations above sea levels as oceans, follow this uneven surface. Imagine if you shrink the earth the size of a basketball, the geoids irregularities would be smaller than the roughness of the orange skin. Wow. Of an orange skin, yet still impact their daily lives. Wow. Yeah. So it must be a little exaggerated because I think that that's clearly rough than the orange, that's clearly thick in the roughness of an orange skin. But yes, yeah, that's an exact, it gives us an example. But it's so, yeah, so we're a little, little bulgy around the middle, a little flatter on top. So when you get down to latitude and longitude at the equator, right? So at the equator, what it means, if you draw that cube one degree of latitude and one degree of longitude, it's not a perfect cube. Okay. So it's a little bit further east to west than it is north to south. So if you cut that down into like 60 seconds of latitude and longitude, it's a smaller, the. a bit further east to west than it is north to south. So if you cut that down into like 60 seconds of latitude and longitude it's a smaller little square but same proportions you have the same ratio and if you actually take the great pyramid so there's the thing to understand about the great pyramid is that there's it sits on a cycle I don't know if I've talked about this before but so you know we know because we have casing stones we have that 51 degrees 51 minutes angle of these casing stones so we were able to really act and we have a few of those still around the base from where they fell off. So from that we can determine the height and we also have this perimeter length using the casing stones pretty very accurately the survey and now those casing stones it doesn't sit direct on the bedrock the pyramid actually sits on top of a 55 centimeter cycle so it's this little platform that sticks it sticks out about this much and it's 55 centimeter high and it's like sticks out so you have the casing stones and there's little cycle that it sits on so you have these two methods of measuring the pyramid you can measure the perimeter length around the casing stones or you can measure the perimeter length around the cycle slightly larger and if you get the funny thing is if you get down to one quarter of one second of latitude and longitude at the equator the longitude is exactly within inch or two the perimeter length of the cycle and the latitude the north south is the perimeter of the pyramid so it's encoding the geodetic shape of the earth the ratio of latitude to longitude is encoded incredibly accurately in these perimeter lengths on the pyramid and it's just that's just it's just kind of mind-boggling well so this this would be this would be the skeptic reduction it's a answer to this stuff is the right you say well you just playing with numbers it's like it's the numbers that they're none of those things none of you can anyone can check that data for themselves like the forty three thousand two hundred to one ratio of the pyramid the fact that that's the number of seconds in twelve hours of the day there's so many I mean this this by the way forty three four three two turns up all over the place the carly Uger said to be forty three thousand two hundred years old the radius of the sun is forty is four hundred and thirty two thousand miles the king's list from the Sumerians is a total of forty three thousand two hundred oh no four hundred and thirty two thousand years with one king reigning for forty three thousand two hundred years so there's four three twos one of those one of those sacred geometry numbers that keeps turning up again and again but what's always been fascinating to me in the geodetic information in code in the great pyramid is is like you have to understand the shape and size of the earth to get that ratio so accurately embedded in that in that monument and we weren't able to do that basically until really recently we satellite servers but we certainly weren't able to measure longitude even until like the turn of the 18th century like James Cook's second voyage of discovery we couldn't measure we couldn't accurately figure out where we were on those on those east to west traverses like accurately reflecting longitude in the pyramid is a it's astonishing it's one of those things that also relates to ancient maps having accurate coastlines with longitude on them but what seems clear is that somebody in some at some point in the past had very accurate knowledge not only of cosmic cycles but also of the shape and size of the earth like in terms of they surveyed they understood its shape they understood the ratio of latitude to longitude on the planet and it's all encoded in this monument and it's just kind of scratching the surface on what's in the you know in code in their great pyramid but I mean the numbers are all there you can you can add these up have you ever had a debate with anybody that thinks that this is all coincidence and that you could take these numbers and just kind monkey around with them and make any kind of equation you want if you just draw arbitrary distances between certain things uh no not not because some people do believe that right yeah I mean so I think I think there's a difference between when you talk about numbers versus ratios like it does and once you get to ratios then it doesn't matter how you measure them like that's it's like the ratio it doesn't matter you measure them in mosquito dicks or inches or whatever right it's all so ratios are one thing numbers like there is a lot of me in the whole system of measurement how we measure time the imperial system of measurement where the mile comes from all of that stuff does have these deep roots in sacred geometry and and basically cosmic then that's again I think all pointing towards a common system or a common set of knowledge that came from but I've not debated somebody about this I don't know that you I mean you can you can't really question the numbers but there's some incredible just I guess coincidences that are in this whole system that do point towards like I mean they get really crazy so here's another one um which I just this one just pickles my noodle it's so you know you know we know that I've said this before I think that the Sun is you know the moon's 400 times smaller than the Sun and it's the Sun's 400 times further away so you get this that's how we get total solar eclipse is actually nice but there's also another sacred number encoded in their ratios relative to their diameters in the distance from Earth that's the same between the moon and the Sun and that's 108 so if you if you take the diameter of the moon at whatever it is 21 60 miles by the way 21 60 is also the length of a great month in the processional cycle that's one 12th of 25,920 but 21 60 miles times 108 that gives you more or less the distance between of the moon to the earth so moons yeah so it's a the moon's diameter times 108 gives you the distance to the earth the Sun's diameter which is 86,400 miles which is the number of seconds in a 24-hour period times that by 108 and you get this that's the distance of the Sun from the earth so it's like that relationship between their diameter and their distance from the earth is exactly the same between the Sun and the moon and it's 108 that that ratio so it's the lunar lunar diameter over lunar distance equals solar diameter over solar distance and I mean what a coincidence what a coincidence yeah and it's 108 and by the way there are temples and places like Cambodia that have 108 pillars like 108s another one of these sacred numbers that have been encoded into the way we measure stuff the way we count for time so this is is this huge there's a huge sort of rabbit hole of sacred geometry that and and processional numerology that seems to point to some point in the past someone having all of this understanding to create these systems and to measure things and to do so accurately to the point where the more accurate we get now measurements the closer we get to these the ratios and data reflected in these ancient structures it's just and you can't attribute that to these the cultures that we're on this like the ancient Egyptians or the Greeks it's like where did this information come from and how come it's represented in cultures from you know the Norse mythology through you know South American Native Indian myths to you know these numbers show up again and again as was shown by by Hamlet's Mill this book that that basically this tone that put that information together and say well this all of it seems to point to this you know this this origin point of someone with this information and it's just it's one more of these contextual points when you combine it with the human timeline and climate and cataclysm and the all the endless other other contradictions in the megalithic architecture on these sites and stuff like that that makes this concept that we've been advanced significantly advanced as well someone has and they've left all these signs and signals and breadcrumbs for us to try and follow to figure out yeah wow yeah the pyramid is cool it is just well it is my favorite subject of all time yeah the the loss of visualization subject I think is my favorite subject because it ties all of them together you know it in the mystery of the human origins it yeah all of it yeah it's just I think it's I think it's plausible I think it's probable even that that we've risen and have been wiped out I mean I think I was just saying I just spent five weeks in Peru again I just came back like 10 days ago and I mean that place more than anywhere else is both more mysterious and more obvious that there was something else going on long time ago more obvious yeah more of in the the delta between these technological levels like so in Egypt you know it didn't I don't you never want to underestimate what the dynastic Egyptians were capable of they had this long civilization of 300 or sorry 3000 years and they did some incredible work so you know they're really good stonework it gets the lines can get a little blurred I mean you still see the difference but in Peru it's it's different particularly in the Sacred Valley and places like Tuanaku and Bolivia but there you have these very distinct lines like in terms of technology in the stonework that and the layering of the stonework in that place to I mean typically mostly all attributed to the Inca but the Inca were really only around for like maybe 300 years maximum at their the Inca Empire was barely a hundred years before the Spanish wiped them out in 1533 and so it's relatively young rights at 1200 AD roughly to 1533 and they attribute most everything to the Inca and it's just not you just look at it go this is not remotely possible it's there's a huge difference you see these these three different layers of architecture there's a guy in Peru that has been researching this stuff for 50 plus years him and his father Jesus Gamara who's has this classification system for the architecture in Peru so you have he calls him Hunan Pacha Oran Pacha, Econ Pacha the three levels this has these words have many meanings in Quechua but it starts with like the older stuff seems to be this monolithic carved really bizarrely carved mountains like rock bedrock it's not they're not blocks it seems vastly ancient there's all these channels and massive structures and shapes carved into the the living rock of the mountain and it's like the lowest level usually shows the most erosion then you have the megalithic stuff like you see exactly one month you've seen pictures of that you know exactly one month and the core of much of picture yeah on Yentay Tamba these giant know the streets of Kursco these huge megalithic blocks that are all got these perfect joins between them you can't fit a razor blade in between them they're flowing their their mortalist walls they're they're incredible it's one of the best the most amazing parts of the sacred valley is the proliferation of this sort of megalithic work but then on top of that you have the Enka work the Econ Pacha it's literally cobblestones that are put together with mud mortets like a local rock and they've stuck it together and so you have this you have this very distinct layers I pictures of this stuff Jamie in the South America director on there but it's super clear like there's no blending like it's it's like boom okay here's here's the oldest layer here's the next layer here's the inkler and it's always in that order like it's always like hunting partial on the bottom then the megalithic stuff on top and then the Enka work on top of that because they were repairing stuff so even the Enka never talked about them making sites like Saxe one month they have all these other stories for it like to you know the giants built it is one of the explanations you work yeah there's a great example so it's this is the interpunk of the sungate so you see the difference you see that clear distinction in the architecture you have the megalithic stuff and then you have the repair work on top the cobblestone work and there's just this is all I once you see this you can't really unsee it as you go all over sacred the sacred valley and some of these some of these this is small compared to the type of stuff you see in Saxe one month where some of the blocks get up towards 200 tons 150 plus tons and all of the same type of yeah this is Tijuana and so you know there's this long history of unknown so in Egypt you have this connection a cultural connection they you know they have their kingsless they have they talk about Zeptepe they clearly have this connection to whatever build a culture was there they talk about it and it means part of their origin stories but in South America you have something else happened like there's a big gap like you you don't have the Enka don't have that that precursor culture they came from the South they talk of their origin story comes from Lake Titicaka up into the sacred valley and then they took over there are a couple of precursor cultures to the Enka but there's this huge unknown it's like we just don't know what happened you know there are there are other sites in Peru and Graham Hancock's been out there recently I was out there just recently too there there are pyramid sites in Peru that are 5000 years old places like Carral they're not sophisticated it's incredible work in terms of the amount of stone that's been used but it's not you know it's not megalithic or or or precise but there are pyramid cultures that stretch back at least 5000 years but in terms of the real megalithic precision work in South America we have no clue who did that in fact there's probably the strangest site it one of the my favorites is Tijuana you Puma Punku Tijuana you heard of this place in Bolivia it's tough to get to it's amazing it's up at up in the up on the high al-Toplano like 12 and a half thousand feet above sea level it's like nothing else on the planet the the stone work there is massive it's precise it's playful there are just endless 90 degree turns perfectly polished surfaces like saw marks cut marks it's it's a moment just this yeah I have a Tijuana the rectory there Jamie and then and it's it's it's quite well preserved because it was buried in mud it's been it's slowly been excavated and it's there's there is a lot of evidence that suggests this place is at least 10 to 12 thousand years old again using um yeah endless like this sort of andesite work see this is the left turn our epism but but it's this playful nature if you like the h blocks are famous at this place but they just have these endless little insets and don't like stuff like this like this is one of my favorite blocks to show people that is a you're looking down on top of the grounds down so I'm looking down this this thin channel that's been cut into this block and it has all of these little drill holes in it little and these are like tiny little drill holes in this channels about this wide and it's cut into this block you have several blocks with features like this like it's clearly something's been attached to this like it's how how how how do you cut this in stone and this is you know thousands of years old but it's it's a remarkable sight full of these sort of examples and it's you know attributed in general to a culture that lived there around 1100 ADs you still there still digging stuff out of the out of the ground it was it was destroyed in a cataclysm or or a kit just some sort of massive mud flood I think was the end of this civilization however that's me and Graham um and this is at 12,000 feet or 12 and a half year so what would be the reason for establishing a civilization at 12,000 feet it gets strange because there's so the the modern first the modern dating for it comes from a handful of carbon dates right they found some carbon dates and they go okay 1100 AD but they've also found carbon dates that go back to 1500 BC and they just dismissed them as being unreliable I literally think the only these carbon dates could literally be the last person someone that can't fight there or was buried there there's a guy named Arthur Poznansky who's a Polish professor that lived he spent 50 years on this site died in La Paz published his works 1945 I have a copy of his books the cradle of American man it's called he spent 50 years investigating this site he dated it at 15,000 BC based on a whole range of other like geological data um astro archaeological dating which is it has these alignment properties we can talk about it you know um he found discover toxicodon there which toxicodon is an extinct Pleistocene error mammal that went out with the young in the younger driest 13,000 BC there seems to be depictions of saber tooth tigers and smaller donns in some of the artwork there so you have some poop they also they say they're all pumas but some of them have small canine some of them have really big canines I mean why is there a difference here um he dates it culturally in terms of it being the origin point for not only other cultures in South America but also central and North America through the symbology that chicanas the ink and cross there's all these other fits are he used a whole raft of scientific techniques to date that site and to support his conclusion that it was vastly ancient and then that's kind of all been thrown aside because they found a few carbon remains that were at the you know 1100 AD mark why would you build a civilization there at that altitude you wouldn't you just wouldn't it's too hard it's above the tree line there's no natural trees and this is it gets wacky because today the t-men argue was a port like they admit like this even the archaeologists they talk about puma pumco it's like a port there was something industrial happening there the stone if you look at a posnansky's original images with the there's all sorts of interlocking bits of stone and sluice gates and hydrodynamic features on this place is a giant step pyramid that had this reservoir in the sense it's crazy but they tell you it's a port and it was a port on on Lake Titicaca which today is about 10 miles away the shoreline is about 10 miles away Hs Bellamy in the 1800s discovered a strand line that runs basically through a t1 argue what so strand line is like you know basically the shoreline of an ancient water body of water and it can be formed through just gentle wave action over long period of time it can be formed from like a high intensity period of waves you know something hammering a shoreline but he measured this he found this shoreline that runs about 400 miles so it's like across the Altopliono from Silestani in the north way down south towards La Paz but he's he documented the strand line what's really weird and and at that strand line t1 argue would have been at the shores of Lake Titicaca it would have been a small island or a peninsula the lake level would have been right there when it was and it would that fits it being a port however the strand line is today it's tilted the strand line's tilted so obviously water when it makes you know body of water when it makes a strand line it's flat like it's it's finds its level but only geological processes and I assume over a fair amount of time can give it this tilt of a couple degrees which is what they measured there's no doubt there is a strand line but it's tilted so I question whether in the period that they say t1 argue was built 1100 AD less than a thousand years between then and now that there's been enough geological upheaval in the Andes to tilt this strand line a couple of degrees I don't think it can happen anything like that fast I think I think this strand line and the evidence that it was a port shows us that this city was in fact vastly more ancient than that and that it was destroyed by by cataclysm by flooding from the the melting of the glaciers in the Andes there's been the strong evidence there that it's seen several you may have seen multiple cycles of of glacier and then the climate would have been different during this period like the climate change to make it this arid sort of inhospitable place that it is today like where it's just tough to exist at 12 and a half thousand feet above the tree line where hardly anything except like fruit varieties of potato grow they must have had better climate or I don't know lower altitude but better better climate at least. Lower altitudes possible. I think I mean how much is that chance you talk in millions of years for that like because like titty cargo I mean that was sealer like it is seawater like it's not today it has like unique species in it like there's a native seahorse it's the only it's brackish water so it was originally part of the ocean that was uplifted and it's been uplifted 12 and a half thousand feet but this is millions of millions of years and it's today fed by these glaciers so it's slightly it's it's brackish it's like it's a combination of salt and fresh water but it has these species that can only have come from the ocean but this is like long geological processes so I think it's more likely that there was just a different like like sub climate or like a mini climate zone in that area that must have supported that life because the place is massive it's it's the site where you go is is only of the barest fraction of what is actually there under the ground they've done scans they found entire buried step pyramids at this site the farmers in all the fields around it are kind of they ran into you know these big blocks occasionally and like dammit ruin the tractor again and it's a big and decide block from T1 okay whoa yeah yeah so it's and it's it's a super mystery and it's that's also the place where those trabactyl pyramids those trabactyl mummies are right so Nazca right a lot of a lot of that comes from South America that's right and there's that gets real weird it does you take all those things in a consideration yeah things yeah real weird well you know there's also this evidence for technology and alignments there I mean this is one of the things Posnanski based his dating on was this was this structure they're called the callus asiah there's a there's a big step pyramid there called the Akapana then there's this callus asiah which is big rectangular mass they call it the stone hinge of the Americas were originally because it was just these giant stones that form this big rectangular structure today it's been reaped they've left the big stones there but they've kind of filled in the gaps and they've built the walls and stuff again and what Posnanski found was that it is a extremely accurate solar observatory kind of like a mean similar to stone engines some ways but if you stood in the center of the the west wall and you looked east so there's big rectangle do we have an image of this so I can look at yeah if you've got a T1 arc it's kind of like an overlook if you bring them all up I can show you or you can type in T1 arc you probably find pictures of it um callus asiah k ala se y essay something like that but it's it's it's it's like it's imagine a big rectangular huge rectangular that's yeah they so that's it there so you actually it's like there's an inner structure there but this is so see all those standing stones those are the original stones so it actually goes all the way around and all that far side so it it has an internal structure as well interesting so the the larger stones and the original okay and then they built the smaller wall that's all modern modern as far as the last 50 years oh yeah they reconstructed if you go back to Posnanski's original excavations from the early 1900s all you see is the big standing stones it's been quarried like this is another one of of those places where literally like the core of lapas is made from stones from T1 arc it like it's the whole town that's here there's a massive church that's been built this they made they made mines and sewers systems they it was just like the most convenient source of stone and in T1 arc in particular like they're very square like it's really linear beautiful blocks of and it's a perfect building material why wouldn't you just take it and build cities so they they will write up until the 30s they would just wagon loads and wagon loads and waggling of stone every day every day so that place has been used as a core if you have to similar to lot of place in the Egypt for hundreds if not thousands of years and but it's so so what you're looking at is you got to use your imagination to look at the older pictures even then it's a barely a fraction I think of what's actually there under the ground that what's interesting is Posnanski figured out that if you stand in the middle of that of the west wall like so look in this way and if you looked at the corner pillars on the east wall it showed you the sun on the on the solstices would rise exactly on the outside corners of these pillars now this this is if you it looks like that to the eye but if you measure it with precision instruments you find it's about 18 minutes off now and so when it was a line so it's similar to that this finks and like when was it lined up with leo so when when was this structure lined up exactly on the solstices and so that the motion of the earth that would affect that is called the change in the obliquity of the ecliptic it's another one of the malenkovich cycle so you have we talked about procession of the equinoxes which is the wobble so then you also have this tilt like this change in the tilt of the earth so the actual tilt goes back and forth I think between 22 and 25 degrees something like that but it's a 41,000 year cycle and it's basically the change in the axis of the earth relative to the equator of the sun or the ecliptic plane so this you know if you project out the the equator of the sun where all the planets are orbiting it's it's the change in the earth's tilt relative to that plane change the obliquity of the ecliptic and so on that cycle it's a 41,000 year cycle turns out that he dated it using the star charts of the time at around 15,000 BC now his work was was validated in the early 2000s by the Bolivian this is a funny story Bolivian head of archaeology in Bolivia and these astronomers that went there and said let's check Posnanski's work using the astronomical almanac more up to date information and they said yes indeed he's he was correct like if if you assume this was an alignment thing this would have lined up right on basically 12,000 years ago 13,000 years ago 10,000 BC or plus 41,000 years I guess for the cycle so and the guy Gustavo forgotten his name but the guy who was in charge of the Bolivian Department of Archaeology at the time once he made that announcement lost his job and I don't think he's ever been talk of sense like he's yes the official dates for Tuanago haven't changed however these guys also figured out that if you spun it around and you looked from it's also aligned to the sunsets on those solstices so if you go on the west wall and I'm sorry you go on the east wall and look west it also perfectly lines with the sunsets you also get the solstices in the center so you know solstices being so equinoxes in the center solstices being the shortest and longest day of the year where the sun's furthest north and further south and then equinoxes in the middle so it's perfectly aligned with that but just off-kilter a little bit because of that motion of the earth the the changing the obliquity of the ecliptic so it's it's it's not an accident put it that way it's not it's not just coincidence that it's that it's aligned this way it was it was set up that way to be a solor observatory and if you look at it with an open mind it's an insane date yeah it is I mean it's even even within this cycle of 10,000 BC I mean that's the younger dry spirit like this is you know this is and it's a significant marker for South America because I can tell you the younger dry has a tremendous impact on South America something like 75% of the megaforn will speak species in South America when extinct although you are up in their Andes they may have been more protected from the the full extent who knows though fires and smoke that would have had the you know the the blackening of the sky as an all the rest of it that would have happened during that younger driest extinction event but yeah something happened I mean they they again there's been I think there's been a cycle of glaciation and deglaciation in the Andes that's affected the lake and a lot of the stuff up there in particular just because we know that there are structures get this there are structures beneath the waters of Lake Titicaca today made from Red Sandstone that match kind of the oldest layers at Tuanaku so they might have been made beneath the water beneath the water so the lake level was to been lower and then the lake and then something happened where a lot of water got added and then temple found on the Titicaca and this is 2000 stone anchor what is that add in add in ammo 660 foot long and animal and animal oh stone anchor and animal bones we're found amongst our artifact scientists when's the elders Wednesday said it's connected to Wednesday said they had found beneath South America's Lake Titicaca in what there's something wrong with this translation because all these words are jammed together even where it says Titicaca then signs it's no space I five year old website yeah but that seems weird like it's like recoded or something right after 18 days of diving below the clear waters of Titicaca scientists said Tuesday they have discovered a 6660 foot long 160 foot wide temple terrace for crops pre-inkin road in a 2,600 foot containing wall holy shit yeah I strongly support the hypothesis that was found by the 2,600-foot containing wall. Holy shit. I strongly support the hypothesis that was found by the... what is that word? Atta-tajalupa? It's something like that. It's clearly a Peruvian wood. Atta-lupa-2000 expedition. Are the ruins of a submerged pre-Columbian temple? Said Eduardo Perea, a Bolivian scientist who is among those those explore the site around 90 miles northeast of the Bolivian capital of La Paz. Yeah. So there's stuff underneath the water. Since it's filmed, did it film of that? Can we see what that looks like? Try to find it. I just thought this was easier. It couldn't find a good video. Oh, it's gotta be. Yeah, I'm sure it exists somewhere, but I have to. Right. Yeah. Oh my god. So I said, it might have a 200 dollars in a water 65 to 100 feet. I'd love to know exactly how deep this is. I had deep it was because I mean, that's a significant change in the level of the lake. So yeah, like to the car cars, 12,000, 400, 64 feet above the sea level. That is bananas. We went and stayed out on an island on the lake with no electricity. The sky at night was absolutely phenomenal. If you were a gambler, how old do you think that is? Yeah, I would put it at least. I'd say at least in that 12 to 15,000 years, if not significantly older. I think I don't know that there were periods of time in that lake where that level was that low. It's that what what's crazy is that there's been a variance like there's there's structures beneath the current lake level. So the water was lower. And then we know from the strand line that the water was. God, what is it? I think 40 meters almost higher than what it is now when it would have been at the shores of Tuanaku. So it's indicating a long time period of chance. Yes. And the tilted strand line. So if you were talking about Tuanaku, I was a gambler, I would put it at tens of thousands of years. I don't think I don't even, my as in getting this is speculation. I don't think it fits even within the 10 to 12,000 years. So I think it's got to be tens like multiple tens of thousands of years for that to be to be where it is. And in fact, when I was there literally like two weeks ago, we made some observations that I hadn't made there, but I spent a bunch of time at Tuanaku over the years. But we figured out that those big pillars of that callus ascire, we thought they were and they're actually granted and they're very heavily eroded. Like again, you have that big scoop out of it. You can see at the bottom where they were buried. But there's this huge amount of erosion and I just and granted a road way more slowly than things like limestone. So it's just I think the erosional data there needs to be studied because I don't know how long it would take even in that environment, which gets more rainfall than places like it is it can rain quite a bit. get these storms. But I think it takes a long time to erode granite that far. And the stuff that's been exposed and above, you know, the mud and when there was clearly some sort of big mud flood that came in that knocked this stuff down. The stuff that was been faced down or buried in the mud has been quite well preserved and protected. But was this the film? There's like one minute of honourable. That's inkage. Whatever that is, it looks, Inca. Oh yeah, but that's not. Lake Titicaca, underwater. It's a geology. Yeah, gold ink and figurine. Well, the Inca would definitely there and the lake. There's the Island of the Sun Island of the Moon. That's Inca. It was big old dick. Well, you should see. It reminds me of like the you should see some of the pottery they make, right? Like they were we were making, I was making photoshopped some of my friends with it. There's it's literally like Dick and balls and like all his pottery, it's they had this whole erotic section of the Larko Museum. And it's it's it's always good for a little giggle. So is it safe to see that less exploration has been done at this site? Yes, for sure. It's still being slowly excavated. But yeah, this isn't I mean, it's the wheels are grinding slowly. They're they're slowly trying to renovate. They're trying to encourage tourism, but there's not there's so much of that site that needs to be dug up. It's not it hasn't had anything like the attention Egypt. Is it a same sort of pushback against dating? I'm sure one guy, but it's the same everywhere. Yeah, yeah. Like a human characteristic of litter and control of the narrow. That it's tough to explain. There's just that they don't want to deal with this possibility of a culture down there that's that old, I think it it upsets too many other apple cartes. So to I feel like it's been it's been it's it's kind of been well, we found these carbon dates. It fits kind of the timeline of what the Inca said too because the Inca talk about emerging from Lake Titicarka and going north being pushed out by the Amara people. And if you think that okay, the Inca arrived in the sacred valley from the south around 1200 between 1100 and 1200 AD. So therefore they might have been at T1 Aku at 1100 AD. So that's it's kind of fits that timeline, but it doesn't mean anything like the Inca could have been down that the T1 Aku could have been there forever. I think the Inca, sure, that's the timeline for that civilization, but it has been established everywhere. You see people put a civilization on top of an altar. Oh, that's yeah, 100%. The Inca were like very respectful. This is the other thing about the architecture in that part of the world. The layers are very respect other than the Spanish. They smashed it a lot, but the Inca were very respectful and trying they tried to rebuild even like where they could rebuild Megalithic structures. They would his great example. And I also think a great example of why why that is not possible that the Inca did all of this because it's in such a short period of time again, that civilization lasted barely a couple hundred years. And there's so much of it of this stonework and it's just complete night and day difference. But so in Cusco, they were like 13 high Inca's, these these kings of the Inca Empire, like the high Inca, the big, big dude. And he had his court with his advisors, the court of the Panaka. And they, and it was a hereditary thing. So the sun would inherit and he'd make his own Panaka's own people. He'd also have his own palace. He couldn't live like the sun couldn't live in the house of the father. So they would build another spot in Cusco in this city. This Cusco is crazy city. It's like Megalithic, Inca, Colonial Spanish, modern all piled up on each other. It's amazing city. But if you actually look at where these, these courts were like starting with Marco Kupak, the first sort of high Inca around 1200 AD, you have the first seven or eight of these high Inca when they would build their structures and they're pals, they would rebuild like a Megalithic courtyard. It'd be these big massive stones. Well, they inhabit and they repair it and they'd have these huge big Megalithic courtyards. But as soon as they, as soon as they switch from, I think, the eight to the ninth or the seventh to the eighth, it's all small cobblestones. It's just that all of their courtyards, like their, their palaces were made from, you know, small local stones stuck together with mud mortars, like, well, hang on. You're saying that if you say that the Inca built all of this stone, then all of the sudden you're saying, well, between one generation and the next, you lost all of this capability to do the fancy stuff, the big stuff, which doesn't make any sense. It's much more likely what they did was they found an abandoned ruined Megalithic city. They rebuilt it and they ran out of Megalithic courtyards to renovate for their next king. That's what happened. Like that. So the first bunch of these high Incas have these Megalithic courtyards and then the next right up to the end, they're just, they're made from small local cobblestones. Like, would they just not special enough for the big special stone work or it's just, it's, you can't imagine within such a small couple, couple centuries that they lose all that capability. It's just not, none of it makes sense. The only thing that makes sense when you look at that architecture down there is, yeah, they were rebuilding older stone work. They were repairing it. They were bootiness stuff back on top of it. I mean, I had the so many amazing, Iante Tambos, one of my favorite sites down there, just because it's so obvious. There's these giant 80 90 ton granite blocks that make up this structure and it's fallen apart. And then in, like they've tried to move these things and in between them, they've just stacked all this little local crappy little stones in between. So if you have any images of that. I have the Iante Tambo directory tons of pictures. In fact, that's a, that's a whole other interesting story because that place is another example of what you see a lot of in Egypt, which is this phenomenon of just something happened and they went tools down. We're not finished. We're in the process of doing stuff and just drop work, leave whatever happens cataclysm social close something happened because we know a lot about our intake Tambo. It's at the top of a mountain in the sacred valley. Yes, this is a great example of the rocks on top of this stuff. But there's a great little drone video actually. One of those video, one of the videos in there is a drone shot from the top of this. It's at the top of the steep mountain. They built this structure. No, go back one. That's at the quarry. So I'm standing on one of the stones. So yeah, that's it there. And at the top of this, these giant 80 ton granite blocks that make up this central, what they call it, the Sun Temple. And we know where those come from. So I give you to imagine this giant mountain. There's a big old valley to the left of it. And then another giant mountain. And at the top of that other giant mountain is the quarry for this granite. It's about for five, six miles as the crow flies, but it's probably like 10 or 12 to walk it. And I've walked it. We've climbed up to that quarry. And all the way along this path, they've what are called these tiered stones, which are giant blocks of granite that they just, they just, they dropped. They just left them there. They're cool. They're called the tiered stones. Yeah. Right. If you're seeing them very bottom left here, there's a road that they built. And if you look at some of these other images, I'm standing on some of these rocks. Actually, this one, this is one of the examples. They had to build the road around it, the modern road around it. And this block when you pace it out and measure it, it's probably not less than 90 tons of granite. And I mean, we couldn't, I mean, shit, the equipment to try and move this on this would destroy this road to try and lift this. But these, there's, there's dozens, there's like a dozen or more of these things all the way up to the quarry at Oiante Tambo. But it's just, again, it's very obvious that the anchor rebuilt this. But something happened here where they went tools. Yeah, these are the big 80 ton blocks in the center of it. And yeah, this is one of the examples I love to show people is like, okay, you're telling me the same people did all of this stonework stuff in the middle. And like this little filler work in here. Yeah. If we were in a attach to a timeline, it would be way more likely to what you're saying is correct, especially when you're looking at it like this. Yeah. Look at the massive stones in the way they're cut and then what's above them? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It really is, it's what happened and the evidence of the mud, that's the other thing. For sure. At T when I asked, there was, there was a huge, and something happened like a cataclysm happening. Look at these blocks, these big blocks of scattered around something, knock this structure over. And these are huge blocks of stone. Wait, what, what had happened to cause that? That's a good example of the Hunnan Puch of the carved bedrock. You see a lot of this crazy stuff. In fact, there's also tool marks here like in one of the big Hunnan Puch, if you look, there's like a cross, there's like a grid of cuts in, in one of these pictures here, Jamie. That one's nuts because go back. Look at that. That one's nuts because it was removed. Right. So people often say, well, this Hunnan Puch is, is a quarry. Am I really? That's not a, I usually, I like this as many examples like this where this isn't a quarry. How do you make the back, if you're trying to take a block of stone out, how are you, how you make it a backyard? You can't. It's like a box you have to cut it out, deliberately shaped. And that, that block is not, I think it was, I think we think we were talking a lot about this. Most likely it was meant to house something either other stone or something else was going on here. This is stuff that since been removed. And in fact, in one of these pictures, there's like a semi-circle with all these cut grid lines in them. Yeah, these are more lazy, tied stones out in the fields. You go marching around in these cornfields and you find them. Well, over the place down here, it's, it's great. That's so strange. It's a very, this is the thing here we go. So if you zoom in on that, so this is up the hill and it's, these are cut marks. There's like a grid pattern that's been cut into the stone. I don't know how with what, but you actually, you can't see this from the ground. And we were super lucky and then there was a huge festival going on in the town and all the guards were at the festival. So they'd never let you get up here otherwise. We climbed up this half way up in his mountain to get a picture of those cut lines, which is again, not attributable to the very basic tools that the anchor had right barely in the bronze age. This is nice. So this is that drone footage also because the guards weren't there. They would have gone nuts for the quarter strobing, but oh really? They don't like your drone. No, no, I can't do this. Why, why so many restrictions? I mean, wouldn't this all this especially from something like you would not encourage tourism? I think you'd think so, but it's not the case. In fact, they're getting worse. Unfortunately in parts of Peru just in terms of the ropes and the restricted areas you can't go to. Once you pitch you, unfortunately you can't get to the hit to famous, hitching post of the sun or the central, central, megalithic area. Just looking at this drone footage, there's such a clear difference between the original stone that's below and then the stuff that the more modern people built above it. It's such a difference in the way the stone is constructed. Yeah, it's not in day. So there's a lot I like about. Once you see it in South America, it's very clear because you just, you know, again, Egypt, you just had a longer ancient civilization that were able to develop high capabilities than say the Inca did. In fact, the quarry for this stone is way on that other mountain across the valley, the top. You can't quite see it, but it's, they hold these big blocks a lot, like over very difficult terrain at height is still 10,000 feet. What is the largest of these stones? Be it 100 tons at least. I mean, it's sexy one-man, you're close to the 200 tons. I think at T1-Arco, the biggest sandstone block I might be rising something like almost 300, 400, something like that 300 maybe. And a big red sandstone block. Those cross marks, the etchings of the stone is that the only evidence of two marks or something. We see now that it's particularly in T1-Arco. I mean, this is actually up at the quarry. So this is, yeah, this is up at the, up that other mountain we hiked up. And it probably, I can't imagine trying to carry a ton of rocks up here. This was hard enough. But yeah, so in T1-Arco, you certainly see a lot more evidence for tool marks. In South America, you have tubular drills, you have all sorts of kind of crazy. What looked like tool marks and functional aspects of stone in particular plays like the quarry can't you, which is the big central structure in Cusco. It was this today, it's a Catholic church, but it's, it's megalithic and the inside walls have all, and then some of the blocks have been put out in our own display. And there's a lot of the inside structures that are still there. Yeah, there are similar sort of two drills that have been cut. There is a lot of similarities to some of the tools that you see in megalithic Egypt. So there's, I think it's an offshoot, I mean, if I was to bet, I would say it's either the same or an offshoot of the same civilization that did the megalithic stuff in the other parts of the world for sure. Like it's just the megalithic work itself. It's just like there's skyscrapers in Tokyo. Boom. That's it. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, you know, the reductionist and the skeptics will say, well, it's, it's, it's, they're solving this, you know, it's like trying to guy that you want to kill an animal. You make a flint arrowhead or whatever. Right. And I can, I can understand that process where you, you, you are solving a problem and maybe and getting at it the same way. However, when it comes to, to walls like stone walls, I, I'm very skeptical that two completely separate cultures found the most difficult, the most complex, the hardest way to make a stone wall and chose that because that's what megalithic walls are. Like these giant blocks that are perfectly shaped together. That's the thing. And in Cusco and in these streets, when you look at some of them have been shaken apart from earthquakes. So you can see the, the complex like the, the curve, not only is, the, not only does the, the light, it's not straight. So the lines curve where they join, the face angles change. So it's, it's changes this way, but also the face angle changes and they perfectly match. Just it's, it's mind boggling to understand how they might have actually put those stones together. This is it. It does lead people to the geo polymer ideas or stone softening. My buddy Kyle, brothers of the servant podcast who travels with us. He has a great idea that it was, it might have been a resonance thing where you're actually resonating and, and grinding stones together slowly. Whether so, they once, you know, you basically, they'll match eventually if you're just like grinding their jewelers tools like they do similar things. You can cut through, you know, they do it on real small stones, but you can cut through granite with a star shape or whatever with, with these jewelers tools that get to the right resonant frequency and they just sort of grind through like an ultrasonic drill or something that cuts and just vibrates its way through. If you turn it off while it's in there, it's like, it's caliber, right? It's stuck in the stone real tight. You have to have this, but you know, obviously you're talking some advanced technological capability to be able to vibrate a 50 ton stone to make it grind into its neighbor. But it's about the most plausible thing I've heard because I can't imagine that this was done by, oh, we lifted up, we measure it, we mark the high spots, we rub it down, we take, you know, we put it back up and it's saying this for stones that are 150 tons. This is not, it's not happening like that. Let's pull up some images of what you're talking about. These very bizarre shapes that they're perfectly masked fit into each other like a jigsaw puzzle. I think in the South America, the record, Jamie, there will be some walls, some of the walls in the streets of Kentucky. The speculation is that they did it in these shapes to protect against earthquakes. One of them, that's the caricantia, keep going is it the wavy lines, yeah, this stuff. Yeah, this stuff. This is like the Inca Roker wall and there's probably some pictures of the broken sections where you can see these inside joints, that sexy one month. So it's the same thing just a much bigger scale. We're, yeah, some weird bizarre stuff. Weird stuff. Go back to the curvy ones back the way that one. Yeah, that one. Yeah, that's not, man. What are the nubs? Yeah, that's how I die now. No one knows, right? We talked about the nubs endlessly. Yeah, people, all sorts of speculation like people have geo polymer explanations for them. You know, a lot of people try to say they're lifting bosses and that's not how that this they would flip over. They're not in the right place. One thing's for certain, I think, with the nubs that is an observation, a friend of ours of Chuck, a geologist made, which is that if you look at how stone is quarried, right? So one of the common methods still used to some extent today, but certainly there's a attributed to cultures like this and the Egyptians is what they call a wedge and feather quarry, right? These little wedges out and then you hammer in either, you know, wood and wet it and tries to, you try to split stone basically. You're just trying to, and they still do it today. One thing you'll never be left with in a splitting or a wedge and feather approach is a nub. Like you can imagine, you can't imagine these stone faces splitting and leaving these bloody nubs that are on all of these walls. So they're formed. They're formed either deliberately formed or they're result of some other process we don't know. They're not the result of this sort of primitive quaring method. They, they, I don't know what they are, but they're on everything and that's another, it's another that they leave them there as well. Right. They're in Egypt too. Like they're on the, like if you compare that wall to like the third pyramid, the Mancara pyramid, it's exactly the same. I mean, it looks exactly the same, the pillowy appearance on the, not like unfinished. What's the finding image of that? Mancara pyramid. Yeah, the granite. It's just, it's so weird because they're, they're not in a uniform position either. No. And, you know, with those, you find examples, there's been surface wear on a lot of this stone. There's plenty of examples where it was very finely, like reflective and polished originally. So there's been spalling on the surface. It's, it feels rough today, but there are sections. Yeah. So this is, this is Mancara pyramid looks the same. It's the same kind of thing. Yeah, nubs and a little larger in some places. Those are big ones, but there's other ones that are smaller. Very much like that. Yeah, that, that Facebook picture there, I guess, is a good nub picture. But there, even in Mancara, there's some evidence that they were flattening some surfaces of the pyramid, whether or not they intended to flatten the whole thing. We don't know. Um, funnily enough, they have actually found that there's probably another hidden entrance to this behind that blank flattened wall there on the, the turkey today. I filled anomalies under Mancara pyramid. Yeah. So there's a, this is on the, um, well, that would be eastern side, I guess. of the pyramid, the, uh, yeah, the eastern side with a pyramid, strip, temple is the entrances in the north, but there's a flattened part of this wall on the eastern side. And they've been hitting that with like a, a ground, like a radar thing and they found that there are some anomalies behind there. So they might well be an entrance behind this wall. Yeah, that looks a little odd. Like the wall looks a little different than the surrounding stone. Well, for sure. And then there's some evidence that they had a patch like that. One of the hypotheses again, I got a credit, um, Colin Russ from brothers construction guys. So they look at this stuff and they have a great theory about this. Cause on all, there's a lot of the decaying stones are missing on the back, but we found blocks that were smooth like that with the angle for the other side. So what I think there were probably four patches like that. Now what you could be one possible explanation for this is like, well, you, you very carefully grind and finish a section on each side because that sets your angle. Once you set your angle, you can use that patch as a reference point to then basically try to finish the whole rest of the pyramid at that exact angle. So you got to start somewhere. You, you met, if you very carefully set your angle correctly on that patch and then you can, you can use that as a reference to then smooth out the rest of the surface, which you say smooth out. In places as this much granite, you got to remove it. Like a foot of granite, it's got to come off these stones to get down to that. Like they're so pillowy, pillowy. It's granite. I mean, I just, it boggles the mind. It's like there was scoot. It's like this, they were using that scooping tool or whatever to do it. Are there competing theories as to what the nubs are for other than like using it to lift the stones by somehow? Yeah. You know, some people suggest some of them may have been like little mean of the really pretty, there are different types of nubs. The subtle ones, not all work is lifting nubs. Some people say in the geo-polymer world where they say, well, stones were, were formed or cast. They'll say, well, these are like heat expansion points. I've heard good theories from certain people that suggested had something to do with the mass of the stone, like a resonant freak, like as you change the mass of a stone, it's whatever resonant frequency it has my alter. Because you also have scoops. You have nubs and you have scoops. So you seem to have this reduction of mass and then there's more mass in another place. So maybe it had something to do with these. are different theories I've heard. I don't have a good explanation for them. It's so weird how it never comes up again in human history. Yeah, we don't make stuff. It's really weird. It's really weird. Well, it's a commonality. It's one of those other indicators. It's like, hey, this is the same. But how come this is the same? It doesn't exist. It's much apparent as well. Yeah. Yeah, there's places in Japan. I mean, there's a place I want to, I've been there. I've just not explored all those sites. Yes, there's some really megalithic stone work in Japan that actually matches a lot of the stuff in Peru. See if you can find some of that, Jamie, please. Yeah. What's that, bro? Looking on different ones. Oh, wow. Where's that? It was like Turkey. Turkey. Turkey's another one. So that's a more consistent nubs, I would say. They're really, right? Or a little more. It's a little deliberate. There's also a lip on that. Yeah. Still weird. It is. It's like, what are you doing? Are you copying that could be people did? That's a possibility for sure. Because we're very good at that too. You do see a lot of imitation. Right. Who taught you to do it? Yeah. There's a few people really obsessed with the stone nubs. And I can see why. Like it is a real mystery. See those, those one, that's the Doyente tambour. That's those are bedrock nubs too. Those aren't even in blocks. That's in bedrock. And those are a bit more deliberate, I would say. Like they're more like maybe they're shadow and markers for like some sort of calendar. These, this is part of the coriacancher. They're my big square ones. I don't know what that's for. They're different again. What is your take on that sage wall in Montana? I haven't been there and seen it. I've been wanting to. Oh, it's weird. I've heard differing opinions on that. Like it's, it's possibly, I'd like to see it for myself, to be honest. I've seen some. Where's the new job? China. That looks like Yangshan. Yeah, that's Yangshan quarry. And they're giant. That's giant too, by the way. that the Yangshan quarry is thousands of tons. Like if they ever cut that block off, it's something like that. And some astronomical. Oh, yeah, I watched a piece on this of a YouTube channel. Yeah, see it there. It's monstrous. What is the timeline of this stuff? I believe I don't have to top of my head. Maybe Jamie, you can find that Oscar AI. Ming Dynasty, right? Yeah, they say the story on that is like some ruler said like, carve me a dragon. They're like, sure boss. And they started trying to get this block out. And then eventually some form went, you know, maybe we can't deal with this. stone anymore and they left it. Doesn't seem real plausible to me. That's the size of the quarry. Oh my God. Yeah, thousands of tons of that. And what they were doing there, I do not know. And I do not know when they did it about that's the weird things. There's so many sites. And ups would be more huge. Huge. Not. Yeah, they're different. But it's like, what do they represent? Well, so one another option, I mean, something else I've heard is that in some places they could have been mounting points for something that was grabbing them or hanging on to them, some tool to finish the wall. That was another theory or structure around them. Yeah, a structure from the base. And now the Japan ones, Jamie, do you find anything? Did you get a Japan megalith maybe a bit? I mean, India, the the barabar caves is another one of these mysteries. It fits this box. Do you ever heard of the barabar caves in India? No. Oh my Lord. That's a whole other. These are in Japan. This is Japan. Yeah. This one in particular, the whoa, look on that one that you just had your first one. That's I think that's AI. Is it? That thing looks like the one that the one on the left, just next to it, the medium one. That's definitely that's that and then below it actually is a better picture of the asuka. Megaliths. Yeah. So this matches a lot of the stuff in Peru to me and even the imperial palace, the cornerstones and corner blocks of the imperial palace there, the wall. Is very megalithic. Whoa. And in fact, it's funny. They've actually been digging up the foundations. My wife was there recently and they've gone underground and they've found like original foundations and big walls and they've just they've just opened some of that up to the public. Yeah. Some of this is some of this is very, I mean, this is totally Peru, hunting, part share, if this is legit. Yeah. It matches right. It's the same kind of stuff. Yeah. And that's what's weird. It's like is this a traveling civilization, a civilization uniform all around the world at a certain point in time? He was global. Yeah. I think it was global. We're looking at the remnants of it either. Look at that. Oh my God. Offshoots of it too. Pitting an LA potentially was like the giant boulder in LA at the museum. You know, that's like sitting over the tunnel and you're talking about it. I like that. Oh, no. I don't remember. I tried to block lock my own. Wow. Kind of what is this? Like a LA gold chum museum of modern art. It's blue. You go there. It's like this is a plexiglass box. It's amazing. Yeah. The banana peel in it. Right. Kind of shit. Yeah. Not a fan of what not. You know, it's for dorks. It looks similar. Yeah. Kind of. You're right. Yeah. It's but not as cool. It's a balance cooler and obviously way fucking older. It's just so weird how these mega lithic structures are so consistent. Whoa. Look at that one. That's nuts. Where's that? There's something like looks like Cambodia potentially Thailand. Well, that was the other thing that we pulled up. The day that temple in India. The one that's cut entirely. Yeah. The amount. Because that's with a K. Yeah. That's one. Yeah. There's a lot of Indian. It's another place. But that's very, this may from granite. Like it's cut out of granite. What if you look at bar about caves? That's also in India. These are put my friend Patrice Poyardi runs a filmmaking company in France has done an amazing documentary on barabar. And they've scanned them. And these are these are caves cut into big granite outcroppings that are just massive perfect. done an amazing documentary on Barabar and they've scanned them. And these are caves cut into big granite outcroppings that are just massive perfect on the inside. Like it's mirror-finished granite within like a thousandth of an inch flatness on the insides. And they have these crazy shapes. Some of them have these circles, but then have a whole other room in the back that's circular. And that's an unfinished one. That's like a that doorway, please Jamie. Like upper left, yeah, right there. Like that's nuts, man. That's a lot of that. The decoration there is added. That's probably later. Again, it's the writing came later. The original doorway is probably that one. So the elephants. Yeah, that's that's Leah. Yeah, for sure. There's an attribution of these is to, uh, there was supposedly only by a particular king who gave them to like a religious cult to get out of the rain. But it's, he doesn't say anything about about him making them. They just, oh, wow. If you go to the ins, the insides is what's impressive in here. It's the finishing of the granite. They're mirror-finished. And it turns out with the scans, what they found is that are also like almost perfectly symmetrical. Like they're not straight. They tilt in it like a degree and a half. Exactly on both sides. It's some of the most precise work in granite in single piece. Again, it's one of those things where you can't make a single mistake. And I mean, this is not, this is an imitation. Like this is a later attempt to replicate it. Yeah, look at that. The Calpaddy hammer, whatever the one, the two in the middle of the air. So this is, and you literally, it's reflex set. I mean, the acoustics in there are incredible, but this is granite and it's been polished to this mirror-finish. And then it's also been measured for flatness and geometry. And it's insanely accurate. There's been a whole series of documentaries done. You can see the mirror-finishing it. Wow. And nobody knows. There's nothing else quite like this anywhere. It's like giant stone boxes. Look at the size of that one. The carved into a mountain. Carved into a granite outcrop in a mountain. Exactly. Yeah. There's seven or eight of them. All in the same area. Really hard to get to. It's like you've got a rougher than camp and stuff to get out there, but it's, it's on my list. Like, what's the conventional explanation of how they did this? They don't. I mean, it's literally, there are literally other examples of people hammering on them with like trying to make replicas with the tools of the time. And then it just jumps to this. And it's just, there's no explanation for it other than that. Well, they did it in order to let this religious sect out of the rain. And because it's literally some of the, some of the really poorly inscribed, the right, you know, slightly gibchets. It's like somebody hammered this text, right, Sanskrit, or whatever it is. And it says, oh, you know, this was this king gave this to these guys to get out of the monsoon. It's the ancient version of Kilroy was here. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Oh, Kilroy built this. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. Wild little Timmy on this guy's great. I've never seen that before. That's that's far about. Yeah. I have completely insane. I, I, Patrice, I actually have his full documentary on my channel. If people want to to go with the giant statue outside is the Oya, Corey in Japan, Japan, whoa, Sir, the band in Corey. Whoa. Oh, this is like, I, we were in a quarry like this in Turkey. He was absolutely incredible. Look at the in relationship to the size of the people that were walkers. This is a salt quarry or is it limestone? I can't tell a lot of them are salt cabins, but we were inside. So you have big cabin. You have big quarries like this underground quarries in China. We were in Turkey in this. I have this amazing footage from this massive underground quarry. Caves that were carved in in Turkey when we were there in the middle. Look at this title. Scientists discover this structure in Japan. They claim humans could never have a belt. Medium. How's that? How could humans have never built a quarry? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Clicks. Oh, yeah. Just get clicks. You son of a bitches. That's the game. Someone did it. No one's saying this on humans, just saying something was going on back then where they were way more advanced than we want to give them credit for. Yeah. And when you take into account, the younger dry sand pack theory and the natural catastrophes that undoubtedly have befallen many a civilization in the past. Yeah. It all kind of makes sense. It's just, it's weird how many people resist it. That's the weird part. It's like they want to cling so tightly to their preconceived notions of the history of the human race. It's a weird thing, isn't it? Like the history of civilization is one of those things that hasn't changed a whole lot in about 100 years. Like the idea that civilization started with the Sumerians and the Mesopotamians 6,000 years ago and now we're here, that idea has been around for a long time. And it's just everything else around it has shifted such that, I mean, my hope, I really do hope that it's just that the context, the next generation of academics can take some of this context into account. I think, I think a lot of them are growing up listening to stuff like your show. I think that's going to help because there's a lot of people that are getting into archeology now, a lot of young people that are a little bit more open-minded. And then they also encounter some of these very arrogant professors and people that have these ridiculous ideas and think that they should be the absolute gatekeeper of information, which is so crazy because universities are a fairly new concept. The idea that these people that are running these universities, they should be in charge of something. This is a new thing. They should be in charge. They're the only ones that could figure it out. They have the paper that it's written, their name is written, it's framed on the wall. You shut the fuck up. You've got the letters. That is literally insane because you're dealing with something that it is not possible for everyone to know and you're not as into it as they are. The thing is about like they are not as into these ideas as you are. You know what I'm saying? Like you are chasing this shit down. There's not a lot you are. And so is Jimmy Corsetti and so is Graham Hancock. And so are many, many other people in Randall Carlson and John Anthony West of Rest in Peace when he was alive. He was awesome. Those people chasing down these ideas are way more into it than the people that are gatekeeping the information. They don't want to accept anything other than what they've been teaching and what they've been writing about. Yeah. You're right. There's a lot of that. I mean, it's amazing that the medium is shifted to give a people of voice, I guess, that they're into it. For in George Howard has a great way of explaining this in terms of a potential talent pool, if you consider like, okay, so current academics, at least the ones that are the old guard now are kind of been selected from the people that chose to go to university that got into university. So you have this pool, but now with the kind of the internet and it's like you're exposing these ideas to such a wide over variety of people that you can then there's going to be people out there that think about these things a certain way. It's that's polymaths. It says polymaths that are going to be able to come forward and give those ideas. And you know, it's I think, you know, the vast majority of significant breakthroughs and pretty much any scientific field have usually come from somewhere that's it's not within the box. Think it's it's usually anti-establish or it's outside the box thinking, not always, but a lot of those ideas came from like this has come complete from left field like germ theory, all that sort of stuff is like, what are you crazy? That there's dumb idea and then turns out, oh, you know, 30, 40 years later, it's like that was the right idea. And we go from there. I mean, I'm hopeful as well that, yeah, the next generation of academics will be able to embrace a lot of these the context for some of these I and then try to explore them because I think ultimately that's what's needed is is some take some of these ideas seriously and and bend some of our resources to try and explore them on the ground and in full because there's only, you know, ultimately it's the people that have the control and are able to do the real on the ground research are the ones that will be able to confirm or you know, change the it takes real science in a lot of cases. And also we're currently obsessed with our impact on the environment, which is not a bad thing. It's a good thing to be conscious and aware of our pollution and our emissions and all that good stuff. But if we were absolutely certain that civilization has been utterly destroyed by something that is outside of our capacity to control, probably a good idea to know that that's happened. Yes, 100%. And to deny the possibility of even exploring that concept because people are going to get their feelings hurt because, you know, they were because they're so bitchy to each other. That's the craziest thing you find out about these academics. They are so bitchy to each other. When anybody has any sort of an idea that's had a redox, any sort of an idea that's outside of the narrative that they've been teaching forever, they attack each other's reputation. They're a little sociopaths. It is vicious. It's well, that's the version of the fight. I guess it's their, the mean letters and the, yeah, it's, you know what I mean. That's weird. It is kind of weird. But they're also in today's day and age of these shows where like your show and all these other ones that we mentioned, there's a much more attractive approach to these ideas, you know, where people are not like bitchy authoritarians, but they're rather people that are absolutely fascinated by something that is undeniable, size of these stones, the similarity to them all over the world. All these different mysteries, the fact that many of them are covered in mud, the fact that enormous stones look, they've been knocked off by some immense force stuff that was left, just left there in the middle of construction. Nobody ever picked it up. Nobody ever finished it. Like what happened? Yeah. And it's, it's really only not that long since we've had the ability to apply some of these disciplines to these problems, like engineering. And it's, it's since the industrial revolution that we've, we've even had the enough background knowledge to kind of understand these problems because we have to solve them ourselves. Or like to think about how Christopher Don approach is the idea of the Great Pyramid itself. Like no one would have ever been able to do that 200 years ago. That's what I'm saying. Yeah, 100%. That's, that's, it's, it's these other disciplines that have a whole different take on it. And it's again, not a criticism of archaeologists to say they're not engineers, they're not engineers. They're just, yeah, it's fact they don't, you don't, it's like, I'm not a dentist. Like, you know what I mean? I can't solve those problems. Exactly. No one gets off all problems. Yeah. But hey, dentists might have some input on some of these. They don't mean like, sure, you could, you can, I think a lot of these problems are multi-disciplinary is what I'm saying. Like there's, right, as a lot of different approaches and angles to them that lead to some pretty interesting places. Funny. Because my dentist is obsessed with UFOs. Oh, really? Super smart guy obsessed with UFOs. Trying to talk about it every time he's like doing what we think. We think that is a lot, lot, lot, lot. It's fun. It's fun to talk to him. I'll bet. Yeah. Yeah. What else are you going to think about while you? It is filling on some, but it is a subject that is so important for us. I mean, I'm watching the Ken Burns documentary right now in the Revolutionary War. It's really great. Awesome. Amazing. Fascinating to look back at this very recent history, relatively speaking, to the terms of the timeline of the earth. And then just realize like that ain't shit. Yes. And that's one of the reasons I did drives me to is why it's, I think that's a big factor in why this is important is it's altruistic, but I do believe that having, if we could change that pillar of humanity from like, well, we were Stone Age and now we're Space Age to this cyclical nature of we've been here. We've not been knocked down. Be aware of the dangers like solve the longer term. I do genuinely think that a whole generation that's exposed to that that has that inbuilt as they're like, hey, background knowledge of what it means to be human, then maybe we would solve those problems. Yeah. Maybe that's a constant test every 12,000 plus years. We seem like it. Yeah. It does seem like it. And it seems like no one's really solved it yet. You know, and we probably get a little smarter every time we do it. But it takes forever. It probably sucks for a long time. Well, it seems like it's not every 12,000 years or so is like there's definitely been events that that are orders of magnitude greater than anything we've experienced in our the last several millennia. Yeah. You know, like a, you know, a thousand Katrina's or whatever. A ton of kind of thing. And there's evidence of like things like the Tungusco event where like something a little bit more a little more than we've experienced before happens, but nothing compared to what has experienced we've experienced or the earth has experienced in the past. No, for sure. We've not experienced. Yeah, we've had we've had nothing, but it does that if you go back the last several couple hundred thousand years, it is has this period of see it seems like that does for some reason align with some of those those 12,000 years and 26,000 years kind of cycles. It's weird how that happens. Including the depictions of Atlantis and the fall of Atlantis. Well, yeah, I mean, it's all that lines on with the timeline lines up with the timelines. It does. Dude, your show is fucking awesome. I love it. I look forward to it every time we put a new episode out. I really love it. And I love every time you come in here and let's make this a regular thing. I love that. It's my favorite show. I love this subject so much. It's so engaging. It's so exciting. You know, for whatever reason, there's just part of the human fascination with the past that gets ignited in me. And it's it's so I think the audience feels the same way. It's like it's so intriguing. And I think you're right. And I think Jimmy Corsetti's right and Graham Hancock's right. I think all these people are right. I think there's more to this story than we're being spoonfed. Thank you very much. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sure it exits on YouTube. Subscribe, like and subscribe. It's fucking amazing. And then you what is your Instagram? It's uncharted X1 on Twitter and uncharted X7 on Instagram. I should probably fix that, but it is what it is. Okay. Yeah. Well, this is not six seven. That's the new thing with the kids these days. Oh, no. Yeah. I haven't done all that. Yeah. I have heard about it. Yeah. Thank you. Appreciate you. Very much. Bye, everybody. Thank you, bro. Yeah. I'm going to force them. I want that. Oh, Chameleon. Yeah. It's the recording. Yeah. Throw it back in. Yeah. I can talk about it real quick. Yeah. Yeah. You want to talk about Chameleon? I can. Oh, 100%. I'm ended. Sorry, folks. We're we unended it. We unended it because Jamie, it sent me this earlier today. Solomon Shamir. Yeah. The Shamir. So you are familiar with it. I am. Okay. Yeah. So this is an ancient idea that there was a worm or a substance that had the power to cut through and disintegrate stone iron and diamond and Solomon is set to use it in the building of the first temple in Jerusalem in place of cutting tools for the construction of Solomon's temple, which promoted peace. It was inappropriate to use tools that could also cause war and bloodshed. Yep. There's also I found since we've been since I sent that to you. There is a actual thing called a authority or something. What? That it comes with Philippines. That does. Yeah. It's some sort of rock eating worm. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The Shamir is like Solomon's lightsaber. I like to call it. Yeah. It's it's it is described as the Shamir is described as a stone cutting. Wow. That thing ate through that. So the guy who found it said he had never heard of the Shamir. And some scientists don't know if they're even the same thing, but they do they're described very similarly. What a creepy look and motherfucker. That thing is a rocky little worm like grinding stone. That's crazy. It's there. There are a number of different depictions and descriptions for the Shamir and one of the reasons it one of the problems with it being like this this thing that slowly grinds through. Yeah. See, this is the weird part. Shamir was meant always been wrapped in well and stored in a container made of lead. I didn't have a container would burst and disintegrate. So it's like under the Shamir's gear. A lot of it was like right. So Wow. So we describing. We describing radiation. Like what are we describing? Well, it gets into the it gets into the realm of the eye of the covenant and everything else to roll and stored in lead. That's nuts. And then it lost its potency. Yes. Right after which I don't the dripping of the honeycomb. I don't know what that is. By the time of the destruction of the first temple during the siege of Jerusalem and 500 BCs. Yes. But again, it still exists. They found it today like 2019 I think is what they found a worm that does something similar to worm that he would be evolutionary. He had to do it fine. And we had to build that temple Solomon quickly. So he was like we need this. We can't use the regular methods, but we also need to be able to cut stone quickly. So one of the things that Shamir was described as doing is being able to cut these sort of hard stones. Like I think it described like diamond even. Yeah. As the one quickly. The blood of the Shamir was used for diamonds, but this also said he was not he didn't find it. It was given given to him a bird found it. A bird. A bird. Someone noticed the bird was using it to make nests and rock. And they're like, let's take let's let's get the whole of that. So yeah, there's some people who also speculate that there's there is a bird that vomits this thing or poop this thing that look at this which can melt rock. The angel of the sea had then given the Shamir to a bird. Yes, identified by the Talmud as a hoopy, even if it's the oldest bird isn't this I believe this is like the way he had to go to several birds which we're also these like spirits he talked to that and I think he had to get to the very late. Very last one. So they got from aliens. It's a word from a bird. It's a lightsaber from aliens. Radioactive alien lightsaber. All right. That's the fire weapon.