So everyone is paying any attention. All knows that more people are coming across the US border from foreign countries illegally than any time in American history and that the American population is changing faster than any time in the last 250 years and that's not just true for the border states. There was on a New Mexico California, Texas. It's true for at least 48 of the 50 states that continue estates. I mean small towns in Wisconsin and Iowa look completely different from what they look like two years ago. So this is changing the country in a way that can't be undone. There's no bigger thing that's ever happened to the American history than what's happening right now. And the question is how is it happening? Why is it happening and who's allowing it to happen? And to to answer those questions in some extent we had a pretty remarkable conversation about a month and a half ago with Brett Weinstein, who's of course a scientist in an academic now hosts a fairly famous podcast called Dark Horse with his wife and he went to the Darian Gap which is literally the gap in the Pan American highway from South America to the United States in Panama. It's one of the roughest places in the world famously and he went there with a man called Michael Yahn who is probably the most experienced work correspondent in the United States. Here's what he said about Michael Yahn. Well, I wound up there because Michael Yahn had been sending me materials thinking that I would be interested in what was taking place in Panama. And of course I was utterly fascinated by what I was seeing. Now some of your viewers may not know Michael. Michael is a former Green-Barre who has refashioned himself well, the last time I was on your program I talked about Goliath. Yes. And if there's a Goliath, there's a David and I would argue that Michael Yahn is like David's eyes. He's been traversing the world trying to understand a story that has yet has no name and that story is partially in the Darian of Panama and it's all sorts of other places including in various UN installations. There's some story that is difficult piece together and he's been he's been physically traveling to all of its various epicenters and showing people. So a year ago it would have been pretty hard to find an English speaker who had been to the Darian gap. Again, it's famous. This region is famous for being the most lawless and dangerous place on planet Earth. Michael Yahn has now spent about six months in the Darian gap shooting film interviewing people. We're gonna show you a lot of what he's found during the course of the interview you're about to see. But one piece of tape that caught our eye kind of remarkable a town of about 300 Indigenous people only about a dozen working toilets deep in the jungle completely overrun by thousands of migrants from all of the world including Africa and Asia watch. Hello. All moving to your country. Now it's happening. That's the end of the United States the country that you grew up in. They're repurable. Forever. People in Washington, the people who control the Congress and the White House seem to be in favor of this and now they're just kind of saying it out loud Chuck Schumer probably the darkest member of the United States Congress. Of course the head Democrat in the Senate. He's telling us that we can't deal with any of that because Ukraine's border is too important. It's Ukraine. It's only about Ukraine. Here's Chuck Schumer. Let me make it clear. We made the overwhelming sentiment in that meeting is we got to do Ukraine now. There are other issues including border which we should address but not now. Right. So if you want to know what evil looks like in 2024 you just saw it. It's Chuck Schumer. Okay. The embodiment of it right now. But we did want to see more tape and hear more firsthand account from what it looks like at the other side the Darian Gap, the beginning of the journey to our country where this invasion is beginning. And so we are grateful now to speak to Michael Yahn who spent more time there than made me an American. Michael Yahn, thanks so much for joining us. So could you just start with the with the overview what role and maybe I've misstated it but what role does the Darian Gap play in the invasion underway of the United States? It's absolutely vital Tucker. You know, as soon as Biden was installed I was actually in DC for the quote unquote, you know, whatever it was where they installed him. And then I flew straight within about 24 hours to Eagle to to El Paso because I thought that the aliens would start flooding across the border and they did. And so from there I flowed flew down to Columbia to the other side of the Darian Gap. Because I thought that the Darian Gap would end up being a major pathway to the United States. And so went into the Darian Gap on the Columbia side just not very far just about an hour inside. It's very dangerous over there. And I was there with Masako Gennaha, the famous Japanese journalist and Chuck Hulten, a war correspondent friend who just got strafed yesterday in Burma. But so we were out there in the Darian Gap on the on the Columbia side. We then flew over to Panama and went down into the Darian Gap on the Panama side. And so I recognized this would likely be the major invasion route of the United States. And so I just started spending a great deal of time down there. I got to know many of the Emperor Indians and Kuna Indians and others down in the jungle. And I started mapping out the pathways that they're coming in getting to know members of the government and that sort of thing. Now, I keep in mind a lot of people have no idea who I am. But I've spent most of my life downrange overseas. I am an American born and raised was in the US Army, that sort of thing. And but most of my life has been downrange. For I would say two thirds of my life has been in Middle East, Asia, you know, deep. And I spent a year in and around China. I've written three books on Chinese information more that are only in Japanese actually because I've been working to wake up Japan for years. So in other words, I'm not coming into this flat footed. I'm not coming into this. It's somebody who looks at a map and thinks, hey, this might be the route. I'm looking at this as someone who has traveled in about 100 countries or lived in, you know, in so many countries. And so I realized these would be the routes, likely the routes. So often when you see me leave Panama, I actually go to another vital terrain, which is Netherlands, right? And was there with a vlogging in Brook and that sort of thing, you know. And so bottom line is there's a lot more going on here than just the invasion. Obviously the invasion is a kill shot to the United States. Now anybody that can get their feet anywhere into South America, which is pretty much most of the world at this point, they can get to the United States very quickly. And they can do this through the dairy and gap. Now keep in mind, a lot of people ask why don't they just fly to the United States. Many people do. Actually, many people come on student visas and that sort of thing. And anybody that can actually land closer like many of the Chinese will actually fly to Mexico first. Some will go to Cancun and go on vacation first. And if they can get a visa to Mexico, they'll go to like Cancun and they'll meet their, what they call snakeheads and Mandarin is what we call coyotes, the coyotes, the Chinese call them snakeheads. They'll meet up with their snakeheads and Cancun or Mexico City or Tapatula. And then they had a cross up that you know, Texas and whatnot, you, all these sorts of things. And by the way, I've been across the entire US border from SpaceX all the way to San Diego. Quite a lot and on the Mexican side also quite a lot, but I've been across the entire US border. So now many of the actually Chinese will come through the northern border as do others, but back to their end. So they don't all go through dairy and many actually use what's called the CVP one app. It's an application that they can use to fill out this form and get on flights and fly straight from Bogota to the United States or they fly from Guatemala to the United States. I was just over in Guatemala checking that out actually. And so many people do fly in the US is flying them in 24 seven, but not everybody can do that. So now we have maybe 3000 a day coming in. The number is constantly changing, but we know the number quarter over quarter is increasing coming through the dairy and get because more infrastructure is being put in. So it's facilitating it. And in the main funder, by the way, is the United States. It's the United States. I hear people constantly talking about how we should punish Columbia or punish Panama or a stay in Mexico. That's all nonsense. The people that are talking about stay in Mexico policy have zero idea what's going on. It's like teaching calculus to somebody who doesn't actually know how to add yet. The United States is the one that's behind most of this. The main engine is something called IOM, which is the actually most of the board of patrol agents I talked with have never heard of the dairy and gap. And they've never heard of IOM. IOM is the international organization for migration. That's the main engine that is doing this. Right. They are part of the United Nations. They have a main they have a big office down in Panama at the city of knowledge. It's right on the Panama canal actually. And there's more than more than five dozen NGOs down there, IGOs and nonprofits. The main one is IOM. You can see people going through airports every day across the United States and Europe and Asia as well with IOM, tote bags and that sort of thing. But IOM actually has probably the best office space in all of Panama. It's in building 110 at the city of knowledge. I was just there about seven days ago. And it's right. They fly their flag. The city of knowledge in Panama City used to be Fort Clayton. All veterans of Panama know what I'm talking about. Fort Clayton was the US Army South headquarters. Right. Right. That's one of the most vital pieces of terrain on planet earth. There's almost no place on planet earth. More important than that little speck of land that overlaps, overlooks the Mirafloris locks. Panama canal, the Panama canal railway and the Thatcher Ferry bridge. The Thatcher Ferry bridge is the bridge for Highway 1. That goes all the way down from, well, the tip of South America up to Columbia. And then there's that gap. That's why they call it the Darian Gap because there's a break in the road. Which they are they're about to hook together. And then that goes all the way that road in Brett Weinstein talked about it on your show. Brett did excellent down there by the way. And that that man loves the jungle. But that that highway goes all the way up to Prudobay, Alaska. And and and and and so that's a key highway. So you've got Panama, such a vital piece of terrain because first of all, the Panama canal and secondly, the Panama canal railway is important. Believe it or not. And that road and Panama, just the location as a vital. Now we need the Panama canal for trade for one thing. Well, we also need it to get our Navy through. Right. And so we're slowly losing Panama. The NGOs that are causing these invasions like IOM, highest, Catholic charities. And so many more are also taking over governments. Now, we may ask you to pause for a second. It sounds like from your reporting that the the NGOs and the UN are vital. Like that this wouldn't be happening without them. So let's just pause if you don't mind and explain. You just mentioned three. You mentioned the UN agency for migration, the one devoted to destroying the United States. What are the second two? One was Catholic charities and what was the middle one? Oh, there's at least 250. But in and city of knowledge, there's at least 62, 63. I've got somebody doing a study on them now. But the highest is one. That's the Hebrew immigrant age society. And that's actually interestingly, Doug McGregor, who you've had on your show, told me back when he said, you know, hey, it's Tucker Carlson. The internet is crowded with interesting things that don't really matter. On TCN, we attempt to bring you interesting things that actually do matter. And a lot of them interviews, long form and short videos, documentaries. You can find all of it on tuckercarlson.com. And we hope you will.