Dr. Thanks a lot for coming on. So you spent your life, you know, 50 years working on treatments for cancer. And when you started, it seemed like we were moving in the west toward the elimination of cancer. Smoking was a huge emphasis, get rid of tobacco and cancer rates will drop. Obviously smoking does cause cancer. And we got rid of it basically, but cancer rates went up. And that is a very rarely remarked upon mystery that really bothers me. Tell us, since you you made billions of dollars selling your companies, but you're still involved in medical research, which I admire. Where are we now with cancer? What are you seeing in cancer rates? Well, which would really worry something to me now is not just the rate to put the population in which it's increasing. I hear the younger people. So we clearly see an increase in certain types of cancer like pancreatic cancer, ovarian cancer. And we're seeing it go on cancer. And we're seeing it in younger people. Just to set a baseline, what's the 10-year survival rate for pancreatic cancer? It's horrible. I think, you know, if you have pancreatic cancer today, I don't think there is a 10-year survival rate, so to speak. What there is, however, if you have patients who are what we call a fatal of 10 of care, the survival rate is in months, you're measured in two months. That's certainly my understanding having watched a lot of people dive in. So advanced pancreatic cancer is a decence. Where are you seeing it now? Well, I got to tell you a really concerning story. It's not only I'm seeing that now I'm seeing that in younger people, and for the first time in my career, you know, when I left UCLA, I was doing all the whipples, which is a surgery to actually remove most of the pancreas of very big operation. Eat your surgeon. That's what I'm a surgeon. Yes. And I was also doing pancreas transplants for the type two diabetes and eyelid cell transplants and stem cell transplants. So I had this diverse activity as a UCLA system professor, but I never saw pancreatic cancer in children. And the greatest surprise to me was a 13 year old with metastatic pancreatic cancer that the family called us to help. And to me, that was not only devastating. It emphasized the idea that we're seeing people with high incidence of pancreatic cancer and younger right now in our clinic. We have 45 year old 50 year old. And what was sad about this young boy, but the time he came to see us, he exhausted all the stand of care. And he came from Butler, Pennsylvania and all the major medical centers really had exhausted all the therapy. But the time he came to see us, his body was ridden and he passed away. So seeing cancers now in younger people and almost rise almost like I don't know call it a non infectious pandemic. But that's what I think is going to the worrisome in the world, not just in the United States. But largely in the United States, we're being to see this in a three or two. A non infectious pandemic of cancer, including deadly cancers, correct, like pancreatic. In your career, which I think is about 50 years of working on this, how many 13 year old pancreatic cancer patients have you seen? Never. Never. I'm quite around because it bothered me so much now. Why this is happening. So Dr. Stephen Day was a good friend who was true trained with me at UCLA when I was at UCLA. He's now the Angeles Clinic and I called him and he said, listen Patrick, I'm now seeing an eight year old, a 10 year old, an 11 year old with colon cancer. We've never seen that. We've seen now 30 year old, 40 year old ladies young ladies with ovarian cancer. So this is a real phenomenon of a rise of cancer in early people, in young people and early and and and really need to get to the bottom of that. Do you notice a difference in the virility of the cancer of the speed of which it moves? Well, I'm getting reports and they've even called it turbocharged cancer. That's right. I'm getting reports of that now that people that have been in remission before even are now getting back the cancers and very rapidly progressing. So if you really think about what the cause of cancer is, you know, and I did a piece with Sanjigupte many, many years ago on 60 minutes. And I said, you know, the cause of cancer is it's an inability, it's not the rapidity of its growth, but it's inability to die. And it's inability to die is because it either hides from the cells that matter. I your natural killer cells have a T cells. All, and this is what I'm really worried about. Your body and the cancer has found a way to suppress your killer cells. And once they do that, once they activate what you call the suppressor cells and you call yourself immunosuppressed. And then I think you see this rapid progression because it's nothing stopping them. What could possibly be causing this? Well, I think if you look back of causes, you know, ironically, when I was doing at UCLA, I was working on pancreas transplant where I want to in immunosuppress the patients. Yes, you have to. Yeah, because you prevent it. And then I was working on cancer where I don't want to ami suppress. So I needed to understand the body's mechanism. And we have a crazy, wonderfully exquisite balance in our body. You have there a ying in the yang of the killer cells and these things called natural killer cells and T cells. Who's job is to kill anything that threatens the body? It was job is to kill quite right. Anything that threatens the body, whether the body has infection. If you have TB, you have HIV. If you have hepatitis, you have COVID, these cells are there to recognize these infected cells and kill it. As you and I are sitting here today, how stem cells are growing in order to replenish parts of your body, your heart. If you didn't have that, you wouldn't have a heart at age of 14. You need those stem cells. But mathematically, there are some cells that transformed and your body recognizes that through these natural killer cells and kills it. I call that nature's first responder. And that's your mechanism. That's how we are all protected and we are in the state of equilibrium or balance. On the other hand, the moment either the tumor find a way to hide from these cells or your bodies or the tumor causes these cells to be suppressed. And that's why I call this as suppressor cells. And there are certain cells in your body called T-Rig cells or myelodarive suppressor cells. They use all technical. That when they get up regulated, you've lost your protection. And so the question then is, how do we understand this balance? How do we increase the killers and how do we decrease the suppressor cell? So that's been 50 years of my challenge of and how do we expose the tumor. So on the one hand, you need to expose the tumor because it hides from the killers. And then you activate the killers and the other hand, you have to suppress the suppressors. So we truly pray a good game of chess. And I think like astrophysicists where you're looking for God's particle, where all these molecules are floating around talking to each other, all the cells are floating around talking to each other and this dynamic interaction. And how do you understand all of that? You know, one of the best, most fun lectures I gave, I gave a lot of lectures on this and try to be non-technical because it's basically what I call basic immunology. And the problem with cancer is it's been treated by oncologists and not immunologists. And immunologists don't see patients because they look at basic immunology. And then when you have infection and you have virology, so this cross disciplines of virology, immunology, oncology, all these allergies don't talk to each other. Yes. So you're just a big picture for non-specialists of which I'm of course one. You're saying that cancer is to some extent a problem with your immune system. It is everything about your immune system. So you've got all kinds of defective cells that could become cancer or cancer in your body at all times. But all times. But your body is zapping. I'm correct, right? Which is, and that's the fundamental balance of the human body. Correct. And when that body gets out of balance, when the killer cells become suppressed or as effective, that's me a cancer. Correct. Okay. So I'm starting to wrap. I just know it's I love it because that's the perfect interpretation that I couldn't do in a non-technical way because I think that's like I get too near the so I'm glad what you are a doctor. So but that's that's I think is what's happening in our body. We have these perturbations between equilibrium, you know, and that's a good thing. The moment you knock yourself out of equilibrium, now what could knock you out of equilibrium? And that's why when, you know, Bobby Kennedy is talking about the standing up about the toxins in our food, the toxins in PFAS, the processed food, and viral infections. And really what knocks out a balance basically is inflammation. If you have inflammation in your body, there's this, now I'm going to get an eddy again, these cell school neutrophils that actually see an infection and tries to kill it, which it does. But if there's persistent information, these neutrophils actually flip into a suppressor cell. So what people don't realize is that we have the ying yang in our body that every cell has a counter cell. And that's what I was about to go there. I said the most fun conversation I had where I was asked by astrophysicist or physicist to give a lecture is I named this concept of cancer a quantum theory like a physicist. And that in our body, we have cells that can be in two states. It could be a killer or suppressor. And like the show just got, it could be alive or dead. And it depends what you do with it. And so I named the quantum oncotherapy, it's just to be controversial. So that doctors could understand what I'm talking about is that we need to understand the fact that you have a killer T cell and you have a killer suppressor cell. We have an M1 macrophage that actually chomps things up in M2 macrophages that blocks that. You have an NK cell that kills an NK cells that inhibits. And we need to have that balance. Otherwise you'll get into autoimmune disease. But there's a thing called quantum entanglement that is a scatter live with this cat dead. If somebody interacts with that and the person that interacts with that is the doctor. So you as a doctor could either be enlightened enough to activate just the activators and suppressors and change the dynamic towards the cure. But it's very complex because it's now quantum because all those changes are happening in minutes in your body. These molecules like God's particle where they're colliding with each other and self-colliding and interacting happens within minutes. So you need to have a theory of how do you interact at that level. And in so doing, the first thing you need to understand is how does cancer happen? And then how does it grow? How do you stop it? This idea of a vaccine, a cancer vaccine, do you radiate that cancer? Do you remove that cancer? Do you remove the lymph nodes? Do you give chemotherapy? And crazy enough over the last 50 years, I figured out that everything we're doing is not the word wrong because that's a bad statement, a pejorative statement. It's not enlightened or a bit way to say it. Because everything we're doing is tipping the scales towards the suppressor cells. We activate the suppressor cells. We're not activating the killing cells. And we can go into this conversation where I can explain that. So the key system which you just said is cancer is all about the immune system. So if you activate the immunosuppressions system, you get more cancer. So then the fundamental root causes what's activating the immune system on the other way. Yes. And that's interesting. Suppressing people's immune systems, including the poor 13th whole boy who died in pancreatic cancer. And the question is what is that? And maybe there are a lot of causes. But it is one of the first people to notice there's been an increase in scary cancers in populations that didn't used to get them very obvious just from living here. And a lot of people had pointed to both COVID, the virus and to the mRNA COVID vaccines as potential causes. Do you think that they're related? The best way for me to answer that is to look at history. What we know about virus induced cancers is well established. We know that if you get hepatitis, you get liver cancer. Hepatitis is a virus infection. You know if you get human papilloma virus, HPV, you can cervical cancer. Yes. So it's a throat cancer caused by viruses as well. Right. If you get HIV, you could compose your sarcoma. Yes. So we call that uncogenic viruses in medical terms, meaning viruses that are induced cause of the genetic. And the fundamental basis for that are threefold. The whole marks of an uncogenic virus is one in mass persist. And why? Because it continues to create inflammation. And why? With inflammation, you get suppression because your body is trying to suppress it. It must inhibit the sink called P53 that's in your body to try and protect your body from not having cancer. And if it persists and causes inflammation and here in the P53, it begins to have the whole marks of an uncogenic virus. So then the question is, does COVID where did come from the vaccine, which is the spike protein vaccine, or from the infection, which is spike driven that gets into every cell of our body? Because it goes through the cell of the body, it goes wherever you have the sink called the ACE2 receptor, which is in the blood vessels. So wherever you have a blood vessel in your body, it's where it's going to go. And if it has an ACE2 receptor on that blood vessel, that's where it can go. Because that's the purpose of the spike protein to penetrate, to hijack that ACE2 receptor and get into their cells. So that's why it gets in the pain. That's why you have brain fog. Because it disrupts the blood vessels of the brain. And of course, my dichonder of dysfunction is why in the colon, which is a high and the GI tract is a high ACE2 receptor. That's why pancreas ice is a receptor, where that's why you people have in the heart. You have dysfunction. You've seen young people who have sudden heart attacks all of a sudden. You see young people with pancreatic cancer, all of a sudden. You see young people with colon cancer all of a sudden. So is it by coincidence that post COVID infection, post COVID vaccine? We've seen all these events where we know the spike protein goes there. I don't think so. I think it's not a coincidence. So the question is, can we prove is this what I call long COVID virus persisting? And the group at University of California Central and Cisco has now definitively proven that and published that in papers like nature. Can we also prove that once you have that persistence of that virus does that COVID virus suppress the natural killer cell? Does the natural killer cell actually not only go to sleep becomes what you call a neurotic that's now been published? The natural killer cells gone to sleep. So by your definition, we just solved the mystery right there. I think so. I think this is a conversation I had with the wait. I mean, billions of people, literally billions of people had the COVID virus over a billion, got the spike protein vaccine. So that's like we're talking like a huge percentage of the Earth's population. Unless I'm missing somebody. No, you understand what keeps you awake at night and skip me awake at night for two years, two and a half years. And that's why I sort of band in everything just to focus on how do we clear the virus because the answer is to clear the virus from the body, from the body. The answer is to stop the inflammation because it's chronic inflammation. Privacy should be right for all citizens in this country. It's a prerequisite to freedom. No privacy, no freedom. Unfortunately, in America, privacy is a luxury. So who gets the luxury of privacy? You don't, we don't. Privacy is given to government agencies. They've got millions of classified documents actually over a billion in this country. The average American citizen meanwhile is being watched every time he or she goes online. Databroakers are tracking and recording everything you do and they're selling what they learn about you and your private life to advertisers, even to the government's the NSA. What do you do about it? Well, we use a product called ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is an app that sends 100% of your online traffic through secure encrypted servers. And that means that everything you do online, your personal data, your personal information, is shielded from the creeps who want to sell it to other businesses or the government. ExpressVPN also hides your IP address and that means the brokers cannot exploit you. They can't sell you as a product to the highest bidder. ExpressVPN works on up to eight devices at once. It's fast and easy to use. It's number one rated by industry professionals. So until we get privacy, you're going to have to make your own privacy and we do it with ExpressVPN. Right now you can get an extra four months of ExpressVPN for free. Scan the QR code on the screen or go to express VPN.com slash Tucker and get four extra months for free. That's express VPN.com slash Tucker. So, Tucker, ask a dumb question. How long does the virus remain on the human body? So far we found three years for years. Is there any reason to believe it will naturally go away? Not if your body's in misappressed. So it's a circle. Yes, what causes cancer? Because your body's in misappressed. You have in your body nature's compound. And if the tumor and infection of the inflammation suppresses it, you have to find a way to reactivate it and clear the virus. It's a rootry of simple fat. And that's the missing link that I think it sounds like you're describing what could be like the worst human health crisis in history. I don't know how to say that. Without saying that it scares the pencil for me because I think what we may be, I don't think it's virus with this man now. This is existential. I think when I talk about the largest non infectious pandemic that we afraid of, this is it. Because while there was an increase rising cancer in our country because of the idea of the toxins and anything else, this even suppression that is curd now globally. And more importantly, the immigration type to inflammation, chronic inflammation, which is asymptomatic and sometimes it's not this 15 million Americans with long COVID. And they're not psychiatric. When they have memory loss, they're not psychiatric. When they have instantaneous heart attacks, it's not psychiatric. When you have an 80-year-old, 10-year-old, colon cancer, 13-year-old pancreatic cancer. So the idea was, is this solution? And this is what I think that certainly helps out. Because you spent your life around scary diseases, like that's been your life. And if you're scared, then that's that's not a good sign. I'm scared, but hopeful. I think it's important for me to have this conversation with you not just that's why okay, I'll share with you a conversation I had. I got invited by the CEO of the Interjection Foundation to come to D.C. I think October, November, last year during the election phase and just to have a conversation about what I'm doing. And there he brought the leader from Walter Reed, the barter, the DOD, the NIH, the NID, all into that room. It was just me. And I said, it is time. It is time for me to reveal to this learned group of leaders about what I'm scared about. And I spent, I think it was three hours. No slides, just me speaking alone on the stage and all of them in the audience. When I first started the conversation, the first sentence was, I think COVID is unkegienic. One of the members of the audience said, nonsense, okay, let me explain to you what we've been doing in our research. At the end of three hours, well, as you said, you've got to publish this. This is so important. And I said, yes, we are processing the publication. And what came out was this paper that they biopsied the colon of young people, temporarily, when no COVID took COVID and showed the persistence of replicating viruses in the colon tissue two years out. Replicating COVID viruses, replicating codewarices, replicating, asymptomatic replicating in the tissue, meaning there's inflammation. And when you have these inflammation, these neutrophils are now getting geeky again, plasticized flip from a protective neutrophil to a suppressive neutrophil. It's called an N2. It's called a Milo derives suppressor cell. That's a official name. So now you have suppression in your body. And it's no wonder that then converts into colon cancer. But so is this true? Do you think for, I mean, have you covered? No, lucky man, not lucky man. T cell man. I have a T cell in my body that protects me from the nuclear caps. Where do I get one? That trial was held up by the FDA and by Collins and Fauci. You never got COVID because your protector cells were so strong. Not only a protector, I don't see if I do get COVID with the virus class. You want to clear the virus. Look at the hell out of my body. Get it out. I just want to pause here. I know you're in the midst of a much larger story, but this is something I think everyone can understand. So I think I'm in good health. I am in very robust. Did you have COVID? I did. How many times? One. I never took the vaccine. But I got COVID knocked me right on my butt. It was a bad three days. Fine. But I don't understand. You're older than I am. How did you never get, let's just, I just want to get very specific. Like how do I mean, everyone on the planet got COVID. So let me, let me give you some idea. Okay. One, because we understand the implications. My wife, Dutch would also never get COVID because worth of us. So this is this story. We by by that unfortunately, I relate this is a painful thing to me because I related to COVID's death. It was during COVID's time. We have passed away. And at the funeral, COVID behind her, you were close to her, correct, very close to her. And at the funeral, at this funeral, all the people in the room. And there's I think November. And I turned to Gavin Newsom. I said, listen, this is one virus I'm worried about because I was studying this virus. You know, I understand HPV very well. And I understand hepatitis. I said, this is not a respiratory virus. This is a dangerous virus. So I went back and I shut down our organization so that we could actually do nothing else but COVID. My entire team of hundreds of scientists on Zoom and everything else around the world as it we must go after this virus with a vaccine that clears the virus. And the only way to clear the virus is to have what we call a T cell and NK cell for cells that kills cancer cells. And I wrote a paper with calls, good on the said, COVID's like cancer in cancers like COVID, meaning it's immune suppression that causes its spread. And it's immune suppression by the COVID virus that allows it to persist. So the only vaccine that's important is a T cell vaccine. But that's why I'm telling you, virologists think about antibodies versus cellular therapy. It's foreign to them to have a vaccine that stimulates T cells. So I should I understand that internally. So weird since in 20 minutes, you explained it to me, not particularly high IQ, not a scientist. I understand exactly what you're saying. Why don't for a while? Why isn't it obvious to virologists? Why isn't that like day one lesson in virology school that the T cells that the cells that protect you against all potential internal harm, they're the key because every vaccine so far is antibody based dogma blind spots. Okay, now we're cooking again. Now I understand we're talking about dogma blind spots nicely put. Okay, I'm sorry, keep stepping in a story. So no, you're out. You're not stepping because you allowing you actually interpreting it's pleasure to me because I don't know what I'm saying sometimes whether it's going to be so geeky, it gets lost. It's important for the audience for you to interpret. This is what Sanji did for me in the 60 minutes. He was brilliant. He spent two years with me, by the way, doing a little 15 minute piece. Wow. Yeah, we'd come to LA. We'd do the shoes. We just had breakfast. That's it. 15 minute piece. Wow. Yeah. I would come to LA. We'd do this through the shoe, shoe, shoe, shoe, shoe. And we just had breakfast. That's it. Okay. So you figure out early, everyone's panicked about COVID. Okay. But your position is their panic for the wrong reason. Correct. And actually, maybe they're not quite as panicked as they should be because this virus could pave the way for cancer because it will suppress the immune system of the human body. So you in November, you said, when did you write? So, so by March 2020, we had the vaccine March 2020 because I had built a full GMP facility for cancer using the same vaccine that NCI had re-tested for HPV and for colon cancer. We think we'll see you. So I'd create this vaccine in which we would educate your body, pride a COVID for the treatment of cancer to educate the T cells to recognize the cancer cell to kill it. That's called a cancer vaccine, but which, by the way, is for the only vaccine in clinical trials today to prevent cancer that the NCI is running using our technology. Is there any way you can take the word vaccine out and call it something else? I'm calling it bio shield. Good. Actually, just skip the crap out of here. I know. Because it's not a vaccine in that general sense of an antibody-based vaccine. It's your body's bio shield. So I'm real now, it's on the show. We're going to call this project bio shield, which, by the way, in 2004, there was a bio shield act for national preparedness for against radiation against a pandemic infection diseases. So we have the worst thing that can happen to you is to have one dose of radiation will wipe out your NK cells and your T cells. That's how you die. Yes, that's how you get cancer. It's that's your immune system. It's an exception immune system. So we wanted to create a bio shield. And the bio shield is to educate your body to have these T cells called memory T cells that go and hide in the bone marrow and come out when they needed and kill that cell so it can never do damage. That's the concept. And it's not a foreign concept. We published it with the National Cancer Institute. So by March 2020, I took all my resources. Thank God we had the resources. So that's the sort of if was this your money or my money. Okay, so I should just say I alluded to it earlier, but you had a couple of companies making cancer drugs. You owned all of them. I mean, you I think 100% of the companies you sold them for $10 billion or something. So but rather than by a vineyard, you continued in your work. Is that a fair? Very far. You know, as I said to you, the breakfast, I had no idea about stocks. So when the two companies were bought and they were bought for the right reasons, the one company was American pharmaceutical partners and we were making literally close to a million files a day in United States, manufacturing of 150 different SKUs for every part of the hospital. And we say for Heparin. So for his senior said, we want to buy you. We said, great. And then I developed this molecule that was feeding the tumor that could actually activate the immune system to activate the macrophages called a braxing in cell genes that we want to buy. I said, great. And the purpose for my selling them was not for the money, clearly it was for the money, but the purpose of the use of the money to pursue this dream of this astrophysics to find God's particle in your human body to activate your immune system. That was the purpose of this money. And that's what I've done with the money. I spend about $3 billion of this money. I've not gotten one penny from the government. Not even one dime. You're the only one. Yeah. And maybe that's the freedom and the liberation allow me to say what I can say now. That's right. So again, I keep pulling it so I can see there's a lot here that's interesting, but how does you not get COVID? Okay. So I recognized that Peter Marx and I had these conversations. So he was head of CBR and I was in pinging him with the science because this is a biologic. And I was saying to Peter, listen, Peter, I need to show you that we need to create a T cell vaccine. And he said, well, we don't do T cell vaccines. Everybody's doing the other vaccines, but great. Let's continue anybody vaccines. Anybody vaccines. Then he called me and he said, we're going to create warp speed. And he's a star trekking. And I'm a star trekking. I love warp speed. I said, okay, we're going to do this in warp speed. Absolutely. But the only way Peter, you don't do this in warp speed. You need, we need as a country to have NIH and border fund a trial where we take macaque monkeys. We give them the vaccine and everybody should throw their vaccine in because I don't care what's not mine or theirs will ever vaccine to clear the virus. Though anyway, to this experiment, you give the monkeys the vaccine. It's under your control. You have 100 monkeys. Everybody gets a set of vaccines. And then you infect the monkeys in the BSL3 facility with the high dose of COVID. And then you see in their lungs and the tissue that there's no virus after seven days. Absolutely. That was warp speed. So I was one of eight of warp speed. Then I get a call, Patrick, you do warped. You are there. I said, test my vaccine anyway. They did a vaccine test at the NIH and border. It cleared the virus as I predicted. There was no virus in the lungs and by off the big infection. So I said, okay, I'm dewoped. And this was a Francis Collins scheme and Anthony Fauci scheme and Montice Sloughie scheme. And one day we can talk about the conversation. I have a Montice Sloughie and when I've learned about Francis Collins, I mean that in that event. And they were going to go after this antibody vaccine, which is the mRNA vaccine with spike. And I said, this is too important. I told my people, we're going to build out a vaccine without money. I couldn't get enough material other than to do one batch. And we're going to do phase one trial. And we're going to inject as many people that we can do in the phase one trial. I'm one of them. I eject it myself in their life. And then we're going to measure how I don't talk about the family. I'm going to measure my own blood. I drew my own blood and tested and I have T cells to to nuclear capsid and to spike, which means if I were to get covered, that's what the T cells now are memory T cells would clear the virus. So we then tried, begged, begged, because not for funding even, but for the plastic bags that were now restricted as you grow these things to Pfizer and Moderna, all the materials that you need in a biological facility, that's zero. I've been a good one batch. So I'm going to South Africa and inject these in patients with HIV because that's a biggest test you could have. You couldn't generate T cells in the patients with HIV and do this phase two and phase three trial in South Africa. So we did that. And then I called Peter and I said, Peter, I'm sorry, what were the results like? T cells. The people that interestingly enough, it doesn't say, just so you know, you have to differentiate that does it actually prevent the penetration of the virus versus the load of the virus versus the clearance of the virus. These are three different things. So we think it prevents the penetration, but we don't know because as soon as dust penetrated would clear, so you wouldn't even know or the T cell vaccine. This is anecdotal, but some of the people who got out T cell vaccine, their family members got COVID. They didn't get it obviously the vaccine and they didn't get COVID from a time while living with the family. The issue of clearing the virus in transmission was the key. So an antibody vaccine may reduce the viral load and therefore reduce death, which is a good thing that prison Trump did. But the next generation of clearing the virus was what was needed and both should have been developed simultaneously. It wasn't. I'll share with you to this day, it's a mystery to me why. But the opportunity to clear the virus was actually known, I think by by Collins and by Fauci that it did not clear the virus. The spike vaccines of spike vaccine, the Pfizer, the antibody vaccine does not end to this day. It does not clear the virus. That seems like a big deal. Well, I just what we talked about, if you don't clear the virus and you have a piece of the virus in there, especially spike, whether from the infection or from the vaccine. And now you get another infection. Now the virus brings along this nuclear capsid. Now it re-conjoins and replicates again in these what are called privilege sites two years later. So what we've seen now we're back to persistence that's now published just months ago. And this is what I shared within I took secretly four months ago and persistence. Asymptomatic persistence, but with inflammation and reduction of P53 and even a suppression, all the hallmarks and recipes for cancer. And coming back to your first question is why are we seeing an increase in young people? I think all of the above the toxins, the history, the red dye, the PFAS, the COVID, all of the above. Does both COVID and the COVID vaccine lower over time, the human immune system, the vaccine itself up regulates temporarily the antibodies. But if the vaccine, the spike protein breaks off and the RNA or DNA goes into the cells and whether it's from infection or the vaccine, that's where the controversy is, right? It could be both. And the vaccine doesn't clear the virus. That's the key. It doesn't clear the virus. And that's why we were told, of course, you take the virus and then you can't get COVID or transmit it, but not one turned out to be true demonstrably untrue. Well, it's not only demonstrably untrue, it was knowingly untrue. That's what's bad about. Well, it seemed like that's criminal, actually. I mean, if I tell you that, you know, this car gets 40 miles the gallon and instead it blows up, well, you know, that's a crime. You can't sell anything under false pretenses. That's a crime. I don't see how this is not a crime, but. Well, as you said, of a breakfast, it's it's not a conspiracy of it's true. I believe you're writing a book with that title. You probably have no idea where your meat comes from. You probably should know. The likelihood is that the meat are eating past a massive industrial processing plant, probably owned by a foreign corporation. Foreign meat. Did you sign up for that? We don't think you did. So you probably have no idea of knowing where the animal grew up with that animal ate or what chemicals big food pumped into that animal to increase profits. That's all kept secret, meaning you can never really know what you're putting in your mouth and in your body. That's disgusting if you think about it. And it's easy to fix. Meriwether farms, a farm owned by friends of ours, is a great option. We use their meat. We eat their meat for every meal. Unlike corporate farmers, Meriwether farms controls the entire thing from the pasture, the cattle graze on to the facility where the beef is packaged in Wyoming and across the mountain west, the cattle raise without hormones without antibiotics or any other additive. Clean American beef, you can trust every single time and they will ship it straight to your door. Go to meriwether farms.com slash Tucker. Use the code TUCKER 2025 for 10% off your first order. You can also save it a monthly subscription if you sign up today. That's meriwether farms dot com slash Tucker. We eat it and vouch for it. So, and you know that they knew you've established for a fact that the developers of this and our public health authorities knew that the COVID facts would neither prevent infection nor transmission. Yes. And with, I think, you know, it's not well known during the first person Trump election. He offered me a position. And I turned it down because I said to him, I really could help him from outside in better than in and out too much to do. I really sure was working on this. Thank God working on this potential cure for cancer as well as clearing the virus with COVID. This is what I call the missing link, which we can talk about. This activate of the unnatural killer cells as bio shield. And we have this bio shield now. So, it was the right decision for me not to go into the government during that time and to stay out. This was 16 17 correct. But worse, I've since discovered not by my inquiry, but it's been revealed to me emails about Francis Collins and some politicians work hard to prevent me from even joining becoming out of NIH. And I think that was the motivation all the way downstream that we ask, okay, so what happened to this vaccine? So I called the FDA and said, okay, I can't do a randomized placebo control trial now because you got Pfizer's Moderna vaccines all over the place. So, let me be the booster. And Peter Markster's credit was the one who said absolutely. Peter Markster's credit was the one who says, I'm worried about this COVID vaccine and this long COVID. I want to study the effects of this vaccine. Peter walks with them said to me, Patrick, fine, go ahead. I injected the first three patients as a booster. I get the call from the FDA to say, you have to stop. I said, why? To this day, they never explained to me it wasn't Peter. It was people around Peter said, you must stop. So we stopped. And there was nothing more we could do anyway, because we didn't have any of the resources, the money, the supplies to complete a phase three. So the government has a monopoly on some of the materials that you need to do this kind of testing in a biolap. Is that correct? Correct. But now we need to buy an error. So now we in the Biden era that said, I must stop. This is 2020 now. Beyond, it was during the Biden era. And I think there was this, sadly, I'm not a conspiracy theorist, but now I've come to realize it truly was a deep state inside there that had a motivation beyond it's had to say it's the most devastating to say beyond public health. And then I just tweeted recently of how so few people could hurt so many. And that's why when I tweeted about finally we have the right person in HHS with biocannity, we'll take this on. And that we have doctors that will be like Marty McCarrie, I don't know, but I do know he's a surgeon who can understand and touch and feel what it means to be there on behalf of the patient. And my support for that, I think we have a chance now to completely turn this around in this last election was in part about that. I think the national realization that COVID was there was something very dark there. It wasn't just a virus that happened upon us. Naturally, that there was, there was a lot of evil bound up in it. But just to back up a second, you said, you have learned from watching COVID that a few people can hurt so many. Who are those people? I think the main culprit really sitting there was Collins, Francis Collins, Francis Collins, and he controlled, I mean, I had shared with President Trump that Francis Collins should not be there in the NIH director. He offered me a job, uh, piritil nominated me in a safe and fun emails of Francis Collins, sending an email to a politician that belongs to lumbels, piritil nominated Patrick soon, we have to find a way to stop it. Why? To this day, how agreed, political need. He did the same thing with Craig Finto, in a room, during Clinton's time with the human genome project where Craig went to invented the sequencing machine for tens of millions of dollars in your spending billions of dollars doing nothing but one to the credit. I think what happens to you when you get into Washington, the ego, greed, and power changes your mindset. So I can give motivation to that. All I can tell you is when I saw that email, I was devastated that somebody would actually go to that extent and then send that same email to the CEO of Bio, which is his old big farmer. And that CEO of Bio said, let's go to Google search to find some dirt on him. Is there any of you on me to stop me from being nominated to be head of NIH or whatever? Let's Google them, just stop him. Let's Google to find some dirt, some bad stuff, negative research, whatever they want to find. They probably couldn't find any dirt on me. But that was the interchange between them on email. But the funny thing is you made a product, and but below it was a clarification of terms. My understanding was a vaccine was administered to a healthy person to prevent him from getting the disease. You're describing a product, the one that you made that you could inject into an infected person and it cures the infection. That sounds more like a conventional medicine than the vaccine. So therapeutic. Correct. So I use the word vaccine because that's what they understood. It's dogma and terminology. But you're giving this to people who have COVID, who have HIV. Well, I want to give it to people who don't have COVID so they can actually get COVID. But I am now giving patients with HIV. I'm giving to people with HPV. I'm giving people who are getting cancer and have cancer. And more importantly, there's 1 in 280 Americans. 1 in 280 Americans have this thing called Lynch syndrome. What Lynch syndrome is it's a genetic predisposition of an 80% increase of colon cancer or ovarian cancer breast cancer. It's a genetic predisposition where your cells don't repair themselves. I lost a friend to this. Yes. We are in clinical trials for the bio shield for patients with Lynch syndrome. We now have 100 patients enrolled already giving them this bio shield. That'll prevent cancer. So it's one of the first trials of prevention of cancer, regular, and treatment cancer. Then this bio shield, keeping on not one a colleague of vaccine, has just gotten approved in 2024 for bladder cancer. We now have people who have failed everything, who have the bladder removed. Think about that. Your bladder removed the 9% mortality just from the surgery alone where we've given them this bio shield. That's all they got is a sub-catainous injection or sorry, into the bladder. And there are now free of disease, slow complete remission, 9 years out. Alive today, we're going to talk to them published. We have patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer. We just published. We're free of disease. Five years out. Senator Reid who came to see me after having failed all other treatment with this pancreatic cancer, spread to this liver. Came to see me and he said to me, Patrick, I'm here, but I checked with Francis Collins, who said, don't go. I said, well, Senator Reid, it's your choice. I'm coming. And we gave him the therapy. And he's seen 19 went down to normal. And he lived for two years, free of disease. He actually came, was very active. We had a patient with local cell carcinoma, which is a terrible disease of failed everything. He came into a clinic, complete response, 9 years out in diet, other causes. The reason I met Robert, the Rob Junior, and even I've not known him for my four months, is I called Bobby Shriver. His cousin, his cousin. And the reason I knew Bobby Shriver, because Bobby called me seven years prior to that, saying Patrick, I'm on the City Council, Santa Monica, and the mayor of Santa Monica has this terrible tumor in his head and neck. It's also written under his chin, also in through his jaw, and UCLA and see the sign I said, he's got two weeks to live. He's got to go to hospice. Can you see him? I said, absolutely, Bobby, I think he needs our natural killer cells. He needs our bio shield. So I brought him to our clinic, which we have in Los Angeles in El Segundo. The nurse is broken to choose. The nurse is just Patrick. What are you doing? UCLA, silly has to go to hospice. You should give this man, I should know. You don't understand. We can dynamically activate this, and this is always an outpatient. We got him into complete remission, complete remission, to the extent of life. So it healed, and this melted the tumor. He went home because it was exposed, a little bleed happened in the blood vessel. His family took him to St. John's, and then they called me frantically and says, the doctor says, do not resuscitate. I said, what? Call, let me speak to that doctor. He said, well, it's bleeding and it's got the thing. I think he was in his late 70s, 80s. I said, please clip it. It's complete response. And we're going to do a flap to cover that. He did. We did the flap. He lived for two years. He was able to eat. So when I called Bobby and I said, Bobby, you remember what we did? He said, absolutely, Patrick. A lot of people have asked me to introduce to Robert. You know, Robert and I don't speak very much. We've had an argument about but his ideas. And I said, I understand, but I'm going to give you a number to Robert, to Bobby Kennedy. And he'll call you. Bobby called me in 10 minutes. And I said, Bobby, I'd like to introduce myself. He said, Patrick, can I meet with you? I said, please, any came to meet with me at my home? And we had this long conversation. And I realized, I've just watched your show with him. Here's what he is, an authentic man with a sense of purpose, conviction, courage. He says, what he really believes sometimes, and maybe wrong sometimes, it may be right, but he says, where do you believe? And I really believed, oh my God, yes, somebody who would have the courage to take on the world and ask the questions. And I said, I'm going to support you. And that's what happened. That's how I got to know him. Amazing. He was dismissed by no lunches dismissed, attacked, and vilified by a lot of people in the medical establishment, I would say, everybody, why were you willing to listen to him? Because what you're saying is exactly what I was saying. And I'm sort of attacked by the same people because of the dogma that's out there. So let me give you this example. I said, Bobby, and I shared with him the story about Hope Hicks. I said that you probably just walked up to the office and I walked in in 2016, it's 2017. I said, listen, people think of you who are saying, you shouldn't have a polio vaccine, you that you're an anti-vaccinator. What you really are saying, you worry about the the acceptance inside the vaccine. So that's the technical, the materials that go in with the vaccines, the mercury etc. The mercury etc. So I understand there's a polio vaccine is one, two, three, four polio vaccines that now been manufactured. And now that we're setting this a new polio vaccine as a manufacturer in which we have cow serum, calf serum inside that vaccine. And I know and you know, everybody knows in the UK knows you can get pre-on disease from these calf serum because you can't measure that. So that got approved in four days with just because of safety the way dogma has happened. But there's other polio vaccines. So you can take the other polio vaccines, but don't take that one just like I was telling you about maybe I was telling you about propofol story over breakfast. And you should explain it that way, that you wanted just to be examined. And he said, exactly, I said, okay, not only did I get him, he is asking the right questions. And people are scared to ask these questions because he's perverse incentives. And that was what bothered me. But in science, shouldn't any question be allowed? Exactly. So when I tweeted, I said, he knows more science than most doctors. He's much of it's a good thing you're rich as you'd be out of a job. Really stuff like that. But it is right. And that's what the blessing I think. You know, I love the American dream. And that's why you said, okay, I'm able to get this money. The money is for the purpose for me able to do this. And I was very concerned about being too loud about it because if the steep state would hold up the provol and they did, by the way, they put us into complete responsibility. I got a thousand requests for information. And most my submission was close to 700,000 pages in order to get the thing through 700,000. It's like the US tax code. This 700,000 pages in order to get the thing through 700,000. It's like the US tax code. This drug has been in trials now for eight years. 2015, how long was the Pfizer mRNA COVID vaccine in trials? I'm not even. So that's why I'm trying to say, you know, when you- I know it's what I'm taking. When you talk about the use of fees, so we thought that the use of fees was going to accelerate the approval, where the FDA gets used to fees from pharma. It turns out that the big pharma use of fees are so large, it pays for the salary for all these reviewers. So now the biotech companies, the young biotech companies are throttled. So the big pharma that this is incremental, little dots that just follow the revenue. This checkpoints, multi-billion dollars, it works, what, 20 billion, 30 billion dollars on revenue. Personalized follows it, as is any co-follows that Roche follows it. There's no- they will the same, but it's all about incremental, sameness and follow the dollar. But the innovation is really at this young biotech companies that are throttled. This is what needs to be changed by the FDA today. They need a complete revamp where people with skill sets and the skill sets of the modern science, not the old drugs, have to be in place to understand what's at stake here. Time for their true life out story. I got a call for a friend of mine yesterday, honestly, true story. Who said his girlfriend had just broken up with him over out. He wouldn't stop, and I thought to myself, that's kind of sad. He said, no, it's not sad. Imagine if I'd married her. Now I know, I was saved. Then the next day, this same friend is driving at twice a speed limit through a major American city pulled over by a cop in a speed trap. Cop takes his license registration, goes back to patrol car, runs him, comes back, looks in the window and sees a tin of alp on the dashboard. Pause his stunned, says to my friend, use alp. Yeah, I do, says my friend. So do I, says the cop, we all do. He looks at my friend, thought fling, goes drive safely, sir. It hands back his license registration. No ticket. So in two days, he's saved from a tragic marriage to a girl who doesn't like Alp and a speeding ticket. All true. It's more than an accident. In an age show, 350 million people are guessing they're about 350 million Alp stories. Email us yours. We want to know, and read it on the air. Email tell all and alppouts.com. Tell all and alpouts.com. Give us your Alpstore. We have to take the conflicts out too. I mean, if a reviewer is paid by the company whose drugs he's reviewing, that's such an obvious conflict and know their world would that be acceptable. Not only wouldn't be acceptable, if then that reviewer has also the role to block an innovator. It gets worse, right? Again, this just seems like crime to me. Yeah. I mean, I don't know. If this were going on in another country outside the United States, I'm an American. So I give the United States every benefit of every doubt. It takes me forever to realize something's corrupt, because it's America's not corrupt. But if this were happening, I don't name the country, China, South Africa, you know, I'd be like, well, that's the most corrupt thing I've ever heard. Well, that's exactly the fear I have now. The Chinese don't have this restriction. And their innovations now are stripping us. Think about that. I've always said America's lead in healthcare and biomedical innovation is the best in the world. And if we could use biomedical innovation as foreign policy for Africa and to Asia and to India to bring that to the rest of the world, that's how we lead. I now read the papers and the Chinese science is now outstripping us. Look what happened to AstraZeneca just last week. They just spent $2 billion investing in China now. That's a tragedy for us. Not for manufacturing or innovation. Oh, so that's not good. Because the idea was we offshore all the manufacturing, but we the ideas right generate here. So AstraZeneca's English company. So what I'm saying is the fundamental problem, I think lies at the FDA and even the NIH. So the change that Bobby's bringing in with Jane are being ahead of NIH and Marty being here with FDA and Bobby himself having the courage to stand up to talk both against the food and national conflicts in the pharma complex, take on the works of the world and the fisuses of the world. I think we have maybe an opportunity what I call a period of enlightenment. And I read I'm all about enlightenment. And if you look at the Sanji piece, we are there now. So I want to actually say- So you guys stop asking me so, so your position is that cancer, but not just cancer. All kinds of illnesses are caused by weak enemy in system and inflammation. It's all about the immune system. Your body functions, you live with your die by the immune system. The Sinescence cells aging is the immune system. The cells in your body that allow you to go to 100 years old, 120 years old, is based on the activity and the function of the immune system because the immune system, what's regulating your healthy cells. Can we just go through? I know this is not like patentable, this is not your business, but it's, what are some of the obvious things a person can do to strengthen his immune system? So you ask what activates the natural kill cell? So it's like, you know when you look at the leaf and you talk about apoptosis and the leaf actually sits and goes brown and it changes the blood and goes back up. So all of human nature, all of nature, is filled with this biology of this balance. So you have, you're a product of nature. I mean, literally your product of, when you were tadpole and a fish as we came out. So this cell is evolved since the Cambrian age. Think about that. This cell does natural kill cell in your body. I published my first article in natural kill cell in 1990. That's, this cell was only discovered in 1970s. Think about that. And we've ignored the cell. This is what I call the missing link. I'm gonna announce that at the American Urology conference in Las Vegas in the end of this month. We have discovered, I've not discovered the missing link. We've discovered the awareness of this missing link and how to activate this missing link. So the idea is to activate the natural kill cell. It has 30,000 receptors on this cell. What this natural kill cell does, it replenishes self with sleep. So sleep is important. It replenishes self with light with sunlight. And I believe there's a certain wavelength, the red wavelength in the sunlight that it actually requires for it to be stimulated. So this is why people get sicker in the winter. Exactly. That's why Seattle is a high suicide rate. Think about that. So these things, and if you look at the places like Norway and Sweden where this little sun, Finland. So nature's all about light, sunlight. So that's why I think this is, I like obvious observations. Nations, nature's all about sunlight. Of course, I don't grow without sunlight. And at the end of the day, we either about new trans photons in electrons. That's what we are. We as a human being is nothing else but a battery and in gate. When you think about that, right? So we have a bunch of electrons and neutrons and charges that floating through us that actually interact. And that's how I think of the human body. That's what I said. I think of it as an astrophysicist. It's crazy, but that's why my mind works. So sleep, getting sunlight, and having food that doesn't emit suppress your biome, the bacteria in your body sends out materials that actually will emit suppressor activate. What do they mean are suppressive foods? Unfortunately, I think most natural foods are fine. It's the toxins in the food, exactly what I said, the recipients. So when you talk about red dye, the processed foods, all these unnatural processed stuff, ultimately cause inflammation. Now when it gets back to the spasticity of inflammation, inflammation causes immune suppression because it causes all these cells to flip. Yes, from the killer state to the suppressor state. That's why we said we have this dichotomy of, is the catalyze, is the catalytic, dead? You see it, you see it too in the elderly. It's wide infection or a diabetic foot infection, it's actually do a systemic infection and killer person. Correct. Right. That's why, when this guy discovered that H.P. Laurie causes gush skull, so they said, you're nuts, it's acid, I remember that. Right. So well, so well. So now when you think about that, so that's one of the dumbest... But that's a consensus now, right? Acid does not cause ulcers. Well, it's causing effect. So H.P. Laurie causes the inflammation and then the acid that's naturally your stomach activates it. But it's not the core cause. Correct. Correct. But it's all about dogma. That's why I call this a vaccine, but it's a bio shield. So you have to fight dogma. Part of the problem is you're fighting. So I will ask you, I wanted to ask us to do an experiment. I'm off for it. Where we pick up the phone, call any random oncologist, not to shame them. Primary care physician, pick up the phone. And said, you do a CBC, correct? Yes. You define what a CBC is. A complete blood count. You take a blood and you look for... Yeah, the blood screen, that, everyone. Blood screen. Yeah. For whether you need me or not in you. Yeah. People understand that. Right? Great blood cells. And you see these red blood cells. And you give chemotherapy and radiation. And you ask, what are you look for? Well, we look to see we're inemic. So we can give you the drug that Amgen makes called epigenome. We look to see whether you plateless are gone down. So we can give you a plateless transfusion. We look to see whether you're neutrophils have gone down so that you don't get an infection called neutropenic fever. So we give you the drug and you pitch... You pitch in. Well, the problem here is does red blood cells cure cancer? No. Just plateless cure cancer. No. Does neutrophils kill cancer? No. What kills cancer? The natural kill cells in T cell. So in that CBC, there's a thing called the lymphocytes. Correct? Do you look at that? No. They only sell. That is important. That kills cancer. 99.9% of oncologists will say we don't pay any attention to that. That's surprising. That's a little term. That does he mask backwards. Why? Who? Why? If you're oncologists, you know, attack oncologists. But if you're fighting cancer, why do you ignore the one cell that fights cancer? That's experimental. That's a little mysterious. Am I missing something? That's exactly. That's the missing link. The final frontier, the E equals MC squared, the God's equation. That is the key element in your body that we've been missing for 50 years, for 50 years. But it's even worse than that. Those missing link, we've actually destroyed with chemotherapy. We've destroyed with radio therapy, and we just destroyed with checkpoint inhibitors, destroyed with steroids. Guess what we give to patients? Chemotherapy, radio therapy, steroids, and checkpoints. Am I missing something? I don't know anything about this. I was Russian studies major. But I have no, just because I'm 55. I know a lot of cancer patients. I have always been skeptical that the protocol is effective based on, so what I have noticed is those therapies seem to beat back the cancer. Short term. But then so often you watch a come roaring back. I'm in remission and then why? I just get hit by it's the way the cancer is eliminated. So if you see my writings, I have written so many times you win the battle and you lose the war. So this is not, I'm not messaging this from the beginning. I'm not imagining that you win the battle and you lose the war. The reason you win the battle is because you see this little lip of a response with chemotherapy. Then the moment you stopped, or not even again, you've actually now killed the cells that are there to protect you. You've upregulated these suppressor cells and you get metastasis in your, sorry, you now have to go to hospice. Think about that. That's what we've been doing for 50 years. That's the dogma that I'm fighting. So what? Okay. So let's just say I leave here and I'm diagnosed with a serious life-threatening form of cancer. What would you recommend I do next? So this is where you play chess and don't play checkers. This is where you play go. Where you say, okay, what is the cancer doing first? Well guess what? The cancer is not stupid. So it's figured out a way to hide from these killer cells. So the first thing you have to do is you have to expose the receptors on the cancers of the killer cells. Good recognize that. So even in the presence of chemotherapy, you don't use chemotherapy. To kill the tumor. You use a tiny dose of chemotherapy just to stress the patient, the cancer, and the cancer's, oh my God, something's coming at me and it starts exposing itself. So you go from hide to expose. So you use the chemotherapy at a low-dose called low-atomic dose to use it as a, when I call it an immunomodulator. Importantly. I was asking, you're describing cancer is almost like an autonomous entity that has a goal or will to destroy the human body. It does. But that's, I mean you're describing like a, it's a machine. But within, within tent and kind of clever behavior, it hides like what you're describing like some for some, like for an entity in the body that's trying to kill the body. It is. It's like a virus. But how can a tumor know to hide it? Because it has genomic sequencing in there that actually blocks the expression. So it just sounds diabolical. It is diabolical. That's why I spend 50 years trying to understand. It's not a human brain. It's biology and how biology can mutate and actually, it's, your body is a beautiful thing. It's an exquisite thing. So it has, you have these things called epigenetics. So it has the genomic sequencing that says, I'm not going to express this. So we can now stress that and block the, the, the block and it now expresses something on its surface that our T cells can recognize. So that's the first step. Smoke it out. Smoke it out. But your body has mechanisms to smoke it out. It gets even more complicated. Your body has a thing where you can induce what you call damps, which is damage associated molecular patterns, but forget that. It's a way of actually smoking it out. So now your T cells can recognize it. Okay. So now you've done step one. That's just step one. That's one molecule. So this is why I think the FDA needs to understand. We're fighting a war where you need battlefield awareness all simultaneously, where you have to orchestrate your marine, your army or your Navy Air Force all in the right place so that you can use the tumor in your body to act as the weapon as the vaccine. Because the tumor has molecules that is far into the ratio body. And if you educate your T cells, you recognize as molecules that is far into the ratio body, that T cell can remember. Now you have a memory T cell. So for the first time in 2024 in our package insert, we have a molecule called the bio shield. They can activate the natural killer cell, activate the killer T cell and drive memory T cells. We now have bladder cancer patients would have lost their bladder in complete remission for nine years in solar life. And so the protocol is you low dose, you administer low dose chemo to identify where the tumor is. You smoke it out. You smoke it out. But at the same time, you need to have the natural killer cells in T cells ready. So you give them the bio shield that up regalates and stimulate your natural killer cells in T cells. What about radiation? Is that pyro? That'll kill the natural killer cells in T cells. So now, unless, and this comes out unless, today the radiation is what they call 70 gigabits, it's huge doses. And there you give a tiny little dose just to the tumor, no whales, to smoke it out. So you use radiation in a very different way called SBRT, a low dose to identify rather than destroy, to expose rather than expose. So the algorithm is exposed from high to expose. The next algorithm is activated and proliferate your NK cells. And that's what the subcutaneous interaction. The next algorithm is to educate your T cells with the vaccine that you anticipate that's going to be exposed. So you now have educated T cells ready. So you can educate the T cells you go out in K cells. And the next thing is to activate your macrophages so they become killer macrophages. And the next step is to suppress the suppressors. You do that all simultaneously. How much human suffering is involved in this? There's a lot in a conventional course of cancer therapy. All is an outpatient. We've done hundreds of patients now. So someone taking this course is not going to, is he going to lose his hair throughout all this in outpatient? No. Wow. So even more exciting because that matters for cancer patients. And it's hard to be a cancer patient. It's horrible. Yeah. But we've now seen patients now in complete remission. More importantly, I want to treat patients before they need surgery. So I can use the tumor itself in the body as the vaccine to educate the body and the T cells all about that tumor. What's even more exciting now we can take blood from you one pint and extract the natural killer cell in the T cell and grow billions and store in the cryopreservation just like you do from cord blood. We now have the ability to grow these natural killer cells and give it to anybody. So I wish it for the first time we could become the American Red Cross of Cancer, our country and use these innovations as foreign policy. So could looking back, do you think it was unwise to require the population to get the Pfizer and Moderna facts? It depends on the time. I think it's unwise to keep in giving this nonsense. I shouldn't say that. I should be careful when I call it nonsense. The idea of doing an antibody vaccine and an inquiry another antibody vaccine, another antibody vaccine that good chases your tail. I don't know what that's doing. Those spike proteins. It's not reading your body of COVID though. It's not. Is it creating even more variance in your body? I don't know. But is that possible? I see the idea and I'm such a scientist. I need to actually go and actually pull out these variants and sequencing them. That's what we do is theoretically possible. It's theoretically possible. Would there be any change to a person's DNA from taking? Well, that's what this does. It's what the mRNA vaccines do. Correct. It converts into DNA and it converts into replicating and that's what it does. And it replicates an RNA virus. It becomes it's the virus. Well, someone who's clearly made reference for it a couple times interested in evolution, to change the DNA of a species is to change the species over time. No, I don't think it integrates. My concern is that this virus is all about itself. It very selfish virus, selfish virus. In fact, the fact that it's no less deadly is in the virus's interest. The virus doesn't want to kill you because you are the incubator. Think about that. The virus wants you alive. You're speaking in a way that suggests intent and forethought. It's biology, it's evolution. Everything is evolution. It was the intent to go from a tadpole to human being. I don't know, but to consider the possibility you have something or the certainty, the of something within your body that is acting against your body's interest on purpose. Yeah, because it needs you to be the incubator. So, you know, the the the the the the the veracity will, uh, um, when it when it when it was so man made. So, you know, viral evolution when it really called much affinity, um, affinity maturation, it matures itself so that it could be more infective. That's one thing it's tries to do as a virus. I mean, these viruses are living organisms. And when they're living, they won't brains anything else, but they have machinery that are very sophisticated. They have what you got promoters and etc. Why would you make something like that? I'm purpose. Well, the all viruses in nature, of course, which theoretically will go through what you call maturation that normally do not infect you. They not species, they species specific. Exactly. But why would you then change that? And that's what this, you know, gain of functions, as you were so dangerous. That's why it was prohibited. It's so self-evidently evil to even play with something like that with the potential consequences which we're now seeing 13 year olds getting pancreatic cancer. Like, how could anyone do that? And why aren't those people in prison? Well, it was banned, right? It was banned in the United States. Yeah. So we on lab partnership. Well, so we subverted it. Now you talk about, you know, why is it so few people could home so many? Um, I would have got around that is for the investigators to find out. But I mean, you're someone who's created cancer drugs, spent a lot of his life in a lab. That's why you're a billionaire. So you know a lot about this topic, obviously. And it's clear to you that that's just too dangerous to be doing that, right? Yes. To take animal viruses and make them... You can't control it. I mean, because you've done affinity, maturation, that would have taken tens of maybe millions of years. In that fusion protein, they created the fusion protein and created it. And then they created this vaccine, but I think Bonnie Graham was the part with Collins and everything else that was so proud to fail. There were craters, RBD and make it stable. Think about it. The spear headed tip of the spear that goes into yourself, we're going to make it stable. That's why this vaccine was produced. This was the mRNA vaccine was produced. So you've taken a virus that's now gone from bats to man only because I think the skin of function work. You then created a vaccine by taking the spear head of this virus that is now being created to get into you and make it the spear head even more stable and put it on the vaccine. And it says, here we go, this seems super crazy. So just from the perspective of a layman again, if I've never had COVID and I get the mRNA, you know, I get the Pfizer vaccine, mRNA vaccine. If I got it three years ago, can you detect COVID in my body now? See, that's like, that's just crazy. And now look, I know of a, I wouldn't name her, but she was a very senior person at the FDA and she just got the vaccine. That's it. And within weeks, she got brain fog, loss of memory. So there's clear evidence that sometimes the vaccines, in fact, is the cause of sometimes the virus is the cause. So that's what I'm saying. It's not mutually exclusive. I understand. And it's all about the spike. But it's, but the idea that you would be introducing the COVID virus into a body that was not infected by the COVID viruses like, you went after the wrong protein. Basically. I mean, I've been begging that to go after the nuclear capsid protein because the nuclear capsid protein, which is in the core of the, of the virus is not the tip of the spear. And if you have a T cell, it lasts for 17 years. We know that from previous COVID infections. Yes. But the refuse to do it. It seems like a human tragedy at like an unimaginable. Completely. It devastates me. Well, that's incredibly bracing. And I think you're one of the very few people I've ever met who has the absolute authority to speak on this. And yet you've, you've not been encouraged to speak about it. It sounds like. I've been not been encouraged to speak about it. Yeah. Because I'm not a political person. And I have this bigger picture that we have to find a solution, not just for COVID, but for cancer. And the irony is this by shield works for both. And the only chair connected, it sounds like completely connected. And the only chance we have now, because I had no idea that the political deep state was so powerful and so vicious and so egotistical that they would stop good science. So now I'm out there speaking because the drug had approved. But that's not enough just for bladder cancer. It has the same treatment effect for pancreatic cancer lung cancer, triple negative breast cancer. And it is the only molecule for 50 years that upregulates these killer cells, period, the missing link. Well, you never got COVID. So that's you really never got COVID. Have we got COVID? How many people do you know who didn't get COVID? Well, the president, I state that COVID like force them. So if you did get COVID, there's three antigens in the virus. There's a spike. There's a nuclear capsid and there's a thing called the M protein M. And if you have, when you do your blood test, you can see if you have the M protein, if you have the M protein in your antibody or T cell antibody to the M protein, that means it came from the virus. If you have no M protein, it came from somewhere else. Could come from the vaccine. I have no M protein and I have T cells to N and F T cells to S. You could basically look apart, Ben should not get sick. No. no impotene and I have t cells to n and f t cells to s. So you could basically look a park bench and not get sick. No, it doesn't exactly. So now you need to differentiate and not conflate the ability to the virus to infect. It could still infect me. But my body has the protection, the bias you'll declare it immediately within seven days. Clear it. Is this a lifelong protection? Well, based on the science of the whether called MERS 1, where it was in 17 years, it's the is is protectionity original coronavirus outbreak. Right. 17 years, this nuclear T cells is out there. So we'll I'll take that. I'll take seven to exactly and you can get a booster. Now what we're working on is a universal COVID virus vaccine for all co-coronaviruses because this in. So what we did? Oh, that's a good segue to that. So during my genomic sequencing, I was building the whole machine learning super computing network and I ran the national lambda rail for the God's particle and I built super computers and AI way before AI was and I presented the AI model to prisoner bomb a believe not in the one page for healthcare. So our super computer we combine ourselves with Microsoft. We are so whether we had the largest GPU cloud during COVID and we're able then to actually look at the infectivity of every species of every variant of COVID with every human type. There's a thing called HLA. So the bigger actually look at how the virus would change and avoid the T cells. The only thing that it could never do was change the nuclear caps and never could avoid the T we made that software public it is still public and published it so that anybody could test based on your HLA your HLA and my HLA type would be slightly different. There's hundreds and thousands of HLA types and know whether this sequence if you had that sequence in your body would be protective. Through that we are developing what we call a universal COVID vaccine, bio shield T cell vaccine and we have it. But how do you do it? You know, so one of my thoughts was just to give it away to somebody. I actually offered to give it away to Regeneron into Amgen way back but they were to busy everybody was to busy during the COVID time. So one of the ideas now was for me to actually go to this year in institute in India and say, yeah, please go to the world. So just so much we could do as an organization we are tiny little biotech company relative to the merc and the fisuses. But that's what my goal is. My personal goal is when you say I'm still doing it and I don't have a vineyard. The resources that it was given to me as like God's gift I believe that allowed me to do this. So you know, we have hundreds of employees and 48 years of land in Los Angeles. The other tragedy was I took over this facility in Dunkirk that New York stated put 200 million dollars in, completely empty, brand new, amazing facility of a national preparedness. And I call Chuck Schumer to help me make that available for the country. Nothing. It's still sitting there available for the country as a national preparedness manufacturing site in Dunkirk, New York for which we put 50 million dollars in, but there's no employees in there right now. Nothing. That's crazy. It is really ridiculous. Right without leadership, without skill sets in leadership and without informed leadership, how we as a country could go down the wrong path. And I'm so hopeful that this next four years could change that. So this has been an amazing story. You're obviously very famous in the medical research world and controversial, but I'm I'm I'm sold on what you said. So everything that you've done is you know, you'll have a great obit because of it. Then you decided by the LA Times in 2018 ish. And you know owning a the main newspaper in the country's second biggest town makes you obviously a media mogul, but it makes you a political figure as well. And LA is so complex. Like, why would you do so? Why would you you don't need that? Why would you do that? Well, I think it really helps to know how I grew up right. So I grew up in South Africa as a part eight. I because South Africa didn't have I did not see a TV on Malaysia to 21. Believe it or not. No TV. No TV. So that it didn't have TV. So not I watched period period to be also it was just books and newspapers. That was the only way I could educate books and newspapers. To the extent that I would go every day as a newspaper boy to the printing press and poodle is with set of the printing press, get the first one off the press, read it, and then run with about two, three hundred papers through the city. That would be what I did and grew up. So I fell in love with the printing press, the clicker, the and the oil as well. And when the opportunity came, rumors said I had this amazing gift of the resources of selling these two companies that I never anticipated in life. With Michael Ferro saying he took over this company called and their name bit trunk. And he was going to shut down the Washington Bureau and move all the of so he on the LA time he owned the the Tribune actually the whole thing. Yeah, at that point. Yeah. I got your opinion that you're being company, the whole Tribune company, which include early times in San Diego Tribune. And he knew how desperate the I wanted the LA times because I had to help him invest to buy the rest of the Tribune. So it was a minority then and he came to me and said, Hey Patrick, you want it? Here's the price you've got 48 hours to decide and it's five hundred million dollars. No due diligence. No due diligence. That's what's it. And who would take that deal on you crazy people? Yes, it's half a billion dollars and you can't see the books. Yeah, nor can you go visit the newsroom because on Monday, we're going to actually shut all that and move them all out. And I don't want you to talk to these people and you have until Monday to decide. And I was running a conference in LA with all my scientists and the national cancer and students and all the scientists with it. And this hotel and I said, Oh my God. So I went upstairs and we got a private room and I brought all the people into the room. And I said, I want to do it and I call my wife. I said, we want to do this. I think this is an opportunity for us to have a voice for the people, especially if they're going to shut down, Washington, English, shut down LA will never have a paper here. This one of the most important things. So by Monday, I signed it and that was it. And then you've paid him five hundred million dollars. Five hundred million dollars. How grateful was he? Very. So I'm sorry to laugh. If you hadn't made so much money, I wouldn't be laughing because it right. But that's incredible. So Phil and shoots. So I've got some stuff I like to sell you as hell. So Phil and shoots so many at the next lake of game. He says, you know, Patrick, always thought you were such a smart guy until yesterday. But you know, I have no regrets. I think what I did then was said, okay, I'm going to take everything I know in healthcare that rocket ship that I showed you. And then create, because during that time, Bezos would have this arcade had the software and he had the Washington Post. And he's team came to see me and said, listen, we've got this arc software that we want to run. I said, no, I don't like this old software. I'm going to go build a completely new software content management system that could take podcast video live streaming. Because I want this newspaper to be an educational moment for people. And at the end of the day, a newspaper is not just a newspaper. It's a basis of engagement. I want to engage users as a tool to engage with people because that's how I grew up. So we took the risk and we built a content management system took us five years and we launched it and which could talk to the printing person. Talk to magazines. It could talk to podcasts or talk to video, talk to live streaming. And now it's just gone live. It's called Anytime Studio in the Other Times Live. In the next thing we're going to do is call Any Times Next. And the Any Times Next, a gentleman called Eric Beach and I are forming so that we could create a platform that would allow voices to be heard and free speech to be heard unencumbered by either opinion or news. So now we have three platforms. We have a platform of news which supposedly is facts. We have a platform of opinion which are now changed to voices, meaning everybody should have a voice. Whether you write voice, left voice, central voice, do you like a Coca-Cola Pepsi Cola, whatever voice. And then a complete platform that allows free speech and video podcast. And now I have that platform and we've built the infrastructure to accommodate that platform. And I'm excited by Any Times Next because we're going to have a studio in DC. We have a studio in LA. We may have units to your national. And shows like this are important because I believe long forms like this is how you communicate for people who are interested. And it could be fun. It should be engaging. It should be interesting. And that's why I bought the paper. Well, those are great reasons as far as I'm concerned. But they come with them. The purchase comes with it. A show a lot of people who work at the paper. I've worked in newsrooms like my wife and I know that they hate change. They hate the owner. No matter what, everybody hates the owner. It's different. So there are a ton of unhappy people in journalism. I would say the overwhelming majority for whatever reason we could speculate. And they're very hard to manage. And they're roughly about a hundred or maybe even more percent left wing everywhere, including at supposedly conservative places. They're all lefties. So how do you deal with that? By being honest and transparent and hit on. And I openly shared with them. I said, listen, we cannot be a good shame. I won't tolerate it. It's okay if you're left wing, but you need right wing. So I offered Scott Jennings an opportunity to write on the paper. And I said, we need all voices. And so I said, listen, I don't know who made these rules because I came into this newspaper. I don't know the difference between a columnist and op-ed or editorial page and news. And now when you're merging all of these, can you mention the layperson not really understanding the difference? Right. And I want you to say when news is news and you the newsroom fine, theoretically, everything's edited, you've checked it, you fact-checked. But when it comes to an opinion, I'm going to change that to call me voices. And I want all voices to be heard, all American voices to be heard. And you know the Kamala Harris endorsement, I took a lot of heat because the Toronto board resigned by my taking a stand that we cannot be an echo chamber of opinions not based on facts. So just for those who didn't follow it, and it was quite a story for a couple days there, it was during the campaign, the editorial board correct me if I'm wrong, wanted to endorse Kamala Harris. And you said, no, what did they say to you and what did you say back to them? Well, I can't put in. Oh, you've done pretty far already. I can just say they were not happy. But they're pitch like so. So the pitch was we as a board have met and we have this pre package, we know this is outrageous. But this pre package was that mean we had a pre package endorsement, we mean pre package. They already written it after talking to Kamala Harris, never having met they never met Kamala Harris. Never met him. Isn't the editorial board supposed to interview the candidates? By the way, the digital board never met even I'm on the editorial board. So I said, I'm with Kamala Harris was in LA all the time correct. So in your neighborhood actually correct. Raising money, keeping the traffic in trouble, raising money. And that's an item of matter. And the board even at the site, this is unacceptable. And they know they, as you could see, because it's a left leading, they wrote terrible stories about a prison Trump, which is how they met him, not met him either. So my statement to them was listen, you may have an opinion, but all of us should have opinion based on facts. I mean, one of the statements that came and I went name him came from a person that said within this concept that vice prison Kamala Harris was the most consequential vice prison in the history of the United States. So I said, I don't mean to be dismissive on what basis did the person say that? Having never met her and one, it's so no exactly. You just hit it on the head and I said, what basis do we say that? What are the facts? Can we actually show the record of that? So I said, it boiled down to look, we're not going to do that. We're just not going to do it. What did the person say when you asked? Why are you saying she's the most consequential vice prison in the United States? What are the facts that underlie that judgment? I obviously disagree with that person and there are no basis for that other than, as you said, a personal echo chamber. And look, I don't know what they're trying to protect. They're trying to find the kernel of basis, the audience because the audiences left so they need to be left. I don't think that's right. I think our audience, we lost a lot of viewers, thousands of people unsubscribe. But I don't think it's right that we should be this canceling society. I think we should be a society that can have a civil discourse like we're having now and disagree. It's okay. And understand each other's point of view. That's what I think is a value of the paper when you talk about voices. So that's what I'm instigating now. I've taken the opportunity to come up with a quick show where they were shocked that you cancelled that. They were worse than shocked. They resigned. So I had three right now, 90% of mandatory voices resigned. And where did they go? Because there are no editorial writing jobs left tonight. I have no idea. So look, I think it's important. Look, the fact that the courage to resign, some of them know Kevin where I fired. I fired Kevin before they resigned. Why did you fire him? One, because of leadership, two, because of I got to be careful. I don't want to spare you. I fired him because I didn't believe he was the right person of creating, taking the paper way it needs to be. He was for my to wash him post washing it in post. Do you remember that? Well, and then after that episode, their editorial board, the rest of them resigned. And now we're rebuilding. Look, we have to, we have to, and what's exciting to me is I'm rebuilding with young people. And what's exciting to me is this opportunity with Ellie Times next and then the newsroom. Terry Tang is doing a fantastic job. She's, she's working hard to take on the people in the productivity. The productivity. Well, increasing productivity. Oh, you're implying journalists. Okay, so that's the world I understand. Yes, there's some productivity issues there. Yeah, yeah, yeah. When you write one slug a month, I think that's not going to be good. Been there in there. Yeah. So, so it's been an experience, but look, we, we, they're in for the long haul, I think. And look, it's just not asked by the way, we got to save these local newspapers. Right. We got to save the ability to have local discourse now with the illifiers. It's even more important. Right. Look, I called out Karen Bass and Gavin Yussam. And these politicians know them both. I know them both. I text with them both and I complain to them both. And what I tell the publics, what I tell them. So I don't say anything behind their back. I personally say I said, you're not doing the right thing with it. Be the homelessness, the homeless, I say, did a terrible job. Yeah. A completely wasteful job. So these are the kinds of things that I think it gave us the opportunity to have a say in our community, you know, and that's what I'll continue to do. Now we'll position ourselves in DC. And I think the next four years will be really out for you monumental. Dr. Thank you for spending all this time. All right. Now, really, it's been fun and a pleasure. Thank you. Thank you. Okay. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's just subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.