Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. That's a very good time to have a UX photo. UFO expert in a lot has been going on. This is, you know, I had, um, I know you ran into him. I had Ryan Graves on yesterday. Oh my God, I'll tell you the funny story of how I ran into him. You ran into him and lobby the hotel, right? So the lobby told me they're all, don't use this one elevator. It's really rickety and it makes a lot of noise and it's just, it's not very reliable and just don't use it. So I didn't and then I was leaving 24 hours later to come down and get some coffee. And I was like, half-fight. Let me take the rickety elevator. I was like, they told me not to take it, but I'm going to take it anyway. So I pushed the button. I'm standing there. Here's the doors open. I look, I see the shadowy figure of the corner. I'm like, Ryan Graves, what are you doing? You guys? I don't know. What are you doing? I was like, are you doing what I think you're doing? He goes, yeah. Did he tell you that? Did he tell you that? Yes, he did. He told me, Ryan, do you? He didn't tell me the whole story about the rickety elevator. Yeah, yeah. And he was like, the shadowy figure up against the corner. Like, kind of just, you know, look at the end of the video. It was really funny. We talked a lot of nonsense about aliens. But we also talked about the technology that he knows is state of the art when it comes to drones and that some of these ones in New Jersey, they're doing things that you can't really do yet. Yes. Which is really fascinating. Yes. It's like, okay. And the size of SUVs. So is it ours? And we somehow or another have some stuff that mainstream drone manufacturers at the highest level aren't aware of yet? Who's at ours? It's like some crazy military stuff. Because if it's not and it's coming from the ocean, like, what do you mean? It's coming. What the fuck do you 50 of them? What do you mean? What do you mean 50 suburban sized? So check this out. Even closer. It's really funny. I've been working with this guy. We've been communicating on a signal for a long time. Actually, he was through Proton. He was emailing me stuff about Virginia, the UFO crash in Virginia. And but he was anonymous. One day, I was like, he's really knowledgeable. And he was sending me stuff that was really helpful. Like you should track down this flight. It happened. It was going to have this airport. Go to this base. And I was like, funny one day. I was like, who are you? And how do you know what you know? He goes, I'm a retired United States Air Force Colonel. I was like, oh, and he goes, and I'm also an experienced. I had an experience back in 1980. What? Oh, what happened to him? He had a UFO encounter. It's in the movie towards the end. But anyway, he texted me yesterday and he goes, James, I really want you to explain to me how the hell you orchestrated a UAP invasion right around the time your film's coming out. I was like, I really like to know how you did that. I was like, I know. Do you know what kind of a budget you would have to have to have drones running in the sky all over? How many different cities are reporting it now? Like, what's the numbers? It's exploding all over all over the place. And it's getting mid or I've heard California. I've heard Europe now. Base is in England. New York. New Jersey. I've heard San Diego. I definitely wasn't. There's something in Ohio, right? Right, Patterson Air Force Base. They had to shut that place down. Yeah. That's Ohio. So I've heard New Jersey. I think Florida, right? That was the one that Ryan Gray showed us a photo of. I was from Florida. So like, who fucking? What's going on? You know, fucking those. I was super busy. You know, I had the release of the film going on. And so I was like trying to focus on that and getting everything lined up and it was a huge push. And all these text messages from all around the world are pouring in. I'm like, who's going on with these drones? And I was like, God, it's probably something conventional. I'm not going to worry about it right now. I was trying to keep on focusing when I got it hand here. And then I started getting more information coming in more information that a buddy mine called me and he actually went to Brazil with me a couple years ago. And he's like, bro, I live here. I'm seeing these things in the sky. I've seen them seven times now. There's a size of an SUV. I was like, well, what do they look like? What do they behave like? He's like, well, they're making noise. I was like, oh, OK, well, that quickly kind of eliminates something non-conventional in terms of propulsion. But then I got reports of objects that didn't make any noise. And that would go silent. What kind of noise it was making? Like like a like a like a like a propellers drone would make. But loud and they're and they have a lawyer, but they're big and they have a lawyer time of hours. The average drone like I fly drones from my films is like you're lucky to get 25 minutes. These things are like hours. Yeah, five hours at a time. They go dark when they're approached by other objects. They're not getting picked up on flier at times. And then some of them make have no noise. I've heard crescent shaped. And then I heard about the ones that really got me because I contacted Chris for Melon. I was like, Chris, what is going on, buddy? I really rely on him for good information. And he's like, I really don't know. Man, it's a real shit show. And the US government seems to be clueless right now. He goes, some of them are conventional. Some of them are misidentified conventional crap. But there are other ones coming in off the ocean. There are up to 50 of the Coast Guard and police department are reporting that truly remain a mystery. And then you had Schumer at a press conference just like it was yesterday. And then he's going and he's like, we don't know what they are. We don't know what they are on the guy goes, yeah, so it's a UAP goes, well, the drones. He goes, well, you're on the legislation. It's a UAP. It's unidentified and normal. It's phenomenal. Why don't you just use UAP? I think the use in the word drone because UAP is almost too scary. Like something like invasions happening. That's what UAP is unidentified anomalous phenomenon. Yeah. So it, couldn't that be kind of anything? Doesn't even totally flying. Well, that's the thing because it used to be unidentified aerial. Well, it was UFO unidentified flying object. Then it was UAP unidentified aerial phenomenon. But then they're coming out of the water. I feel like this is not an animal. Why don't they just keep using UFO? Because it has, because people associate UFO with otherworldly and they wanted to take that, remove that baggage and make it a little less scary. That's my personal opinion. I kind of get that. But also it's just an unidentified flying object. If we find out what it is, then it becomes an identified flying object. It doesn't necessarily mean it's alien. True. But like think people tell me, jumping out of their windows right now. They said UFOs are invading the East Coast. You remember world of world. Right. Right. People were like, jump. That's what it's doing. That's actually a very good point. So I think they towed it out. I think they're using the word drone even though they're unidentified just because of the fear factor. I think the fear factor is real. Yeah. I can't help but crangenting or that word. Oh, sorry. The fear element. Sorry. It was too much of a part of my life. Too close to home. So when did they start? What was when was it acknowledged that this was an issue that was reoccurring recently? Like, you know, obviously there's always been something in the sky. People have always seen things. Who knows what they are. Whether or not there are a lot of people see starlink and they think it's the first. Yeah, of course. But when did this drone thing that we're currently experiencing basically every day? When did it start? A couple weeks ago. Maybe a month ago. Maybe a month ago. That's when I started really hearing about it. But Jamie, is there like I have any sort of official answer to that? I have something that 20th, 19th something like that is in November. Min no member. This episode is brought to you by Go Puff. This grocery shopping drive you nuts, the lines and the chaos and inflated prices. Then you have all these third party delivery apps with their ridiculous fees, markups. And you still have to wait hours for delivery. Well, enter Go Puff. The game changer. They deliver snacks, groceries, alcohol, essentials, whatever you need, straight your door in just 15 minutes. And get this. It's cheaper than the store because Go Puff uses their own fulfillment centers. No middleman, no crazy markups. It's like Amazon, but for everyday essentials and way faster. Go Puff also just launched cheapest on the planet pricing. Think $2 organic eggs, $2 milk, $5 diapers, $10 tide pods. It's insane. They're beating big grocery stores at their own game. So do yourself a favor download the Go Puff app on your phone, use the code Rogue and 20 for $20 off your order and experience faster, cheaper, better shopping. Trust me, you'll thank me later. I have something that this is about an air base in Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2003. And this is not an anonymous, but this is about incursions over, listen to this. I promised this individual that I met at Seoul conference. He's a witness. He's a military guy. My name is Jeffrey Nusitelli. I served 16 years in the United States Air Force as a technical sergeant and a military police officer. In October 2003, Mike Hoork is an eyewitness to series of extraordinary UAP incursions at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The initial event is known as the Vandenberg Red Square and was first mentioned during the historic UAP hearing, UAP hearing held in 2023. The case involved Boeing contractors who witnessed a huge red square shaped object roughly the size of a football field hovering over a missile defense system. The object was silent and had no visible means of propulsion. The contractors watched in amazement as the massive object slowly drifted east and vanished over the hills. I retained official Air Force records of the event, including the Blader form entry, which includes the names and contact information of all the witnesses and provided it to select members of Congress, Arrow and the FBI, arrows and UAP task force, all domain anomalous resolution office. After the initial event, several other UAP incursions took place at Vandenberg. I was on duty during many of the encounters and I investigated the incidents as they unfolded. Now, remember, this is not anonymous reporting here. They include a football field size craft that terrified security guards as it silently hovered over a bunch of a launch facility before flying off at an unbelievable rate of speed, a brightly illuminated silent object that landed on the base, flight line before accelerating instantaneously and disappearing into space. A huge triangular shaped craft larger than a C-130 that hovered 50 feet over a police officer before it drifted slowly over the base. A blue-white liquid orb, roughly the size of his house that hovered over his house on the base. The objects stayed no sound and had zero obvious means for pollution. And he says, my experiences with UAP were awe-inspiring, exciting and terrifying. I don't know why UAP are flying over our bases and our neighborhoods, but I do know the UAP phenomenon is of the utmost importance to all of humanity. I currently have five other military witnesses to the Weineberg Incursions that are all willing to testify tomorrow under oath that these statements are true. We need answers to this mystery and better government transparency. Thank you for the opportunity to share my story. Former United States Air Force technical sergeant and witness Jeff Newcitelli. Crazy, right? I mean, we're talking objects sizable. Football field? That's bananas. And then they take off insanely fast, just like the TikTok. Straight up into space. So this was what was the exact date of this? This was 2003. There was a number of incursions during that year up all the way into 2005. And he has the names and they submitted it to the new head of Aero. That's interesting because that coincides with the TikTok. It does coincide with the TikTok. I wonder if this is like, you know, vacation season. No. It's like every few years. Let's go check out what those guys were up to. You know what I mean? Maybe it's like a real pain. They asked to get here. Maybe it's one of those things like you can go to Australia. But it's, it's a pain in the ass. It's 16 fucking hours on a plane. It's a long flight. Oh my gosh. I mean, it's not the average one time. That was like 22 hours. I was like, there's planes going to run on a gas. That's exactly what I'm saying. It's like one of those things. It's like you can do it. But it's a pain in the ass. So maybe they only travel to Earth every now and again. How could these incursions have been taking place? And like here we are, 20 years later, we're only now really starting to talk about them. I think the reason being is if you don't understand it and you can't protect people from it because it's so beyond our capabilities that if just describing it accurately removes all confidence that our government has everything under control. That's one, one reason why. And also if you have no answers, you don't know what the hell it is. Well, it's a very good point. Yes. You don't know what the hell it is. What are you even going to say? Hey, there's something that came. We don't know what the fuck it is. It's big as a football field. Shot off into the sky. We have no idea. They'd be like, what do you mean we have no idea? Higher somebody who understands this and then they'd be like, fire him. Get him out of hospice. I remember like 20 years ago, Bradide Bushytale, Toldy Nahi still brought, I mean still Nahi, but I was meeting with the general and I said, God, we're so amazing. You know, the story is like so unifying and we had this kumbaya moment and we discover that, you know, we're not alone in the universe and wouldn't that be amazing and blah blah blah blah. The implications for all of humanity. And he said they're almost chuckling at me and he goes, look, that mean he goes, you got it all wrong, man. You know, you got to see this through our lens. And I was like through your lens, he goes, yeah, the military's perspective. I was like, okay, tell me. And I never thought about this before. You just mentioned it. He goes, okay, imagine this scenario. We sit there and we say, you know, my fellow Americans, it has been brought to our attention that there are craft of unknown origin whizzing around with impunity in our airspace. They exhibit a technology that's light years of advancement, anything that we have. We don't know who they are, where they come from, what they want. Shall they turn to be hostile? We have no visible means of defense against them. Thank you and good night. You're fired. You're fired. You're going to let Trump have come along. I'll have to make a deal with the aliens. Yeah. But you see that predicament. Like people always go, why are the secrecy? Duh. Yeah, you have to have secrecy because you got to imagine the job of a politician in general, right? Like you have to pretend that you're going to be able to handle situations, that you well know you're not going to be able to handle. Yeah. You know, if you're running for president, you know that you're not going to fix this economy. Right? Stop. Stop. Everything's going to be, I'm going to wave the magic wand and it's all going to be taken care of. You know, you're not going to implement electric cars over the whole stop. Stop. Shut the fuck up. It's not enough batteries. So if you're lying about all that, you're probably going to lie about whether or not you can handle the alien threat. I will unite us. I will unite us as a planet so we can deal together with the aliens. Yeah. Yeah. Let's do it right after two. Just say some bullshit like that. And then someone probably bends his ear when he gets into office and is like, yeah, a good speaker about that. Like a little J.D. Vance, like a guy like that, very bright young energetic speaker. He convinced people he could talk to the aliens. He could give the ask people. He convinced people that he could unite us all. Have you have you seen the program? No, I have not. So there is. It's playing it to everybody. Okay. So the program basically, it's funny because the last time I was on the show, we were talking about a alleged crash retrieval case that took place in Virginia, Brazil in 1996. And you're Dr. Manery on it, which is a moment of contact. Amazing. Amazing. So we're talking about that. And I came up the hills of doing the phenomenon, which touched a little bit on a potential crash retrieval program. But then it was like, then it was the crash retrieval over in Virginia, Brazil. And then I got hyper focused on that. And then I had sort of was a personal journey for me was, okay, the elected officials, what do they know? And when do they know it? Do we have a crash retrieval program? That's what I set out to do. And then three months after I was on your show in April of 2023, the highest level intel officer, David Grusch, testifies under oath that there is a crash retrieval program. The government does have definitive proof that we're not alone. So he kind of opened the door for me. And a lot had happened since the release of the phenomenon. And moment of contact, there was all this legislation. There was the first congressional hearing. There was behind closed doors meetings with a number of intel officers and witnesses. And then you had the second congressional hearing, which was David Grusch, which was absolutely phenomenal. I'm sure you saw that. Yeah. Right. A couple of months ago, we had the third congressional hearing, which I actually, funny enough, got to attend. It was the first time in my 30 years investigating. I was actually sitting behind people while they were testifying under oath about legitimacy of the phenomenon as well as there's a crash retrieval program. I mean, people have to understand that feel like maybe these things are happening fast enough. Just a couple of years ago, they didn't even admit that the phenomenon is real. Now there's people testifying under oath that we have a crash retrieval program. So drip, drip, drip, things are happening. They're not putting the genie back in the bottle. Do you wonder at all that you're being mind-fucked? Do you wonder at all this is a massive sigh up and this is all just to cover up some very advanced American weapons technology? I think it's a very good question. And here's why I don't believe that because I have done 30 years of field research. Right. I've been in Russia, I've been in Australia, in Africa, in South America, Canada, Alaska, all across Europe, United States. And I've investigated close encounters of the third kind. And I've asked your audience, don't take it from me. But the United States Air Force investigated and categorized close encounters the first second and third kind, right? During their official capacity project project sign, Project Grudge, Project Blue Book, and movie, by the way, if you haven't seen it, folks. Close encounters with third kind. Probably the best alien invasion movie of all time. Dr. Heineck has a cameo appearance in that film. Did you know that? I had heard that. I don't remember who he was though, but wasn't it? The French guy didn't need a Jaffolei. He's supposed to be Jaffolei. Jaffolei has a cameo. Well, there isn't a guy acting his part. But actually, Dr. Jalen Heineck, who's a scientific advisor to Project Blue Book, all those years for the Air Force actually has a cameo appearance. Smoking is a guard during the encounter. And that's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. And he, a lot of the cases, right down to Richard Driver's face being burned by the UFO. Those came directly out of Project Blue Book files, even the description of what the entities looked like. Close encounters. Again, close encounters with the third kind. This is the United States Air Force document and this stuff. And he took it directly out of Project Blue Book files and made a movie out of it. And as a little wink, wink, nudge, nudge, he has Dr. Heineck have a cameo appearance in the movie. You know what? People don't know that. It's a fantastic movie, too. It's a great movie. Because it's a movie that's filled with, it's not like standard UFOs land. Yeah. There's some play going on. There's some weirdness to the way they interact with us. That sort of is much more realistic in terms of like the things that people experience. They experience interactions, very strange interactions. And when they had those little orb-like things that were flying around the movie, that's all straight out of like, yeah. Oh, 100%. I remember how to buddy mine. It was a pilot over Europe in the 70s and he used to come for family dinners and he was always talking about it. I was like, yeah, yeah, yeah, whatever. And then later we're all on the live writers when I started getting an interesting UFOs. I was like, Michael, tell me about that UFO and Kenneth, you have that red orb because it was just like it was in the closing grounds of the third kind. See what's the blueprints movie. It was like, ah, they took those files directly out of Project Blue Book files and right onto the big screen. That's what the Foo Fighters were, right? Yeah, Foo Fighters too. They had little orbs. Yeah, yeah, little orbs. The fighter pilots are flying around. and they're seeing these things with them. Let me ask you, and this is why that I don't think it's a SIOP thing because- I don't think it's a SIOP either. The reason why I don't is because, okay, I don't just believe Grusch because he testified under oath and he has a high level intelligence officer. That's very impressive. I believe Grusch because his claims align with my personal research in the field, remember I've investigated crash retrieval programs, crash retrieval cases, right? And so I was, when I put out moment of contact, well, actually when I went into to put out moment of contact, people were going, James, you just dropped one of the biggest, most successful UFO films in terms of transcending the UFO community and penetrating a much broader, more mainstream audience. Are you sure you want to put on a documentary that deals with an alleged crash in live aliens walking around the town of Virginia, Brazil? Like seriously, that's what you want to put out there. You've got access to like Larry Reed and all these intel insiders and now you want to do that. You're going to tarnish your reputation. It's a bad one. Who gave you that advice? A lot of people did. I wish you called me. Well, you can handle it. You probably heard about moment of contact and then you thought, this sounds too crazy. The noise that you watched in. No, I thought, well, I always think a crash and contact sounds crazy. I know. I always think that. But I would have never told you not to do it. Oh, okay. I would have never told you not to do it. You're really good at this. Like, you're really good at explaining. But you look half the town talking about, including the most incredible story. It's an incredible story. It's a phenomenal story. It's one of those stories where you're like, if everybody's in on this, this is crazy. If everybody's telling me, and no one does not want contrarian that comes out and goes, they all told me to lie, I'm not fucking lying. This is stupid. They're doing it for tourism. Not one person. Come on. There's always some heater. There's always some heater once a ruin your gag. I remember. You know what I mean? I was like, totally. I remember when I was making moment of contact and it wasn't done with you yet. Lu Elizondo was like, he's like, James, you call me up. He goes, I need a copy. I was like, the film's that I don't care. I need a copy. Give me a rough cut. I was like, okay, okay. What's the urgency? He's like, you know, I understand who's watching this right now. So I was like, okay. So I'm giving him copies. And I had absolutely no idea ever in a hundred million years that I think we're going to be having months after the release of moment of contact, a congressional hearing under that we just a classroom to break up. Here did my objects moment of contact come out. It came out of the end of 2022. Do you think Biden watched it? Do you think you sat down with Biden? That would have been why? He's been saying this. He's been so dismissive at all. He's like, you know, Obama said a lot more about it. Why? Because he's already in space. He's in space right now. He's like, go talk to him. He's a model of me right now around Saturday. That's the best you can do. He's like, Dr. Manhattan. He's on the moon in a glass house. Okay. If you're listening right now, you have nothing to lose. You're the president of the United States. He has to release the hounds. He's never running ever again. Exactly. He's not running for a second term. Yeah. Come on. We're done. He's already part in more human beings than any president ever other than. Listen to the order to the advice at the end of the program by Senator Harry Reid, who's now the late Senator Harry Reid. And I said to him, what advice would you give the president? It could have been any president at the time. He said, don't be afraid of tarnishing your legacy by addressing this issue head on. And I hope that Biden gets to see that. And I really hope that President-elect Donald Trump gets to see that. People are ready for the truth. They've had enough of the line. I think we're way beyond that at this point. I agree with you. However, when I confronted Mr. Trump, he was very cagey. Was he really cagey? I've seen some things. They told me some things. He didn't tell me shit. He basically, it was basically like neither confirmed nor denied. No, there was no eyes. I don't do that shit. Especially do a pro, like Donald Trump. You're not. Yeah, yeah. We're going to do it to an actor or something. Shut up. Everybody knows what's about to say. Yeah, Daniel Day Lewis told you that he just ate a baby. You'd fucking believe him. You know what I mean? You know what I mean? This idea that you do like what it was that I tell you, what it is that it depends on the person, depends on the person. If it's your regular crackpot and they tell you a lie, you're like, something's up. But there's people that can hide things. They can hide things behind their eyes. I think he knows something. I don't think he's that interested. I think he's more interest. I think he's sort of a no-nonsense type of guy that's, this is why. You kind of have to be to be managing multiple businesses simultaneously. Right? He's always done that his whole career. Yeah. Managed being on the apprentice while running these golf courses while having these buildings, apartment buildings, hotels, he's constantly doing something. So while he's doing all that. There's no time for fucking aliens, man. There's no time for nonsense. There's no time for sitting around with your buddies, you know, smoking a cigar going, what do you think, man? I mean, if they fucking, if I was them, man, I would do what they're doing. You know, there's no time for that nonsense talk. That guy's got businesses. But we got objects of unknown origin flying over residential areas, flying over military bases, flying over nuclear silos. Well, now I think he's much more interested because that's how we get to the next year. That's a matter of national security. I mean, it is. It is. We cannot like what the hell are we seeing and they're going, we don't know what they are. But everything's fine. Well, he's a dream. He's a dreamy saint. There's no national security issue here. We don't know what they are, but you're fine. Don't worry about you. Remember, what was the Steven Spielberg movie with the shark, the great white shark? Yeah, jaws. Jaws. Yeah. Yeah. Everything's fine. People here are like, keep swimming. Keep swimming. The water's fine. Everyone say people are getting bitten. That's the perfect analogy. Dude. That is the perfect analogy. That is it. And that's how you find go about your lives. They're definitely getting to see different drones. Come on, nukes, nukes, nukes, nukes, nukes, nukes, nukes, nukes. So what are some nuclear materials just stolen? Oh my god. A focargot ship, whatever, whatever, guys. All the online conspiracy stuff is crazy. And I get a lot of it because obviously what I do, and people said, we all kind of stuff. Well, I mean, I wish I could put boots on the ground, but no, there's something really weird going on. And the fact that they don't know or they're claiming that they don't know what it is. And here's another really funny thing. I actually in the program that I did now, and I hope you had a chance to watch it because it's crazy. It's got, tell people what it is. Okay. So basically, I was talking about early. Tell people the title, the whole time. It's called the program. It's going to be on, it's on, it just came out. Number one right now, it's on Amazon. And it come out. Yesterday. Oh, beautiful. I know. So I came out yesterday. It's on Amazon. It's on Apple TV. And you can Google the, because the algorithm, the algorithm's just starting to catch up with it on Google right now because everyone's like, I can't find it. Look up the program and then Google, James Fox, UFO documentary, the program. You will 100% find it. It's being also made available internationally. They're working as fast as they can to get it up. It just went up yesterday. It's the most independent film from start to finish that I've ever made. And it covers what happened. Does everybody thinks the government suddenly had this epiphany to decide to be more transparent with the general public? That's not what happened. What happened is there were a couple of Intel insiders in the Pentagon reviewing some of this classified data are so called classified data and resigned in protest of excessive secrecy. They found a loophole. This is Lou, probably Jay Stratton. I don't know for sure. Definitely Chris Mellon. They walked these evidence tapes out of the Pentagon through this loophole. They bent the rules a little bit and on to the front page of the New York Times. So that happened and it got, it was just, it was exploded. You remember that? And since then, there has been this unprecedented push by a bipartisan group of lawmakers to find out what the intelligence agencies know and when they knew it. And so that started happening behind the scenes. So it was 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021. And then in 2022, there were like, we're having a congressional hearing. Congressman Andre Carson, I think he was a wisdom and I'm not positive. He put on, he spearheaded the first open congressional hearing, public open congressional hearing. And in that congressional hearing, they acknowledge the fact that the phenomenon was real. It was slowly introduced that we were not getting told the facts. There was a document that came out called the Wilson Davis memo. And that was about the discovery by former DIA guy, Admiral Wilson, of the crash retrieval program that was like maybe 20, 20 plus years ago. And none of the names or anything in that document were redacted. I cover that memo in the film. And then 20, 23, another congressional hearing. This time it was David Grusch talking about the crash approval program. It's been a steady progression. And so a lot has gone on between 2017 and 2024. And that is what this film does. It covers behind the scenes efforts by partisan group of lawmakers effort to find out what the intelligence agencies really know. Yeah. And people that were, you know, and in one of them, there's an encounter. And I think I remember you hearing about it because you wanted to get a hold of David Grusch and so you contacted me. And I actually had a drone. I actually had a drone up in the air in England. And I was like, I know. And I had, I had my phone attached to my drone thing because that's what was using as a controller for the screen. And I'm flying the drone and there was a huge windmill and I saw this windmill. And I was like, oh, that's going to make a beautiful shot for the movie. And it is in the movie. So I'm up there flying it in the wind. The, the, the turbines are going round and round. And I can't quite tell how close my drone is to him. Oh, no. So I'm paying really. Isn't the movie so I'm up there flying it in the wind the the the turbines are going round and Round and I can't quite tell how close my drone is to him Oh, so I'm paying really good attention and I'm getting close to these big turbines and all of a sudden my phones ringing And it's you like oh my god. I can't not answer this. I got to answer so I answered it while my drone was up there Oh, no, and we talked briefly and you said hey can you get me in touch with with David Grush? I said yeah, I got a guy that can put you touch with that was Jason Sands and I guess you and Jason Sands talked about this alleged encounter in 1994 with this entity alien whatever you want to call them in the desert Yes, so that was crazy story crazy But in any case so when you watch the movie in the program You'll see the drone flying dangerously close to these and that's funny little inside thing So it didn't crash but I was on the phone with you when it happened But when you watch the footage, it's like wow, that's really close. Is that guy public with that story? He well so because otherwise I would discuss it. Yeah, yeah Because it sounded so nutty. No, no, no, okay, so here's what happened. This is funny because When I was in Washington DC with melon and and this gentleman Jason Sands, I'm using his name now melon looked at me and he goes This guy's story is pretty wild. I was like what do you mean he goes really wild and we're sitting down having dinner and Chris melon orders he orders they He orders a drink yet he had a Dequila so whatever anyway and we're all having dinner and Jason Sands are selling the story about this alleged encounter in 1994 and it's one of the craziest stories And I've been doing this for 30 years and this story is nuts, okay? You remember oh, yeah, so yeah, I want like this to my phone. He was telling me like there's one. Yeah me too Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it me too so What the fuck in insane? Yeah, so I will get to that in one second. This is the reason why I think some well, though This is why I can discuss it probably I know the reason why I can discuss it publicly is because He was gonna appear anonymously in the movie and I was debating on exactly how to go about doing this because I Was torn because you got a statement from an individual. You don't have his identity, but I Was in DC. I put the whole thing down and I said look if it ain't he was worried about a security He was a whistleblower he already testified to a number of Senate Intel communities and armed service community and All about the UFO phenomenon. Yeah about the UFO phenomenon They're part of the UFO a UOP task force they found him and then he was giving them information and reporting on things and So I he's he goes I'm really fearful. I don't know if this witness protection program is gonna be that helpful I'm just I'm wearing I said look if you're concerned about the story getting out or not getting out if you want I'm here you can come to our studio. We could film you on camera If anything happens do it could be released and it could be a little insurance policy for yourself He goes that sounds great. Let's do it. So I did a whole film about it and then I'm periodically posting clips are just still frames and updates on the movie as I'm making as I do on social media And I posted this one scene and it had a clipboard on in the scene and on that clipboard if you zoomed right in it had his name so I posted the Accident I posted the damn thing and my phone starts blowing up 10 minutes later You just reveal this guy. What are you doing? Take it down take it down take it out two late two late So it was out there and he's getting all kinds of heat So as a result of it. I'm giving the truncated version He basically had to go through the Doppster process which is basically pre-publication of Authorization of what you can and cannot say Excuse me. So he basically could talk about a number of cases That were in the film. We had to blur about one particular word which in the movie it's blurred out We had to do that. That was that was to observe so It was the winter of 1994 there was A Unidentified flying object That was picked up on the base. Oh school UFO. Oh yes, sir It was it it was a UFO It was picked up on the base and it was recorded by sensory data It was picked up on camera it had camera footage of it from different locations and this it looked like it looked like It was weird shaped. It was like unusual shape and there's people talking about it's in the movie and The film is in the movie the film put is that leaked from the base isn't so you can see what it looks like flying kind of Yeah, it's it's kind of blurry in some spots and yeah, you'll see it So it's in the program. Yeah, and then you hear all the voices I actually had the voices cleaned up. You can hear people talking about what the hell is it? Is there a clip? We could see online Just like a joke. Oh, what it looks like? Damn, I'm sorry Could you maybe just to save the actual name of the incident? Maybe it's find it. Yeah, try and find it. It's Nellest test range UFO 1994 see if you can find it people put stuff along and it's really bad Yeah, true good point because it's on Amazon right now people put clips up. So yeah, it's true Yeah, there's other things on there. So in any case so that that that video there it is Terrible, there's much better footage of it. Yeah, there's much better footage of it. It's in my movie I had it cleaned up, but yeah, that's it basically. Can I see it again? So that's what it looks like wait the footage I have is is way better than this. Yeah, sometimes it's so so So what did it look Jesus Christ? You know what that looks like Jamie very weird shape Jamie. You know what that looks like? It looks like looks like Terrence Howard's creation Doesn't it? It's weird. What is it? What is you called that again But it was those things that locked together Those you know the flying drone thing that he created Lens pens. Lynch pens. Yeah, Terrence Howard created this fascinating concept for Like a drone where it's like propellers going all these different directions and they they sync up and they link together and It looks like that. Oh, yeah, so it's anyway, so it's footage people talking about it What is it? We don't know. It's not it's unidentified And it flies around the base and that leaked and the names of the other witnesses leaked Three days later, can you explain? But I'm sorry to keep cutting off because you have to say what it did like how it moved. It just it was like It was didn't have any visible means of propulsion. It didn't have any wings. He didn't have propellers It just look like a like an object around sort of object Weird shape almost like a helmet or something with things coming off of it And it was just moving around the base and they know it's nobody slow slowly at time. Oh, there it is Yeah, okay. That's that's exactly it. Yep. It's definitely not a big balloon and you hear no You hear everybody talking about it the audio that goes along with it and I had it cleaned up is either all talking like Nobody knows what it is So this is zoom is this why it's moving around like that they're trying to keep it in focus and it's all it's all it's all Mr. Sands explains all of that in in the film the program he talks about it so anyway, so this leaks people's names the witnesses leaks and Three days later. He's in a convoy Guzzun tight He's in a convoy and it's early in the morning and there's three jeeps trucks Jeeps In convoy on a dirt road headed out in Ellis test range and they see what looks like Maybe somebody was involved in a plane crash Somebody that was struggling out the middle of the desert It was early in the morning You know wintertime and they're looking at this individual like oh my god. Is that a person that that individual needs some help That that individual looks like they need some help. They look cold and skin had a slight blue tint to it And they're looking at this gentleman and they're like hey, stop the convoy this person needs help medical attention Maybe they had a plane crash and so we're gonna help this person out and the pool They pull the convoy over and this individual comes up individual comes up to the car Jason Sands goodouts gets out the right side of the door and as he's getting out somebody in the truck screams He's got no effing ears and Jason says he turns around and he looks at this guy And he had the same kind of uniform that they had had on but the uniform was just Immaculate like there wasn't any dust on it no dust on the boots and he was thinking to myself well Weird this guy's got no ears. This guy some kind of mutant and he looks at him He said his eyes were a lot bigger. It's all illustrated in the movie and then he starts talking like he said It was like a snake bite him and he was just paralyzed with fear He was really scary. What am I looking at is this a human is this a mutant is this an alien? What is this and I start talking to him in gibberish, but he said he started to understand like telepathically everything this this Person or entity being creature alien whatever you want to call it was saying to him and he was looking for some kind of metal and He didn't know 10 tell him and I and Jason sounds like you know I don't know. I don't have any you mean you mean titanium he's like no 10 tell him or something and This conversation goes on for for a bit and then the guy just wanders back off and gets into that little crap that looked very similar to what you just saw there and flies away and he sort of stare stepped away and everybody's where it came out of this comatose Dayton off and off they went and We have the names of the other military witnesses that were on duty during the encounter the alleged encounter People are going to criticize me because I'm reporting on a close encounter of the third guy But this Jason Sand says he's willing to do a light detector test like public he's willing to testify under oath That everything he's saying is true We have a date. We have a location and we have the names of the other P on duty officers So what I'm hoping is despite the level of criticism I'm gonna receive for reporting on this is it other individuals that have more information on this are gonna be inclined to come forward I also met with people in the Senate Armed Service Committee Senate select Committee on Intelligence and that sorry in the house and they said Jason Sans His who he says he is he checks out. He is named Previously classified or classified programs. He's he's identified The guys legit is his credentials check out and so I opted to go ahead and report on it with the hope that a more Information will come out on it. Listen man. It's there's nothing wrong with reporting on a story like that There's been a bunch of them It's not a small number of these things where people have experienced things and imagine if it's true if it's true Not all liars. I can't believe they're all liars. I had to but I imagine Imagine being that person who had that experience and not have anybody Believe you not only that but it can actually ruin your reputation in your career to talk about this experience Which is the reality of it? It's one of the things that stifled discourse on this until I think the New York Times really broke the ice I Think in 2017 when they published that all the sudden serious people who were unwilling to talk about UFOs before just for the Ridicule yeah now you you've got the gimbal video that go a fast video You've got fighter pilots commander David favor if you've got these people discussing these things openly and like okay this seems like something that a serious person can discuss now and so then it's open but Actually meeting one and talking to it's like the vargina story like when I told people the the cop picked it up and carried in the car in the Cop died man handled it some horrible bacterial infection that they couldn't cure He was rubbing himself down with a rubbing alcohol according to his family. He was like a greasy stuff I might burn hey was rubbing himself down and he had to stench smell Grease yeah, and then I tell I interviewed the doctors there's a couple of actually going back to Brazil next month There were a couple of forensic pathologists that are willing to come for that we're gonna cover Kind of update the movie and we release for it. So it's an ongoing investigation wouldn't that be the best protection from an alien Planet's bacteria if you had the most vicious Bacteria on the surface of your skin Right like imagine like if you go into another planet and the way to mitigate the effects of Viruses and bacteria in that planet is to have Skin fluid that's like unbelievably Anything that comes near you just gets cooked. Yeah, like a skunk right have you ever had a skunk? Oh? Yeah I had a skunk got my dog once I I Check out this guy's garbage one time and he's like hey, I think it has in my then my garage She flipped up the thing and drop it in there So I like I was like kind of hung over I was that we had a party the night before and I Went out to the garbage can and I kind of heard like some rustling in the garbage cam But I didn't really think anything of it and I like lifted up the thing and then I heard some rustling again So I reached out and I put my head down inside and the skunk just turned and got me right in the face now I held my breath and I closed my eyes the last second and it went right through me It penetrated my molecules. It was so powerful that it was paralyzing Absolutely paralyzing can you imagine just a smell that's that's that's their way of defense? It's just this stench that just goes through your goes through your body. I'm just paralyzing you. That's crazy Anyway, you got it in the mug, huh? I got to write the face. Wow. How long did it take for you didn't stink? Because you probably two weeks I Was that was that was several weeks. Yeah, I tried the tomato and I tried to bake I think they have the special soap now. Yeah, just for skunks. But when my dog got zapped He got zapped in like 1980 I think it was 1980 because I was living in Jamaica plain and she went out in the backyard and I think she thought that It was our cat because we had a cat that was black and white and she just ran right up to that skunk and it took her right Right in the side of her body like she tried to turn away But it got her all over her body. She was wet with skunks. Oh, yeah It was so nasty I had to take her inside and I had to do it because she was my dog 13 I had like cover her with tomato juice and washer down. She's still stunk. Well, how stunks It's so funny because I was getting ready for a road trip this a couple years ago and And I looked over and I was like did we did we walk Duke? It was like nine o'clock a night We're exhausted we packed everything up. They had the car ready to go for the next morning It's like we walked out you know, I take our dog three times like I was nine o'clock on a slide them outside I hear him like Run run run run run run Oh, there he goes And I thought oh my god. He just got eaten somebody just ate him. I was like oh my gosh I ran out there look for me. He comes running in he jumps in that governance Oh, I was like it was so So strong It's unbelievable that smell is just like Incredible and the way someone has cleaned me, you know like animals like blood hounds and bears and they have been seen Oh god like a hundred thousand times shorter than ours right, but they can pick up parts per million the way we pick up skunk Really? Oh my god. Think about that. So if a skunk gets hit by a car like a mile away you can smell it Have you ever driven your car? I could drive over it into my car smells like yeah if you're in the but if you're in the neighborhood where a skunk got something you could smell it. Yeah for some strange reason it permeates He's like it carries more than any other smell with dogs. That's how they smell everything They're like oh roscos home, you know like they could smell things that you can't even imagine they could smell especially like a bloodhound And then a bear can smell like what is a bear's like ability to smell above a bloodhound it's something something crazy My friend was sharks in the ocean can sense blood from miles away miles miles Incredible insane miles away. They could smell blood miles away Got seven. I remember look at this 300 times look at this. This is great Help bears are sent the best sense of smell of any animal on earth for example average dog sense of smells 100 times better than humans a blood Batter a bear sense of smell is seven times then a bloodhound or 2,100 times better than humans Unbelievable. That's why they say when you go camping put your food up in a tree or something Oh 100% you have to you can't have the tent at all. Oh when I was a kid we went camping and the bear broke open or cooler Wow, yeah people just had regular coolers you'd have like a little cooking in your pocket and being bad I mean your yeah, you're gonna have you're gonna have an issue. Oh 100% yeah Wow 100% I remember when I was a kid I went camping and they were like don't have any food I was like yeah, whatever like that. No, no, no, but that stuff. They were really adamant I was like why these guys make us into folks and bear is not gonna smell a cookie my pocket like Yeah, of course they will don't don't look at that like a want on like look at that He's soft outer layer and there's meat inside of it. They're gonna look at that tent like look at its trapped in there The meat is trapped in the tent. This is crazy. What was that one movie called where they got the the grizzly man or something Yeah, grizzly man that's when they came and got him. Who are they well? One with the grizzlies and then he got eaten. That's a very complicated movie. That's a Werner Herzog film Yeah, what are her socks? Yes, it's a really funny camera was rolling and they played it sort of the camera's rolling But the lens cap was on so there was an audio so it's just audio. Yeah, it's even worse The audio about the way it's audio you hear in the internet. That's fake. Oh, that's not the real one The real audio Werner Herzog told the lady to destroy it Destroy it no one should hear it. Yeah, he heard it It's long, you know because bears don't kill you. They eat you, you know like a salmon They don't kill salmon. They just put their paw down and start pulling chunks off of it. That's what they do with people too That's terrifying is that well, they don't have any predators So they don't have to kill things and then you know worry about someone taking it from them You know shit from a bear terrifying especially grizzly bear You're not taking shit from a bear unless you're a bigger bear So like all the other animals have to worry like mountain lions kill quick because wolves will steal from mountain lions And apparently in the areas where wolves has been introduced It's actually become a problem because mountain lions are killing much more than they normally do Because mountain lions will kill like a deer or two deer a week something like that and eat the weather Yeah, they get a week. That's a lot of meat. Well, they're big. You know a big mountain lions, you know 150 pounds It's a big cat their cats are just they're obligate predators All they eat is mean and a bear is lead a little berries. They lead a bunch of shit not cats so the cats are Killing more because the wolves scare the cats off of the kill So if the cats on a kill and a bunch of wolves show up the cat will just get the fuck out of there Like fuck it because he's a filly. I didn't want to defend himself against the wolves Exactly because wolves hunt in packs. So there might be 13 14 wolves and one cat the cat will just get the fuck out of there Cats run from dogs, right? Like they have a fear of like canines and I think it's from wolves stealing their food So like that's how they hunt cats the way they hunt them you have to trim because otherwise you're not gonna find if you find a mountain mountain by trim you have to get the dogs to bark them up a tree Oh, they were in the tree and they shoot them when they're in a tree. Yeah, and they it sounds cruel But listen they have to do that to manage the populations if they don't they start eating dogs They start that's what you get in San Francisco California still kills mountain lines They'll kill they kill as many mountain lines as they would if they gave tags out to people to kill them because you have to kill Certain numbers of them for depredation because they'll start killing livestock to start killing dogs in the Bay area They would them the problem cats that they wound up killing in like San Francisco. Yeah Half their diet was pets Really half their diet half their diet was house cat people's house cats dogs in cats That's half their diet half of their diet So you manage you know a hundred plus pound cat and he's running around just eating dogs You leave your dog in your backyard gone Happens all the time Wow, it happened to my dog. Yeah, my dog and Colorado got eaten by a mountain line It happens. Oh So bad for my little guy. It's terrible not there to protect my little feller. You know one time. I was I was hiking up This mountain and I had my son with me at the time and he was in that little pouch You know that little pouch. Oh, you put him in the front like he was like probably like maybe two doing a half And I was hiking this mountain pretty daily. It's funny actually because when I went up there without him I was like well This is why people hike with weights on this feels amazing. I could run up this mountain anyway, I was going to the mountain and I had my dog my little little Duke and I had my my son walking up this mountain and Come around this like good left answer. It's a pretty exposed not too many trees some bushes and it's a hot sunny day And I see this leg of a deer like just fresh kale with blood in the ground. I was like god damn What the hell's the hell looked uh wow that's fresh. It's like huh? I kind of keep going and come on the corner. There's a long straight away the hill goes up like this And I see what looks like a big like grayhound dog kind of like brat like brown kind of walking kind of back and forth like this with a tail and I was like man Who the hell's grayhound is doing out of here like what the hell is that's a mountain lion? I was like holy shit and the mountain lion turns around and looked at me and I had my kid I was like shit I So I grabbed my dog and I turned around and I started running and I knew that I shouldn't be running So I'm running going I shouldn't be running. I shouldn't be running. I know you should be running But yeah, I wanted to get around the corner and get it out of its light sign of like Line of sight and then I go. I go well if he comes up on me. I'm gonna have to throw my dog I was like I looked at do good. I can if it comes down to it. Dude. You're gonna have to take one for the team I was horrible choice horrible choice, but I had my son But I remember my dog too, and I was like looking at my dog going Oh, man, this is a horrible decision to make but it becomes down to it I'm gonna have to sacrifice you buddy I love you, you know, but it didn't come down to it But I remember running going you're an idiot James. Why are you running? You're not supposed to be running you can't run well That's the problem with mountain bikers They get got because when they pass by a cat it's almost like rolling a ball of yarn past a kit They're predator and they will they'll catch bikes her Oh, yeah, they get people on bikes. Yeah, that's happened a few times they get people on bikes They get joggers people on bikes. They think you're running away from them Could you imagine what it was like to be running for your life? Having something like that chase you. Yeah, I can. I mean it hasn't happened to me, but I've seen them I've seen three of them in my lifetime only one of them that scared the shit out of me I saw one in Colorado. I saw one in Montecito Like the Santa Barbara area. It was small. Those are small ones. They're like 50 60 pounds And then I saw one with a buddy my friend Colt and I we spotted one under a tree That was 30 yards away and we were in a truck and made me ship my pants Wow, it was so big big this one was really big This was a mature male with a big pumpkin head and huge forearms like a fucking bodybuilder It was freaky it was freaky to say because You know it was first of all it was dusk So the the sun was going down and the lights of the truck Even though it wasn't quite dark yet the lights of the truck were making his eyes glow Oh my god, and you can see him with the naked eye But then I put my binoculars on and so I've got these 10 power binoculars And I'm zoomed in on this things face and like holding those like he belongs in Africa Well, he belonged right where he was and we didn't belong there Let me tell you a really cool story that's a UFO the best UFO picture. I think is ever taken You have it. You look at her. Yeah. She's me. No, no, no. We're gonna look for it Okay, so can can you find the program trailer on on here at all? Yeah for sure Find the public trailer. I'm gonna tell you about this Is this trailer? Yeah, just watch the trailer. Let's watch the story exposing a secret government program investigating UFOs That story was kind of a catalyst for a lot of things that have happened since Members of Congress started to ask questions instruments report there is something there There are flight characteristics that we can't explain UAPs are unexplained. It's true. They need to be investigated Here we are having a hearing where just a few years ago. We didn't even acknowledge that these things were real Do you believe that our government is in possession of UAPs? Absolutely based on interviewing over 40 witnesses over four years You're telling me people have come forward claiming firsthand knowledge of craft of non-human origin That's correct We have sources who have asserted not only that there have been crashes But there have been crash for tree molds. Do we have the bodies of the pilots who piloted this craft? Biologics came with some of these recoveries. Yeah Where they human or non-human? Non-human I'm saying here today because the American people are being lied to We are the American government and we are open and we're gonna be open about this What has been revealed? Non-human intelligence exists Non-human intelligence has been interacting with humanity It's only part of the story The pressures on Pentagon the CIA are gonna have to answer the mail Some are risking everything Have you had incidences that have caused you to be in fear for your life? Yes, personally to uncover the rest What is being done to verify the assertion that the US government has spaceships of non-human intelligence in their possession? That kind of revelation on earth's people's beliefs How are we gonna jail to say things that I'm then exposed to in the program Bro is that Mick Jagger? Was that another guy Mick Jagger? Is it the amazing that's how I put off? How put off? Oh yeah, I know. That's a like Mick Jagger. That's not my Jack. That's Jeremy Kinnan. He's the biggest computer hacker in history. Let me see what he looks like. He almost went to jail for life Because he was like I'm gonna find out what the government knows about UFOs So he hacked into the systems NSA CIA DIA Like Where is he? Yeah, you want to see that really cool picture? The fuck no in the The film. Yeah, you're gonna go towards the end. Yeah, you know, he's the holy one. It's like really funny. You should say that because I totally thought I saw it. I'm like wait a minute. That does look like a rock star. He is a rock star in the UFO community. It's coming up. You'll have to you'll have to pause it quickly when it when it hits But Gary McKinnon took it upon himself a computer hacker To find out if the government had proof of alien visitation And he spent a couple years hacking systems and he found and he got paid dirt That's that was it bro. That's that's my check. That's my check. That's my check. That's my check. Jack is a new UFO's you should just like only show that clip. You know like they do in horror movies where the mask is not that good It's real quick. Yeah, but so well, I was gonna tell you there's a photograph of a jet circling Can I can I go in a little bit of detail because everyone's always worried about like where's the good evidence? Where's the good photograph? Show me a photograph again. So it's yeah, there we go This was a lost photograph that was recovered. Yeah. Yeah, you know what this? Yeah, I know about this. Okay, so I heard about this in the late 90s. Tell everybody about it. Okay, so There was a guy Nick Pope who investigated him as part of the UFO desk at the Ministry of Defense of England in the late 90s mid to late 90s Maybe in his late is early 2000s, but in any case And I was in fact I was interviewing him for a number of my films. I did a film called a lot of the blue I know what I saw before I did the phenomenon and I I asked him like hey, man, you're a part of the UFO desk at the MOD What was the best case you ever? And he goes oh man 1990 he didn't give me this the town. It was Calvin but he said Scotland. There were two poachers They called them hikers, but they were actually poaching and so maybe think about this talking about animals earlier And he said it was it was late in the afternoon They were in a place. I now know it's called Calvin and they Came upon In this relatively remote area. I know because I hiked out to the exact spot and it's in the movie But and they came upon this diamond shape or disc shape object that was quite large that was hovering silently Really close. I mean close and they were scared to death and they were kind of Hiding out underneath this tree and they're looking at the thing of what the we're looking at and there's looking at this thing Is it silently hovering remember this is 1990 okay and one of them had a camera and Just as he was considering taking his camera out a military jet came in turns out It was one of those Harrier jet they think it was a Harrier jet and it came out into the scene and it flew all the way around the disc and As it did so the guy mustered up the courage came out from one of the tree and he snapped five or six photographs of This object suspended in the air and it went So the disc is here and the plane is flying around us click click click click click click And the reason why I know this is because The individual who kept one of the prints. Thank you very much Craig Lindsay R.A.F. Press officer and thank you David Clark for uncovering this because it's the most amazing picture ever and The two hotel workers in just outside the town of Calvine Scotland Came back and they were like telling their co-workers. I'm a god. We encountered this thing We're not was so they go to the local newspaper and they were like hey man We just filmed something in the sky. We got six prints of it. They it was it was 35 millimeter film footage, right? and They're gonna go public with their story to witnesses But in the sky, we got six prints of it. It was 35 millimeter film footage. And they're going to go public with their story. Two witnesses, broad daylight, a UFO, points of reference with a military jet flying around, five or six prints. That's pretty solid evidence. So the local newspaper was like their botanical public with it print the story. And they were like, well, we need a statement from the RAF. So they contacted the press officer Craig Lindsey. And they were like, hey, what do you make of this? You a father, these guys took. And the guy from Craig Lindsey goes, I don't know what you're talking about. I haven't seen the picture. You haven't seen it? Well, let me send you a print. This is the newspaper. Send some a print, big print like this. The one you see today. And he's like, holy shit. The hell is this? He's already a press officer. Craig Lindsey. So he starts getting in touch with the MOD. And he goes out and he investigates this. He goes out to the witness. He starts to the witnesses. And they were telling him. And he goes, well, they told him what happened. And he goes, well, what kind of noise did it make? And they said, didn't make any noise? No, he goes, no noise. That's impossible. An object that can hover like that in the sky for that period of time. They were talking 34 years ago. Didn't make any noise. And the witness said, no. So he was like, holy shit. This is crazy. So he takes a color Xeroxie machine. And he sends it to the MOD in London. And he says, hey, there's a case that you might want to look into. And here's a Xerox, which is really crappy. It's just a scanned Xerox, like a fax machine, over to MOD. He said he went from the office where the Xerox machine was. And before he can get back to his office, his phone was ringing off the hook. MOD. And the MOD basically stepped in, took over the investigation. They said, you can step down to Craig Lindsey. He steps down. He keeps the print. He steps down. They take over witnesses gone. Five or six prints gone story killed. So 30. And we rumored about it, because Nick Pope had talked about this case in a book he wrote called Open Skies Closed Minds. And then I talked to him about it in late 90s. Then I talked to him about it again in the early 2000s. And I was like, Nick, especially in 2007. I was like, tell me about this photograph. And he's like, I was incredible. We had a big poster of it on the wall. The MOD. And I was like, well, where is it? He goes, well, I don't know. I stepped down. I'm no longer at the UFO desk. And I said, well, then he just throw that away. Once you get in touch with the people, they were there. And find out. He's like, oh, James, I can't just make those inquiries. We killed the story. It was like, so I was incredibly frustrated. So discreetly for over a 20 year period, I was making inquiries, because I don't like letting things go. Right? It was like this picture exists. And by the hell, let's get this one out there. But the story went dark. So David Clark found Craig Lindsey. And the way he found Craig Lindsey, the guy that kept one of the prints, is that he got a declassified government document out of the MOD's office. They'd had redactions on it. And one of the things that said was 1990. And they said, are you a press officer in Scotland? Blacked out. Said that blah, blah, blah, blah. And he's like, oh, who was the already a press officer in 1990 in Scotland? Craig Lindsey, boom, context, great, Lindsey. They started communication going. And then after so much for redaction. Yeah, so much for redactions, right? And so this whole dialogue starts going and they're developing up. And then he goes, oh gosh, I guess I might have one. It turns out he ended up keeping one of those prints which he had. And that story broke probably two years ago. David Clark again, again, thank you enough. You deserve accolades for this. And so I flew to England. I met with David Clark and his crew, the people that the analysis worked. Then I went up to Scotland. I met with Craig Lindsey, the art press officer. Gave me the first and only on camera interview about it. What astonished him about it, the analysis work that did on it, what the witnesses said. But we didn't have the witnesses. The people that took the photograph. We didn't have him. But I was going to report on this anyway just because, wow, this is the picture that we've all been waiting for. This picture is phenomenal. But if you don't have provenance and you don't have the background story on it, it could be AI, it could be right, it could be a hoax. Some people call it reflection. Not a reflection, not a hoax. So I'm ending production of the program and I get a text from David Clark and he goes, something big is about to happen. And I said, what? He goes, just sit tight. I can't go public right now, but something big is that happened. There's a new developments. And this is just teases. Well, I'm coming out with it. I promise. So teases you. He did hate me. He did tease me. But I was like, well, I'm almost done with the movie. And if this is something I conclude in the movie about the case, please, let me know. So long story short, this guy Richard Grieves, who was one of the hotel cooks worked in the kitchen with the photographers, with the two witnesses that took the photograph. And Richard Grieves came forward on print, but I contacted David Clark. I was like, hey, can you get me an interview with this guy? So he kept putting it off, putting it off, putting it off. And then finally, I was like, I didn't want to be persistent, but I didn't want to annoy the guy to the point where he was going like, hey, you know what? You're being annoying. But I got it right up to that point, right? When I was like, I was wrapping the movie, the movie's done, and I want to get this movie out, because all the people that participated wanted it out. And then I finally sent him one final text, and I was like, look, I'm really sorry to pastor you. And I know you're probably really busy. And I really appreciate the fact that you even said that you'll meet with me, but that you'll give me an interview. And then probably about 10 o'clock that night, I'm in the editor room, buttoning the film up, and all of a sudden, I got a phone call, and he's like, I'm just come out the problem. I'm ready to go. I was like, OK, grab a camera, roll it. Let's record this. And he reveals that he knew the witnesses. He worked with them in the kitchen. He gave all the specifics. He provided their names. And then he said that two or three nights after two or three nights, four nights after they took that photograph, they were all in a cigarette break at the hotel early evening, pissing rain. He said a car rolled up. There were three guys in a driver and two men and suits in the back. They roll up. They come out. They say cigarette breaks over. They pull the two witnesses aside. And they grill him. And you got to hear it directly from the horseman. Richard Grieves said that when they were all the people that were not involved with the incident, were told to go back inside the hotel, was they did, but they looked through the window and they saw in the pissing rain. He said they were out there for 10 or 15 minutes in the pissing rain. And that these guys, they came back inside. And they were white. He said, he literally goes, they came outside. They were white as a fucking ghost. And which we all get a good laugh out of. But and then they started drinking heavily. And within a couple of weeks, they vanished without a trace. And they've been gone ever since. So we report on this. And yeah, that's a replica. I was saying it's way too clear. I was like, is this a? That's a replica from Nick Pope that he did it for some series talking about it. And that was before the real photograph was found and print. Let's see the real photograph. Yeah, show the real photograph again. I got it. There it is. Yep. OK. So what was he doing? Show the fake one more time. Yeah, that's what the recreation. We're going to go out. So was he just recreating what he remembered? Yes. Can we see the real one again? It's pretty damn good, isn't it? Did he remember that? Not bad. Not bad. Mr. Barbora, a friend, but not mad. Put in a bunch of bullshit background. I went to the exact location that Bob bullshit he put in there put in beautiful hills. I know. And that fence is still there. There was a? About throwing. Yeah, that fence is still there. I took it actually. So what is that jet in the background? Harrier jet. Harrier jet is what I'm told. They're 99% sure. And was that Harrier jet trying to figure out what this was? Well, like I said, in the other prints according to Craig Lindsey, they are a press officer. He said the other six prints or five prints had that Harrier jet in a different position. So he said it was if the Harrier jet flew around checking that out. Now where are those other prints? We have other MOD just ever gone. They killed the story. I mean, the guy at the MOD worked there, Nick Pope told me that they could just wash it because they probably have it all the way somewhere. Of course they do. Of course they didn't throw those pictures away. They killed them in those Jimmy, please. Yeah, it's a really crap copy. You're looking at a really bad prey. Did you zoom in? I've got a much better version of it. You got it on your phone? I do. You don't know me. This image is weird. Yeah, it's hard to see what you're looking at. Yeah, well, let me show you a much better copy of it. Hang on. Let me just scroll up here because I've got a really good, I got the original print of this copy. But people talk about the more compelling data and the links. So this is the photograph that I took at the site. You can get an idea of that. See how it looks like. Right, how similar? Exactly. Same. Here is the print. I could text that to you guys if you want. Yeah, text that to me. I'll text it to you guys. I'll text it to you guys. It's very interesting. Very interesting case. I mean, again, I think it's one of the best photographic cases because you're not dealing with just a UFO. You've got a military jet in the background. And if you have a date and a location, guess what? Pilot's still out there. Right. That pilot can probably got it on radar and probably got gun cam for him. It is still alive. Well, he would have been probably young, right? Pilot's are young. Sure. He would have been in his 30s or maybe early 40s and that was 34 years ago. So, chances are he's still alive. They're pretty fit. Yeah, maybe he's in the 70s. Okay. I'm going to text this to you right now. Alright, here we go. Boom. You should have that. Did I get you all to get all of them to you? And here is a picture of Craig Lindsey. This is great. You're going to love this. Okay. This is the guy that kept it. I didn't get it yet. You didn't? I wonder if it's because I had my phone on airplane mode. Yeah, take it off airplane mode bro. I told you to do that. Okay. Oh, you did? I was trying to explain to you. Oh, sorry. Okay. It's off now. I'm sorry. Otherwise it won't actually send it. Oh, it won't. Okay. Alright, here we go. Here we go. It's like, see if it's bad. I know. I'm so bad. I know. I know. Okay. Great. Great. Do you need me to send it? Here, you do it. Here's that one and there's flip left to right on it. But you know, it just goes to show the links that the Intel community, the Ministry of Defense, the DOD go to hide the more compelling photographic data because it's so easy to complain like, oh, if they were real, there'd be good. Well, there are some really good prints. You got Joe Exotic in your phone. I can't. I can't. But you guys are looking at other stuff. Yes. I found drones that you can, I don't know that they're commercially available. Did you get all the ones you wanted? But you can have a drone up for 24 at plus hour. That didn't send it to me either. Are you serious? Yeah. So weird. Am I sending it to the wrong telephone number? Let me see your number. Does number you have in my old one? Okay. Well, I have it. I definitely have it on signal. Yeah, you do it. Here. Fuck it. You take over. I'm in the middle. You drive. Because I'm clearly failing at this one. I'm going to check to see what I sent it to. Because I change my number. People get weird. Oh, I can totally imagine that was this. Separate. I found some drones that these companies say that you can take off anywhere. They're showing them taking off from small platforms in the ocean. They can stay up in the air for 14 plus hours. They're small. And they do have propellers. I will say that. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And like I said, I mean, it's not the question is, are all these drones, you know, explainable by aliens. And the question, the answer obviously is no. The question is, are any of these bona fide UAP? And there's definitely some evidence to suggest. That's the case. But again, there's always misidentification and more conventional stuff, right? Right. And there's always. And then there's a stubborn core percent. Like a giving example. This is something that I've discussed a little bit recently. Did you find it? OK. Yes. OK, good. Finally, we got that enigma worked out. Yeah, it's just your 5G is very slow. Oh, really? Yeah, you've used an 18T would use a 5. Oh, I use a Verizon. Verizon? I guess. Really? Yeah, it's just a slow. Do I have a, what's the macollodon? Actually, it's accidentally sent myself these other ones of the guy holding it up to. OK, yeah, that's cool. That's Craig Lindsey. So I'll sign this to you, Jeremy. So let me tell you a little story. It's pretty cool, which I never thought that this would happen. There's a guy, Kirk McConnell, who sent an armed service committee, and he participated the very last minute in my film. He's in the trailer. And he, in an official capacity with high-level clearance, he had been investigating UFOs ever since the New York Times article in 2017. So he was behind the scenes 2017, 2018, tail in the 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 23, 24, and then he stepped down. And he came through some intel folks. We got in touch, and I said, hey, man, my film's almost done. If you want, I could squeeze in one final interview. He decided to participate. Up he went, we became friends. We've been talking. And he said, hey, I could probably arrange a meeting, because there's some mutual interest in some UFO cases and evidence that I've been going after as a civilian. But he goes, hey, on the inside, if you want, I can cook up with the heads of arrow, the new heads of arrow, John Koss Klauski, and this other guy, Ryan, who was Air Force Office Special Investigations. This is just a couple of weeks ago. So I went to the Congressional Haring, which was incredible. And people say, oh, it's a big nothing, burger. But you know what? It was very exciting. Seeing people test find a road that there's a crash-free program, seeing an rear-admull, Tim guy, you had Gallaudet, saying that they're under the water. I mean, it's pretty fascinating stuff. So I had to apply for a security background on me, which was about 48 hours. And then I got approval for that. And then I showed up at a wing across the street from the Pentagon. And I had to go through the metal detector. And then there are these kind of exciting for me, because I had never had this kind of experience before. There were these glass tube-type things that were lined up in a row. And I only one person can go in at a time. The door's open just like in Star Trek. And you walk in, and the door closes, and the other one opens. You go through the other side. Then I had to get rid of my phone. And everything that I leave it outside, and then I go into a skiff, which is a sensitive compartmented information facility, and it's a skiff, it's all super top-siggered, whatever. And I got to meet with the new head of arrow, John Klesklowski. And I was like, I can't believe I'm in the belly of the beast. This is crazy. I got in there. How could I? I was civilian. I don't belong here. But we started talking. They're just very nonchalantly. I said, hey, you guys got to throw us a bone. I said, you know, we're not going away. The story is not going away. And I said, and you know what we're ultimately dealing with. I mean, obviously, the vast majority of UAP or UFOs can be and have been explained away in down to Earth conventional terms. But there's a stubborn core 15%, 20% that really defy conventional explanation, not because of a lack of data, because it truly can explain what these things do. And you know, well, you've had many people on these objects exhibit a technology that's just light-use advancement, and anything that we have. And it's been well-documented since the 1940s, and possibly some people would say, way before that. But modern day UFO wave, no question. So there's two stories. One is someone's been in possession of this revolutionary technology for 85 plus years and kept it secret. Or two, we're not alone, right? At a time. So I said, I said to the gentleman, very candidly, you know, we're probably dealing with a small percentage of any time. What's the plan to tell the general public? And this is just a couple weeks ago. And he looked at me and he goes, James, I can't part my hair without approval from the DOD. And you can quote me on that. And that was him, in my opinion, telling me, hey, this is structured in a way that I'm my hand-tied. I can uncover all the things in the world. But I can't tell the general public, or even Congress, without the DOD approval at first. So that's what's happening right now. And one of the reasons why we were so fortunate to get the number of, I say, whistle blowers or potential whistle blowers or people who come forward in the program is because they were super frustrated with the previous head of error, which is a guy named Sean Karpattrick, which basically just kind of blanket, you know, denied pretty much almost almost everything. And people were extremely disappointed with that. But just like Blue Book. Yeah, I kind of like Blue Book, yeah. They've always done that, right? Yeah, but yeah. Again, it brings us back. Everybody's doing it. Not everybody's doing it. There's a bunch of, well, I think now also with the internet, there's ways to get information out that's much quicker and cleaner. No question. Then trusting a reporter, you know, and then your life's in danger, and the reporter gets threatened. Yeah. Yeah, now things just kind of get out. So, well, I've thought about this. Like, you know, I'm going back to Brazil and I thought, you know, I'm obviously going after, you know, additional eyewitness testimony. I'm going after the photographic stuff. And those of you out there that are like tired of hearing about it, well, I spent 20 plus years in search of the photograph that I featured just now. That one with the background story on it, provenance, that sort of thing. Jamie, go look at the one that I sent you. It's a better version of it. Yeah. And so I thought, I just, because you, you know, you can't after a year or two, haven't successfully obtained stuff. So this is a better version. Yeah, it's a better version that you can see the granular of the film footage. Weird. It almost looks like there's something in the back. It does look a little bit like that. It looks a little more propeller or something like a Jetson type. But let's just say, nothing was silent, supposedly. Silent, according to the witnesses, it didn't make any sound. However, there for an extended period of time, it went it took off. It took off straight vertical like this. Shh. Straight up. It's fast. It started going fast, faster, faster, faster, and then it was gone. Yep, that was, that was Craig Ledsy, who interviewed the witnesses who told me that. And it's so weird though. According to Richard Grieves in Scotland, the Americans got involved. Of course, we get involved in everything. Yep, they showed up and they intimidated the shit out of the witnesses. And I know people can criticize me for reporting on these alleged men in black. But it's not me saying it. It's the witnesses that are saying it. And I did it full bore for the first time, in moment of contact, because I remember hearing these stories for decades. And I finally was like, everyone was going to think I'm crazy if I report on this. But this lady, even was the mother of the two daughters, saw that had these visits and intimidation. And I was like, screw it. I'm just going to report on this. And I'll just take the criticism. And then I wasn't expecting this to be the case with this photograph, but lo and behold, it was. But anyway, it's a huge story. In my opinion, they can't put the genie back in the bottle. It's coming out. And it's drip-drip-drip. But I have to remind your audience, people that are feeling impatient that we've had three open congressional hearings in the last three years. Yeah. We hadn't had any in over 50 years prior to that. It's definitely even though it's still difficult to get information and figure out what's actually going on. There's way more open mainstream discussion of it. And it's frustrating at times. I get it. People are like, oh, well, while these people, I can't. They just say, why can't David Grusch just tell us? Well, I can remind people that the DOD has stripped David Grusch of his clearances and won't allow him to get into a scythe. There's one of the things that I talked to this guy, Brian Benner, who appears in the movie, at the political and he goes, he goes, if Congress finds out about it, one thing we know in the hell is that you're going to find out about it. They can't keep a secret. It's going to leak. So they've been doing everything they can. I imagine it's the DOD to prevent Grusch from going into a a scythe with members of Congress to release and reveal the classified details necessary to verify his claims. Okay. Have you been this under wraps for 60 plus years or whatever they've been doing? Yeah. Would you really tell AOC, would you really pull her aside and tell her? Well, I mean, any members of Congress with the proper clearances and feel like they want to have that information. I mean, you got nothing wrong with her. Yeah. I'm just saying that's pick a young one. I'm going to give them all that information. Exactly. They don't want them to have that information. There's no question about it. I would, that's what I would imagine. That's probably why they won't let Grusch get into a skip. So here's another thing I'd like to mention is that David Grusch claims that he gave even a street address to the ICIG, which is Thomas Monheim. That's the intelligence community inspector general. So I'm asking members of Congress to support all efforts. You know, Brachette, who's been amazing, regardless of what your politics, the guys phenomenon. He's been really pushing for transparency. He's a super solid guy. You got Mace. You got Muskowski, which is from Florida, Garcia from California, AOC, New York, Luna. And of course you got the Senate side. You got Rubio. It totally knows where the stuff is. Rounds, Schumer. And if you look at the NDAA, you can see the language in plain side. I mean, it's phenomenal what's going on. And I think that our elected officials that are really pushing for transparency need to hear from us, need to hear from the citizens, and know that we support their efforts and that we have their backs and continuing to push for transparency, to push to find out what the hell is going on. I mean, imagine if it's true. Imagine if we have spaceships and we have biologics, bodies. That is not just implications for the United States. That's global implications. I mean, the impacts, the ripple effect that would have around the world for that confirmation to happen. No doubt it would be huge. Well, the human race deserves to know. It shouldn't be unelected officials and defense department people that know about this stuff. That's crazy. I totally agree. Unless this is what I had a conversation with Ryan Graves yesterday, the way I would argue it, if I was a military person, I would say this is a national security interest. And we are trying to back engineer this stuff. We're not successful. If China steals our data, if Russia can back engineer one before, if Iran gets one for us, we're fucked. Because these things are insanely sophisticated. We would obviously weaponize the technology. That's obvious. It's like 101. What were we not? The basics. I mean, if you could put a new home, one of those things. I mean, the exhibited technology that people would say, people that have witnessed this stuff, say it goes from a standstill to out of sight in the bleak of an eye. to these objects. What was David Freaver said it went from space? 50,000 feet above sea level. To sea level in one second. In one second. Yeah. That's insane. We talked about it yesterday. Oh, you did. Yeah. It's insane amount of speed. And the way Ryan explained it in terms of like the amount of force you would need is equivalent to how many nuclear bombs that he say? Something insane. Like the entire nuclear arsenal has to be done to generate that kind of power. Whatever it is, if these stories are true, it's doing something that we don't understand. So if it's ours, I kind of get why they wouldn't want to spill the beans. My thought once was, what if this is not weaponizable with our current technology? Like what if these are our drones, but they don't know how to put a weapon on it yet? Like because whatever you do, I have a problem with that. I have a problem with that theory. And the problem I have is that the United States government has documented close encounters with a third kind. That's a beans connected. That's their own files. That's not me saying it. So it's not just these objects exhibiting revolutionary technology for at least 80 years. Right? No wings, no tail, no visible, means of propulsion, the ability to hover. At a site of the blink of an eye, writing of turns at ice speed, no wake, no sonic boom, that kind of stuff. But you also have reports credible reports of beans connected to some of the craft. And that's documented all around the world. So that eliminates, right? If it's true. Well, yeah. Just because something's written down somewhere doesn't mean that someone didn't write it down as a a cyops, something to write down to discredit other people with a ridiculous story. One way to discredit a credible story is to attach it to a bunch of ridiculous stories. Right? So if I was going to hide some sort of technology, one thing I would do is connect it to a bunch of cookie stuff, bunch of psychic stuff and remote viewing, just a bunch of things that people like very easily dismissed. UFO abductions, UFO encounters encounters with an actual being. Right? But put a bunch of stuff in there that like makes people to what? Is this real? And just enough. Just enough so that you can hide the real stuff in there. Well, I think I'm playing. Yeah, I totally agree. And again, I've said this earlier in the show and I'll say it again is like the reason why I believe David Grusch, who testified not just because of the story. Well, I believe David doesn't have firsthand experience. I just talked about it. But the reason why I know, but the reason why I believe him is because it aligns with my research in the field. Remember, I'm not sure if it's a question. I know. But the reason why I believe him is because it aligns with my research in the field. Remember, I spent over 12 years investigating on and off with my buddy, Marco Lael and Virginia Brazil. That UFO crash case and only found out last minute. The last time I was there that the Americans were involved. So I was like, oh my God, the rumors are true. Like, you know, the Americans really are. Do you see, like, obviously looked into Roswell for years. I went to Roswell, the 50th anniversary. I mean, I think that's not the deal works, bro. You want the aid? We get the UFO. We give you the aid. But if a crash, you have a fucking call us. Stay out of there. Don't be carrying that dude to the hospital. Leave it to us. And then we'll just scoop that up and shut the fuck up. What do you think about that? One of the craziest stories is that there's a building somewhere that's an enormous building that was actually around the UFO. Because the UFO was too big to move. Have you heard the story? It was reported on news nation with Ross Cole's heart. Look at the kind of e-mail. And well, Ross Cole's heart is incredible. I see no joke. He's got an axe. He's got a great axe. He's got an axe. Not quite British. We believe you. But it's close. It's more credible than a new work. There's something about a British axe that just adds credibility to anything. He's something about the new up. So we got this fucking car. Right. We're all being in. It's actually huge. This spaceship's so fucking big. You're building around it. But they talked about it now. What is this building? And where is it supposed to be? I don't know. Are you holding him back? No, no. I'm going to go to this. Nope. I have a little bit, but I don't have the same connections on that. But I'll tell you a case that I do think needs to get looked into. Oh, you can move us around. Yeah, yeah. Because this is a craft. Well, this is a craft. This is a government agent. Oh, this guy. So there's a memo in the program. That was through the Doppler process was released. Unfortunately, some of the names are redacted. Christopher Mellon obtained it. It was from a correspondence you have with the high level government official back in 2020. It just got approved for release. I don't know, maybe a year ago. It's featured in the in the in the doc. And in it has the names of not just the gatekeeper, but other people that name to found the gatekeeper to the crash to the program. I'm told that un-retacted versions that had been handed to select members of Congress and people that are investigated in a physical capacity for the government. But in it, they specifically mentioned a case not crash a landed case that happened in 1953 at Cayman, Arizona. So I made some inquiries with aerospace folks that I've been meeting with quietly. And I'm like, what's this case? So you guys keep talking about with the King in Arizona? There I go. It was like, oh, this is landed in left. I was like, well, how do you know? What do you mean landed in left? And they're like, well, the doors are open. and nobody home. And they walked off. I said, I mean, somebody just flew this thing down. It landed on the ground in the desert. And Cayman, Arizona in 1953. And they left the doors open and left. And they're like, yep, that's pretty much what happened. So they left the craft there. Somebody just they flew it down and left a craft on the ground. I was told that. And I wouldn't be repeating this if I didn't think there was some serious credibility to it, but apparently it was. And it does not align with how Diana, Pasulka and Gary Nolan have started describing these things as donations. Well, the individual that I talked to was so funny because this individual was like, not a scratch. And I go, not a scratch. What? Not a scratch? Not a scratch on the. No, it was perfect. Didn't have a scratch. I was like, oh my gosh. This sounds like somebody who's more than just heard about this. But one of the aspects of it didn't have a scratch on it. So I think that's a case that I think that. So the first hand witness that it never scratched. I don't know if it was the way they describe the way the problem is the way the problem I have with all this stuff. But here's the thing if you were Thomas Walton. Yes. Okay. Love that guy. I love that guy too. Fascinating. I really enjoyed there's we got a ball head. That's a Travis Walton ball. Oh, no way. Yes, I got it from Travis. I love that guy too. Fascinating. I really enjoyed, we got a ball head. That's a Travis Walton ball. Oh, no way. Yes, I got it from Travis. Tim staring at the sky. Oh my gosh. When he was a young man. I went to the location. That's a remote platform. I'm interested in that because that's a firsthand witness. Yes. Right. That's a guy. He's explaining his bizarre experience. He's told the same story for whatever, 50, 60 years, whatever the hell it's been. 1975, whatever it was. Yes, he got abducted. 50, almost 50 years. So this guy was there. That was his story. I'm interested in that. When I hear a guy told a guy that this is what happened, and this is how he's described it, I'm like, hmm. Super frustrating. Talking to Jay Sands. Yes. First hand. Yeah. First hand was learned. What the fuck are you saying? Yeah, face to face. Yes. Tell me what it was doing. What it looked like. Yeah. He thought it was an adolescent too. He didn't think that it was a full grown one. He thought it was young. Well, he's got an illustration of it in the documentary. I tell you, it's one of the crazy. I remember after he was. Imagine. I know. This is true. I was like, this is crazy. Do you make the face of Sam B person? This is something that we didn't reveal in the documentary. It was really funny. He thought that this individual was suffering from frostbite or something. That means you get really cold. I have a thermo. I have a thermo. Skin had a blue tint to it. So he took his jacket off. And he very insistently put the jacket on this individual, because he was sick. And this person is really, really cold. He's been out in the desert probably had a plane crash or whatever. And so he's putting his jacket on. The person was kind of resistant. But Jason says that I insisted. I took one layer of my jacket. And I put around this individual. And that individual left with the jacket on. So we joke and Lee, I joke at Lee's saying, where do you think your jacket is now? He's like, probably out there in Elbs, Atari, or God Lillie knows. Or right here. Or yeah. Or this is the thing that gets right here. Lillie, logistically. Yes. OK, if these things are coming from the ocean, just logistically, you'd have to have a large ship. So we were talking about this with Ryan yesterday. And I was saying, if they had a battleship, we'd be able to see that, right? Like 100%. He said, so it would have to be a submarine. It's like, Jesus Christ, what if there really is some sort of a civilization underwater that has existed, co-existed with us forever? Did you hear about the testimony by Rear Admiral Tim Gallaudet, just recently in Congress? Is this the one where the things moving underwater are 500 knots? Yes. He's reporting. He's like, explain it to people. Oh, he says? I don't have all that you can remember. Yeah, well, I can remember basically is confirming that we have objects that are exhibiting in technology underwater that defies any convexial explanation, things that are just virtually impossible. Like so much faster than the fastest submarine or anything like that. Just, and they're really big. Yeah, it's moving as if there's no resistance underwater. Yeah, and then they're moving like a fighter jet would in the air, moving like that under a lot. Yeah, they're called a trans medium or something they can do. Yes. But confirmation, I mean, that's, and I actually spoke to Rear Admiral Tim Gallaudet on a couple of occasions recently. And I thanked him for coming forward to testify. And he said, you know, I felt an obligation to do so because a lot of my men, the pilots, were coming forward, and I wanted to pack them up. And so, that's why he stepped forward and testified. If you're coming here from somewhere else and you wanted to hide and play in sight, you would hide in the ocean, especially if you have the technology to completely negate any of the effects of the water and the pressure. At least explore this place on Earth. Yeah, we can't get to it. We don't have the technology. They know we don't. They know it's really hard to get a submarine out to wherever the fuck they want to. Which is the winter the bottom of the marion a trench. Cameron. Cameron buy himself. I would never do that. He's a wild boy. Yeah, that's like 35,000 feet down. That's not the bizarre like that. I mean, that's those poor folks. Would you go down in a submarine by yourself? No, definitely not at all. No, homemade one, like the one those people died in. Yeah, but that was, there's another thing about that case when people went down that submarine. Apparently, I guess it's the Navy. It has some sort of very sophisticated underwater audio sensors and they heard the implosion and they knew about it like immediately. And didn't report on it. Well, I mean, I think the problem with reporting on it is that you have to report on your technology now. Oh, yeah. I don't even know if this has been confirmed. But this is what I had heard. Methods and means are well, it's also, it's got to be top secret. Like it's got to be one of those things where if you're going to reveal that you heard that, you have to have clearance to do it. You probably have to run it up the ladder. One of the reasons why we know about overhead satellite imagery of UAP is because of Ratcliffe, who's former head of ODNI. And he came forward and I remember it was funny, actually, it was classified. And Christopher Mellon participated in this latest production with me because of Ratcliffe revealing it on Fox News. And Ratcliffe basically says, yeah, we have overhead collection, satellite data of UAP that are pretty fucking far out. And that, yeah, that happens. So they're talking about this. But getting back to your point, because I know you said you were frustrated. You're like, oh, yeah, it's just another anecdotal piece of evidence, a piece of testimony, third party, not first hand. I'm not so unfrustred. No, no, no. I know what I was saying is I totally agree with you on frustrated as somebody who's been chasing the story for 30 years. I too want access to the better more compelling data. That's why I chased after that photograph. I just shared with you earlier on for as long as I did. Because I hear about something that I go after it. But I want to remind your audience, you can't go after something without knowing that it exists. So you get the leads. We're learning more about the programs. We're learning how these programs are hidden. These WOO-SAPs, they're waived, unacknowled, special access programs probably hidden somewhere in the DIO. I know, it sounds crazy. But at least giving some guidance to where are these things and how these things are hidden, where they might be found. We reveal there's a gentleman in the film called Navy X. And people are like, oh, it's another person testifying anonymously. Well, yes, true. But he gives a specifics on telling members of Congress where to look to find specifics. J-Wix, what is it? And this is where to find the more compelling data. I'm going to read this because it's important that people know that. He's saying, look, I've seen it. And this is where it is. It's called the official UAP data is kept either in separate, secret, internet, protocol, router network, or J-Wix. Joint worldwide intelligence communication system that's used by the DOD and only available in a SKF. And SKF is a sensitive, compartmented information facility. So is it frustrating to hear that? And people criticize it. Oh, it's another person. But he's saying, I've seen it. It's phenomenal. He gives descriptions of some of the stuff he saw. And he's telling members of Congress if you have the clearances, this is where it's being kept. So those are very good specifics. And again, I remind you guys, OK, just be patient. This is not 100-yard dash. We're running a marathon right now. And I'll meet you in the page. We are. We're trying to get back to what I was talking about earlier. Let's test it. Legistically. OK. If you're letting something go from the ocean. Yes. If you're flying it out of the ocean, logistically, you would have to have some sort of a large craft out there that's going to house these things, or it's going to launch from. Yeah. If it is actually coming from the ocean. Oh, you see, the drones you're talking about right now. Right. Yes. So either they're ours. And if there are hours, how do they hide the fact there's a battleship out there? Is that possible? And if it's from a submarine, how do they develop a submarine that can launch 50 car size or SUV-sized drones from? Yeah. That's one of the things that Chris was well and said to me this morning he goes, that's just, that's the one element or aspect that really is a head scratcher because this is the question. 50 of these things coming in off the ocean. That's just confirmed. Right. No one's in there. But here's the question. Yes. Is it possible to classify the location of a US battleship that's capable of having these things? So big. How could you like what, how big would it have to be to launch 50 drones? God, you're not talking. You're talking. I don't know, man. But that's a question. That's a question. Right. But that's a question. They're talking about drones the size of an SUV. Right. So let's see the on a loiter time. Let's imagine you. So when you take a ferry, how many cars can a ferry fit on it? I take a ferry all the time in Vermont. But they weren't like a legit one, like a European ferry. 50 cars? Well, the one that's medium legit, I put 25, 30, maybe 40, 25, 20. So could you think, couldn't you do that with drones? And couldn't you have something that's a little larger than the average ferry? So you wouldn't need a battleship? Why would they do that? Why would they do that in residential areas? Why would they have everybody scratching their heads? All these press conferences, you're talking about the head of the gang of eight. Right. But if they need to control those kinds, they're going to tell them if they are really looking for a nuke. OK. Let's imagine that this story about a Ukrainian nuke from the time when they disarmed them, there's one that's unaccounted for. This is one of the stories that's been on the internet. I don't know if it's true. Yeah. That it's unaccounted for, and that they think it's headed to the United States. If you were trying to find that thing, and you were at a bomb, yeah, or just a regular nuke that if you're looking for gamma rays, like you could devise a drone that could search for that. And you'd fly it over an area, and you wouldn't care whether people freaked out because it's more important to find this goddamn thing. So if you have this technology, it's some skunk works that you're talking about from space. No. I don't think so. I think you have to be there. Certain proximity within. I think to pick up whatever. Did you bring this up with Ryan Graves? Yes. What did he say? I mean, he doesn't know either. You know, he doesn't think so. Everybody that I trust is the issue. People in the FBI, people that I communicate with often, I'm like, what is going on? It almost seems too sexy that the United States has that kind of ability, and they're just flying these things around, and that they're doing it for that specific reason to find a nuke. It's like that we have this kind of technology that we didn't, none of us are aware of. That we have these drones that can shut off when you come close to them, the lights shut off, the disappear. They go away. Yeah, they go away. They're tracking the RF signal. Yeah. It doesn't show up. They're cool. They're some sort of cooling mechanism in them. So it's difficult to see with infrared. I don't understand any of that. He was saying that's above what we can do right now. And saying that, but they're not moving in a way necessarily. That's not possible with drone technology that is mainstream. But there's some aspects of the way they move and what they're doing that doesn't lead them to believe that this is current state of the art technology. No, they even I had some, tell people to tell me like, even if it's conventional, it's highly advanced conventional. Right. But let's look at China. China has highly advanced drones. Yeah. We were talking about this as well. The bottleneck in America was the FAA. The FAA put a lot of restrictions on the manufacturer of drones and how you can do them, what you can do. China doesn't have any of that. So they're full steam ahead with innovation. If you look at what drone manufacturers in the United States have been able to do and then imagine untethered if they weren't fucked over by all these regulations that got in the way of innovation, who just obviously would have to have one because you have some commercial drone that someone can buy that can move 500 miles an hour and fly through the air and stay up there for six hours at a time and film video of everything and anything. And you can't control it. You can't block the radar screen. You can't find it with infrared. That's pretty nuts. So I would imagine that would not be a thing that they would want in the hands of the average American person. But why did it just start happening fairly recently? What I would say is this. I'm saying if it's Chinese. If it's Chinese, if they're un-burdened by our regulations and not only do they have the help of the government, they have financing behind them, they have an imperative. They're told what to do. But they're flying it over Langley. They're flying it over. All you do that. But just to fuck with these people. What's the golf course that Trump has? Yeah, it's golf course. What's that called? Westminster. Yeah. They're flying over that. Yeah. The president elect. Langley Air Force Base did experience incursions of unauthorized unmanned aerial systems in last year, December 2023 says Sabrina Singh, Pentagon spokesperson, the number of those UAS incursions did fluctuate. But they didn't appear to exhibit any hostile intent. It's something that we have kept our eye on. Thank God you're keeping your eye on it. We have no idea what they are. But they're flying. Nothing to worry about. This has been happened. This is the third year in a row. This has been happening right around Christmas time. Well, one of the reasons why I wanted you guys to hear that account by the guy at Vandenberg Air Force Base, this is not an anonymous reporting. The guy is giving his name. Right. And he's talking about objects that are the size of a football field. Yeah. Hovering over a silo, launch control area. That's also the Phoenix lights. They described them as size of a football field or larger. Oh, yeah. Well, I interviewed a guy. There was a case that happened right here in Texas, Stevenville. Ricky Sorrell is one of the best witnesses. I love the guy. He was a hunter. And he's like, James, he's like, you could have landed an airplane on this. I said, you've got to be kidding me. He goes, no, man, I goes, I stood under this thing. He goes, it was so big. I was standing under it and he had his rifle. And he's standing under it. And he's looking up. And he's looking to the left. Right, back, forward. Can't see the edge of it in any direction. So he grabs his hunting rifle as he was hunting. Dude, this is 2008. Gives is hunting. He's not telling me shot it. No. So he holds his hunting rifle up. His rifle up. And he's looking through the scope. And he goes, James, I'm a metal worker. I work with metal. I know what metal looks like. And he's looking through the scope. And he goes, man, there's no rivets. There's no seams. There's no weld marks. He's like, there are these on the belly of it. There were these reverse like recessed cones. Like bigger. And then they got smaller as it went up in the belly of the craft. He's looking up at it. And his fingers on the trigger. And he's like, man, I wonder. Wasn't that hard? I wonder what happened if I just pulled the trigger here. And I bet it would ricochet off or hit the belly or something. So he's looking at it. And he's just about to pull the trigger and check it out. And he goes, hmm, maybe this isn't such a good idea. I interviewed him in 2008 when this is going down. And then about a year later, I was doing some follow-up interviews for a film I did. I know what I saw. And I had this gentleman walk up to me. And I was filming in the downtown square in Stephenville, or it might have been Dublin. And this gentleman looks at me and he goes, you Mr. Fox? Yes. And he pulls out a badge and he shows me his badge. And he's like, kind of talked to you for a minute. I'm officer of so-and-so. And I was like, Jesus Christ, what the hell did I do? And I said, yeah, sure. And we walk off to a cafe and he goes, he's looking at his back. He had his back to the wall and the cafe. So he could see everybody coming in. He was really paranoid. And he said, you know Ricky Sorrels, and he said, yeah, he goes, that guy's telling me truth. I said, how do you know? He goes, because the whole police department saw it. I can't remember if it was Dublin, police department or Stephenville, I think it was Dublin. Stephen, police department, he goes, we have. And we said, we were sitting over there patrol cars and this object was like a floating department storm. It was absolutely colossus, the colossus, like a city. Took out my radar gun, pointed at it. And it was doing 22 miles an hour. And then he said it drifted off. And one of the officers, I don't remember the name of the gentleman, took his gun, sorry, his dash cam. And he flipped it up and he filmed it. And apparently one of the biggest mistakes this individual made, this police officer made, was that he didn't make a copy of it because the local Air Force base requested that film footage and got it. And so I've been telling people to go after that, stuff exist. But my point is, this object was so big. People claimed the witnesses, the first hand witnesses, that you had landed an airplane on it. I mean, what is that? What is that? What happens if you see that? That's the thing. Like if you see that, do you even tell people? You sound like a coke. Yeah, like if I saw it, if I was outside in the desert, and I was just chilling, and something so big that I couldn't see the edges of it, flew overhead. I don't know what I'd say. He said when it took off, it was like this. He goes, James. And Ricky didn't want to give me an on camera interview for the longest time. He said, I'm not coming forward. I'm not going to do it. I'm not going public. I worked on him for eight months. Finally, I got the green light. I flew back out to Texas, got him on camera, put him in the movie. But he said, when it took off, it went from this, a complete standstill, and it went straight up. Like as slight angle, but straight up and gone, he goes, James, I said describe the acceleration. He goes, hell, I'll tell you the best way I can describe it. It had a blanked. I would have missed it. That's how fast it took off. So it went from here, like that. He had helicopters hovering over. I know this sounds crazy. People are going to be like, oh, this big. But he had helicopters flying over his property for a while. Right around the time that I was trying to get him to go on camera. Then he came out in his underwear in his shotgun late at night with his helicopter spotlight in him up. And he ended up calling the local Air Force Base and said stop flying over my house at night. And they said, we suggest you stop talking about what you saw. And so he was kind of spooked. And about eight months later, he finally decided that he was going to go public with the story. But everything to lose nothing again. You get this countless reports of these cases. And they're around the world. It's not just the United States. I've demonstrated that time and time again. But there's more of it in the United States than anywhere else, right? Well, I mean, one of my favorite cases, Ruiz and Bobway, that's an amazing place. But there's more sightings in the United States than anywhere else, right? It seems to be an attraction, almost like a moth to a flame with nukes. Somehow they're interested in our nuclear capabilities. And I remember interviewing Robert Salas, who was the launch control officer, who described this whole event at mouse-to-marform space in the 60s, where these UFOs were witness on the base. And then all their minute-man missiles starting getting shut down. And I remember saying to him, like, well, what's your take on that? What kind of, you know, he goes, and I could realize, why this individual was a launch control officer because he was so measured and so calm and so cool. And he goes, well, James, the message I got was kind of clear. It's almost like taking matches out of the hands of a baby. About the nukes. Yeah. So, you know, with the phenomenon, you look at what they do, right? And that says some things. They've done some pretty brazen events, right? Over the, around over the decades. But you also look at what they don't do. Because if the phenomenon wanted to end this, like, you know, secrecy once and for all, all they have to do is hover over the Macy's Day parade or over the next big Super Bowl and it's game over. They don't do that. They've done some pretty brazen things, right? I mean, case in point, March 13th, 1997, over the state of Arizona, including the governor, five-time witness, that massive, there are a number of UFOs witness, but the main one, you know, was this big boomerang shaped craft and even the governor said it must have been, at least a mile across from Wing Tim, that floated. And I actually interviewed people that worked at Luke Air Force Base at the time and they said that they scrambled jets to intercept this thing. And I interviewed a number of people that saw that craft. I mean, that stood on there, that light down in their lawns and watched it float over the top of them. And apparently, according to this individual that I met in the late 90s at Luke Air Force Base, they scrambled the military jet to intercept this thing. He came up on it, could have landed on the damn thing. It was so big. And it went from moving very, very slowly to accelerating like warp drive, boobs just gone. When the jet came back to the base, Luke Air Force Base, they had to carry him out of the plane I'm told because he was so shaken by what he saw. Yeah, I could imagine you wouldn't handle that well. Can you imagine having to keep that secret? You imagine, could you imagine taking the governor who had to lie, right? The governor had to stand up with a guy in a- Just an alien suit. Yeah, an alien costume. And then- Yeah, a hammer did him on that one. Well, then afterwards, once he left office, then he talked about it. Yes. He talked about seeing it. Yes. Yeah, yeah. I got- I wonder why he had to do that though. I got- Oh, well, so I interviewed him. I was the one that got him to break his silence after 10 years. And he told me, and I don't necessarily know that I fully believe it, but he told me because initially when it happened in March, and that remember the vast majority of people were out of the night's guy, you get a glimpse of the hell-bomb comment. So it was witnessed all the way across the state of Arizona and even in Nevada, Southern Nevada. And yeah, there he is. If I told me that it was growing hysteria, but initially he had set out and he said, we're gonna find out, I'm contacting look Air Force Base, we've sat to the Pentagon and all these various services and we're gonna get to the bottom of it. And then I don't know how much longer it was. Was it later that day or was it the next day? He held an unscheduled press conference, and that's when he had his aides dressed up in an alien suit and made a mockery of it all. And I can assure you, pissed the hell off his constituents and the witnesses all across the state of Arizona, they were furious. And I confronted him on that 10 years after the fact, because I was pissed off. I was investigating that case when it happened in the 90s. And I interviewed a lot of really good witnesses and he said, the reason why he did it was because of growing hysteria that he wanted to quite calm down the hysteria. But did he get a phone call to say, hey, kill the story? I lean in that direction, but he's never, even when we're having cocktails together, he's never confessed that happened. But it was awfully suspicious, the way it all went down. It's a little weird, especially considering he actually saw it. That could have been a turning point in the UFO phenomenon reporting, era, right? Like suddenly you get this massive sighting which would happen today, we would have been covered by everybody's phones and everybody. But if the governor had come forward and said, yeah, we need to figure out what that thing is. I'm a former captain in the Air Force on a pilot. And I don't know what the hell that thing was. Is there any footage of the actual thing, the triangle boom-wearing thing? There are some footage floating around. And I featured some and I know what I saw. You got an object in the night sky with lights that at the time in 2009, I did some kind of enhancement. I'm sure the software is a lot better nowadays. Of it looks like a big, I can draw it. Look at Bummer. Yeah, yeah, but more angular. It was like this, like this. Am I drawing my drawings of terrible? Like that? Look up at the screen. Yeah, yeah, yeah, kind of like that. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Yep. And so that image in the far left, that's, but that's the, yeah, there was a set right there. So yeah, and here's something that kind of throws off the trail here because, excuse me, the object came down of the state of Arizona, it went from north to south. Is that legit? On the right there? Yeah. I honestly, I can't say. I'd have to really do a deep dive into it, but let me tell you what happened, because this was brilliant. So what happened was you got this massive object from around 538 at night in the southern Nevada, and then it drifts down very slowly over across the entire, from north to south across the entire state of Arizona. And right around 738, 838, the Gary, the Barry Goldwater Mountain range, which is the direction it was heading in, the military decides to drop a bunch of flares. And so people were like, oh, there it is. And a bunch of people filmed the flares. So in my opinion, it was a diversionary tactic that was brilliantly done, because why the military suddenly decided to drop flares and the shape of somewhat of the shape. So I think that some of the footage that you've seen out there is military flares. But there's, and there was an effort, I don't know if you want to get into it right now, but there was an effort by the so-called M&B, which the MIB, these men in black, or whatever unknown government agency they come from, that took some footage that I was learning about during my investigations in the 90s. And then you're looking at me, look, I'm crazy. No, no. So the first time I really heard a really credible report of the MIB, and I decided not to report on it, was when I was in touch with a woman who was councilwoman Francis Barwood, who was one of the few officials in Phoenix area that was saying, hey, let's investigate what these people are claiming they've seen. She's not saying aliens have landed, all she's saying is, hey, these people have a right to know what's going on, let's launch an investigation, she was lampasted over the media, made fun of, ridiculed, but as a result of her inquiry, public inquiry, and putting it out there, one of these individuals reached out to her, and I know this, because I know her, Francis Barwood, I heard the whole story. And he was a Vietnam vet, and he was on the roof of his house with a tripod and a camera, and he was trying to get a glimpse, he was trying to film the Pelebob comment, and he had walkie talkies, and he was monitoring the truck driver, he was driving up Interstate 10 from Tucson to Phoenix. And so he's monitoring this, and he hears these truckers talking about a massive UFO, and he's like, shit, that's heading right towards my house. He was like, I'll film it. So he had a camera all ready to go, and the object went right over his house, according to him, and he filmed the whole thing, and he goes, yeah, I filmed the whole thing, it's pretty spectacular, and I know that you're launching an investigation, and Francis Barwood, would you like to see it? And she said, yeah, so they made arrangements where he was gonna drop it off at her office. Either later that day or first thing the next morning, two representatives, and it was July at this point, it was very hot, two men in dark suits showed up at his house, and they said, hey, he was apparently relieved that's all they wanted, he said they were quite menacing looking, didn't really say a lot, they said, we're from Francis Barwood's office, we're here to pick up that footage. So he gives them the footage, he said the only question they asked them is did they make any copies? And he said no, and so they take the footage off they go, well he doesn't hear from Francis Barwood, he's like, what the hell? So a couple days go by, I think, possibly up to a week. He calls Rob and he says, and Francis will tell you this show validate what I'm telling you. He says, hey, what's the name of the footage? She goes, well, what do you mean when I think of the footage? I never got it, you were gonna drop it off in my office and you didn't show up. He goes, what didn't have to? You had two men from your office show up, and pick up, she goes, I didn't say anybody around your office, and I know at the time in the late 90s, I'd heard a couple of stories prior to that. I thought this is too out there, this is too outlandish. No one's gonna believe this, I have no proof of this other than her testimony, screw it, and I didn't report on it. But hearing those cases over and over and over, it's like there we go, once again, the so-called evidence that could prove or disprove one way or the other that's happened truly extraordinary took place in the skies over Phoenix back in 1997, vanished. But there is some that's slipped between the cracks that's out there, you just have to do due diligence. And I don't have the time to sit through those images that we were looking at, they look too clean. Yeah, I don't know what AI generated or whatever, but I... Or what could have been in a documentary, like a recreation? I know what I saw features some of the footage. I cover that case extensively. So if anyone's interested in the Phoenix lights case, that, but I can tell you... How many people saw it? Oh, thousands, thousands. I talked to another woman, Stacey Rhodes and her daughter, Emily, and they said they were driving on Interstate 10, and she goes, look, James, I'm gonna tell you how big this thing was. I said, how big it goes. First of all, there were people stopped on the freeway, just like stopped as this thing. It was like close encounters, just floating over there. She goes, I could have held up a newspaper like this and looked to the left, looked to the right, looked at that, and she said, I couldn't block this thing out. That's how big it was. And it didn't make a sound. It was gun metal black. It was witnessed by a lot of people. That's why I say there's some events that have happened over the decades that are pretty brazen. And that's one of Hudson Valley's pretty brazen as well. That's just a big news. That's what you do if it was true. Well, when you got thousands of people seeing the same thing, if you see thousands of people saying the same thing, including the governor, I know. The governor. The governor invested in it, and you go, what happened? The governor. Yeah. The governor. Same guy who came out with a fucking guy dressed up like that. Yeah, I know, but I got him to come clean, take his land. But so he's not credible. Well, he already bullshits. He does. He bullshits. He definitely bullshits. He definitely bullshits. So there you go. But so when someone bullshits about that, they're bullshits about anything. But well, true. Yeah. But I mean, again, I'm just playing devil's ass. No, I hear you. I hear what you're saying. And I've had a limelight. I don't know what's good things to talk about now. There's no smoke without fire. There is so much evidence in terms of eyewitness testimony and radar, some photographic none, as much as we'd like, that something truly inexplicable is taking place in our airspace. For sure. Something that after careful examination, something that not because of a lack of data in some instances, but that after careful analysis and research investigation that comes out the other end and says, I can't explain this is going to have to be one of those unknowns. After careful analysis and research investigation that comes out the other end and says, I can't explain this is going to have to be one of those unknowns or falls into that 15% category of cannot provide a terrestrial or conventional explanation for. And those are the cases that I've so desperately have been going after for a long time. So, as all this disclosure and discussions on television now and all these meetings and hearings, does it, so are you think we're on an accelerated path? Do you think this is like, this is all good, right? I'm convinced of it, yes. But do you think that there's a real possibility like within the next few years that they just completely drop all the bullshit and come clean about this stuff? Or would it take some sort of extraordinary event where they had to admit it? Something much bigger than this drone thing? Well, in some respects, there has been, I remember I interviewed this guy, Nick Pope at the MOD years ago. And I was like, this is the time when we were pushing for transparency. Their France was releasing previously classified documents on UFOs, Liz of Niez, they'd say, the MOD followed suit, their releasing previously classified documents slowly putting it out there. And at the time, it was rather exciting. I just did a big event at the National Plus Club of of Lesley Cane. And it was like this whole movement. It was like, oh my God, it's happening, right? But it kind of peed it out a little bit. And I remember asking this guy that used to work the UFO desk at the MOD, Nick Pope, and I said, Nick, do you anticipate this any type of disclosure? This is like 2009 or something, 2008, 2009. And he goes, James, no, he goes, it's going to be disclosed with a small D, not a big D. It's going to trickle out slowly. The conditioned people get people paired, test the waters. You know, one of the things that we explore in the program, and I've never done that is the politics of disclosure. It's a far more complex. Let's just suspend judgment for a moment and assume that it's real, okay? That there really is an NHI or nonhuman intelligence aspect to the phenomenon, right? Let's just suggest that's real. Now, how do you disclose that to the general public? What about the impacts on organized religion? What about the impacts on financial institutions? What about the fact that we'd have to confess that we don't have full control over this? I mean, those are real considerations. And it's not just the United States, right? This involves the planet. This involves all the humanity. I want to ask you about this. Do you see him saying like, yeah, I totally understand what complex thing you think. Oh, I totally get that. How does Russia handle these things? How does China handle these things? Well, I, uh, there was a case in China that happened in 1994 right around the time of Ruiz and Bobway, also in 1994 called Meng Zhao Gua. And I happened in the Black Mountains. And it was a landing alleged contact close to kind of the third kind. It's funny because it happened right at the same time of Africa. Similar message that was conveyed. I went to China. I met with an active general in uniform, talked openly about the UFO phenomenon. They were pretty open. I went to Russia in the late 90s. And that was right before Putin. It was right around the time when Putin was coming in. And that was a period of openness. And I went to Star City Russia. I interviewed a cosmonaut Pavel Popovich, a number of generals. And they were very open about it. In fact, they said to me at the time, if you're here to discuss whether or not the UFO phenomenon is real, the doors were over there. We're here to create an international coalition, an international exchange of information and to talk about the implications of the phenomenon, which I thought was amazing. This is like 25 years ago. So now I don't know things have changed since Putin's been in office, but that was back in the late 90s. I mean, they've been congressional hearings in Brazil. There's been an effort. I mean, shit, they had hearings back in 1978 at United Nations at least people put on. So there's been an ongoing effort for this stuff to come out. I just think it's different this time. To me, it feels like there's too much momentum behind it at this point. And there's so much legislation that's written. There's too much that's come out. And it's too important. Look, whether you believe it or you don't believe it, if you can just imagine for a moment, if it is true, and if the U.S. government does in fact have a refutable evidence that we're not alone in the universe, that's so significant that we all have a right to that information and that we should continue to support this unprecedented push for transparency with our elected officials and get to the fucking bottom of it. Not everybody agrees. Right? Yeah. And I think the general public, no one's going to screw with you above. Yeah. And then new administrations coming in. There's, you know, there's Ratcliff in Rubio. I'm telling you, Rubio knows a lot. I know that. How do you know he knows? Because I've talked to people that have debriefed him and been in the room with him during first. You haven't talked to him? No, I have not. No, I have not. But I talked to people that were in the room when he was being briefed from first-handers. I'm told that there were I'm going to say right around 12 firsthand people that have had behind closed doors meetings. First-hand people that are concerned about their secrecy, concerned about their safety, concerned about the implications and the of them coming forward and, you know, going public, that they're not quite, they don't quite have. This comes with very good source of information, that the witness protection program and the legislation that they've created around that is not quite there yet. It's getting closer. They need to continue to work on that. You don't mean like witness protection program like, I'll put him in high school. Whistleblowers, they have whistleblower protection. I'm sorry. I'm meant to say that. Yeah. Yeah. Whistleblower protection. It's not quite in place. One of the things I really wanted to mention is that there is a gentleman, a young man who's 30 and he feels like he's old. His name is Jesse Michaels and he's got this new show called American Alchemy. New couple years old. Why's he feeling he's old? Because, you know, in your 30, you feel like you're old. Really? Well, I did. When I turned 30, I was like, I'm 30 because just 10 years earlier, I was almost 19, right? Or 11 years earlier, I was 19. Right. You go for a teenager, suddenly you're 30. You always take like 30 and I was talking to him not too long ago, Jesse. And I said, he's like, yeah, I feel a little older. Like, you are just getting into your prime, baby. This is rocket roll tell, but I really wanted to, this is a guy who's young, Julian Dory is also doing some amazing work on this and podcasts. But he was young and is doing a deep dive into the implications and into he meets with aerospace engineers. The guys, he's Jesse, you're a phenomenon, keep rockin' roll and I want to cut tip my hat to you. I don't know if you've seen this guy or not. No, I haven't. He's doing deep dives into what's happening. Maybe he's documented with these podcasts and he's doing a fantastic job. And I just got to tip my hat to the guy because he's 10 times more than all of it would be and he's young and he's a force to be reckoned with. And he's really doing these answered all the questions that you and I are exploring all these issues that you and I are talking about. Well, I'm glad there's people out there pushing it and I'm glad there's guys like Grosch that are sticking their neck out and guys like you who are making documentaries about it. The subject is much more open to discussion like I was saying amongst serious people. Yes. Where I didn't used to be before and now I think with his drone thing, I think there's so many people that are going, okay, okay, even if there are or they're China or who, what's going on? Yeah. Why are there so many of them? What are the answers and why can't you tell us? Is it because they're searching for a new, Jesus Christ, maybe you should warn people when we get the fuck out of here. Is that really what's going on? Like if it's not what is going on and if it's not ours, what are they and how come you can't track them? How come like what kind of... Very bizarre. It doesn't even make sense. It doesn't make sense. When you think of the capabilities of the United States military, it doesn't make any sense. They can't figure out what's going on. I think what Trump said is probably correct that the government knows they know what's happening and they don't want to tell people. Why would he know? He could tell us why wouldn't he do? I don't think he knows yet. I don't think he gets an office. He gave a speech about it at Mar-a-Lago. I saw that. I saw that, but did he say, well, let's watch it. We'll watch it. We'll watch it. We'll pull a speech up. Yeah, because I wondered if he... Yeah, we'll about to find out. Yeah, essentially he was saying that he knows that the government knows what's going on and they're not telling us. So that means they're not telling him. So they're not telling him. No, I don't think until you get into office, you're not the president, right? So he's the president elect. I don't know what kind of clearances that he has. Yeah, I don't understand how that works. God, I'd be very curious to know what he knows. Right, especially with this, like who do you even ask? Like, who's the person that can lay out the information? Like which department? Which agents? Yeah, right. It seems like they're so compartmentalized. Thank you. Good to see you. Good to see you. Can you call it on the drones that are flying or not in New Jersey ports? It seems like they're a big decision. The government knows what is happening. Look, our military knows where they took off from. If it's a garage, they can go right into that garage. They know where it came from and where it went. And for some reason, they don't want to comment. And I think they'd be better off saying what it is. Our military knows and our president knows. Our president knows. Our president knows. For some reason, they want to keep people in suspense. I can't imagine it's the enemy because it was the enemy that blasted out even if they were late. They'd blast it. Something strange is going on for some reason. They don't want to tell the people and they should because the people are really, I mean, they happen to be over Bedminster. We're going over the two. They're very close to Bedminster. I think maybe I won't spend the weekend in Bedminster. I decided they can't sell my trip. Yeah, I think I won't spend the weekend at Bedminster. Yeah. Wow. I bet someone told him, Mr. President, it's pretty important that you don't go to the golf course. Yeah. God, that's so crazy. Yeah. So what does that mean? I gotta, I gotta, if you don't mind, um, there I was contact. I was just going to switch some. Well, no, no, no, no, no, no, this is all about exactly what we're talking about. I just, this is something that I really need to put out there because it's very important. Okay. And it's an unprecedented effort spearheaded by this woman, Andrea, who runs a number of communities on Reddit. And she said that they're banding together for the first time ever, the biggest grassroots campaign for government transparency. This is happening on Friday, the 20th of December at 3 p.m. Eastern time. And this has the potential to reach millions and millions of people. It's the most unprecedented event on Reddit in history. And I'll post all of the necessary information on X because this is a very grassroots effort. And I'm reached, what are they doing at James C Fox on X formerly known as Twitter? It's, uh, the, the Reddit community is banding together for a huge grassroots campaign for government transparency. So basically all the various platforms on Reddit, the paranormal UFO, they don't usually get along too well, but they're all combining their resources and they're getting together for the first time ever. And to push for government transparency, there's a couple of government insiders that appear in my film that will be appearing on this to answer questions and what steps that need to be happening, what's going on today. And, and this is happening on the 20th of December, 3 p.m. And I'll be posting more information, the very specific details on X at James C Fox. I just wanted to get that out there before because well, the more this stuff that happens, the better, the more people demanded, the better, the more politicians here from the people and want to, I mean, especially politicians are up for reelection and they want to show that they're doing what the people want them to do. Yeah, I, I'd like to know more, but obviously I'm very happy that we're hearing much more about the subject in a serious way. Yeah, you know, whatever that's going on. Yeah, well, I, I, I, I really encourage you to watch the program. I will 100%. I went bent over backwards to put together and explain everything in layman terms. What's happened from 2017 to today because it's unprecedented. We're living in an unprecedented moment in history. There's an unprecedented push for government transparency. And I want to continue supporting our elected officials by partisan effort to get to the bottom of this. And I especially want to throw a shot out to representative, per chat, because you're, you're killing it, buddy. Hey, Jamie, why don't you use chat GPT and ask chat GPT what's going on with the drones in New Jersey? That'd be very curious here about that. Yeah, it's a damn good idea. And maybe then ask rock, but a, a, ask chat GPT. What is really happening with the drones in New Jersey? Let's just see what that works. So tell me how that works. It's AI, right? And what is really happening with the drones in New Jersey? Let's say. So what does chat GPT say? Chat GPT is going to source the web. Oh, okay. Numerous Jones, I've been reported across New Jersey. Now there's these questions. It's incredible how fast it says. Look how fast. Look at this. This is incredible. If I'm no evidence suggesting threat to national security or public safety, despite these assurances, some local officials and residents remain concerned. For instance, Belleville mayor, Michael Melham, uh, speculated the increased drone activity might be related to search for missing radioactive material from the medical facility in New Jersey. Additionally, the public figures like Bethany Frankel have shared unverified theories about the drones purposes, further fueling speculation. The situation is evolving and authorities continue to monitor and investigate new reports. Residents are advised to report any suspicious drone activity to local law enforcement avoid taking matters into their own hands like shooting them down. People are shooting them down. Uh, so they shoot them down to read the dogs. Tell me thinking shoot down drones. Uh, as it could pose safety risks and violate laws. Um, now ask chat DPT. Oh, let's just keep going with chat GPT for a little bit because you're asking it again. Um, ask chat GPT. If I live in New Jersey, should I get out of town? Yeah. If I live in New Jersey, should I get out of town? Should I evacuate? Yeah. I should have evacuated. Let's say evacuate because get out of town. It's like a cold, coolism. Should I evacuate? Okay. This is amazing. At this time, there's no official recommendation for residents in New Jersey. Uh huh. Follow official updates. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. As a precautionary measure, are you sure? Are you sure? Are you sure? Sometimes you always have to ask a no federal evacuation orders. Okay. And it knows that there's no federal evacuation, if you were going to give me advice, would you tell me to leave these coast? Advice is fucked up based on the current information provided by trusted authorities. There's no evidence of it imminent threat. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Could you imagine, put this in, could you imagine a scenario where these drones are actually looking for a nuclear bomb? And if so, would you advise me as a preemptive measure to evacuate? I typed so much worse when people were watching. I'm so impressed at how well he's typing. Actually, I really am. While it's possible to imagine scenarios involving drone searching for dangerous such as a nuclear bomb, there's no verified information suggesting such an extreme situation. Yeah. So I, how about this? I think, I took this in. I was like, I put it in a grock and fun mode. It might get a bit wrong. But hold on a second, but try this. Is there a non human intelligence behind it? I think the drones are looking for a nuclear bomb. And I am going to leave New Jersey. Where should I go? Till Montana. How far away should I go? Well, it's okay. If leaving New Jersey is a crosshair measure, here are some suggestions for place to relocate temporarily. You're doing good. Okay. So now we're getting better. So now it's saying go further away. Colorado, consider scroll back to up. So I can read that where it's a Colorado. That's a good. Consider Durango, Grand Junction or areas outside of Denver. These are safe and equipped with modern infrastructure. I was telling you to move. This is telling you to get away from big cities. Durango. Tennessee, the Smoky Mountain region and Gatlin, Berber Knoxville provides natural beauty, lower cost of living and a sense of isolation. They're telling you how to rebuild civilization. Okay. If a new goes off, where to go? If a new goes off on the east coast, type this in jammy, if a new goes off on the east coast, where should I be to be safe? Oh my gosh. If you're concerned about potential nuclear incident, here's a list of safest options based on geographic environmental and strategic factors. Montana, Colorado, Wyoming, Idaho, sparsely populated, vast distances from major cities and military targets. Sounds like Bozeman, Jackson Hole, San Point, are beautiful remote and away from the fallout paths. Jesus Christ. I'm curious. What would happen if you asked Chet, GBT? Is it GPT? GPT. If what percentage of UAP represent a nonhuman intelligence? Okay. That's a good one. What percentage of UAP represent a nonhuman intelligence? Really curious. I know. Could represent nonhuman intelligence remains unknown and speculative. Current investigations by UAP organizations like the U.S. government and to emphasize the following most UAPs of conventional explanations, us project Blue Book bullshit. So all percent of five or 10 percent of UAP cases remain under theified even after thorough analysis these cases are. I was like, I was like, 18 to 20. But yeah, it's just 10 percent. Evidence in consistent with known human technology, no conclusive evidence for nonhuman intelligence. While some UAP cases are public, publically, the government has not officially. Okay. Command, we typed this in. Commander David Freaver encountered a TikTok, a Tiktack, Tiktack shaped craft in 2005, 2004, 2003, 2003, 2003, that defied our understanding of known physics. Period. What do you think he saw? Two of the four of us are out of a TikTok. Shaped craft remains one of the most compelling and well-documented UAP cases in modern history, key details of the encounter. Craft describes smooth, white, oblong, resembling a Tiktack, no visible propulsion wings or exhausts by extraordinary flight characteristics. Accelerated instantly from a hovering position descended from 80,000 feet to near sea level in seconds. Freaver reported the object mimicked his movements during their engagement and then vanished at extreme speed. It's possible the craft was an ultra secret military project, either U.S.-based experimental aircraft, aerospace technology, or developed by another nation. However, the extreme flight performance raises doubts such that advanced technology would suggest a significant leap beyond publicly known capabilities, which is inconsistent with current engineering limits. Sensor anomaly or perception issues. I asked the heads of arrow, okay, I could explain that one and they said no. If-don't type this in, it's really good case. If all accounts of the capabilities of the tic-tac craft are true, what are the possibilities that it came from another planet? If the accounts of the aircraft capabilities are accurate, instantaneous acceleration, hypersonic speeds without the propulsion no heat. Say it loud, some people can hear you. Okay, so if the accounts of the tic-tac's craft capabilities are accurate, instantaneous acceleration, hypersonic speeds without visible propulsion, no heat signatures, and defiance of inertia, then the possibilities of origin being extraterrestrial or from another planet become a viable hypothesis. Here's why. The physics of the tic-tac craft, reported behavior that the craft suggests technology that operates beyond our current understanding of physics and propulsion systems, no visible propulsion that implies propulsion system unrelated to conventional jets or rockets, instantaneous acceleration, defies inertia in Newtonian physics, achieving this required manipulating gravity or spacetime itself. Silent operation, no sonic booms, despite hypersonic speeds, points to a technology that likely eliminates air resistance, such as surrounding itself in an electromagnetic field or bubble. This level of technological advancement far surpasses anything developed on Earth. If true, such capabilities would suggest a highly advanced civilization perhaps thousands or millions of years ahead of us scientifically, if true, where do you think it came from? And this was 20 years ago. I know, but if true, where do you think it came from? How about this? It's still typing. Final thoughts. It's right in a whole turn paper. It's amazing how fast it does it. It's amazing how fast it does it. The tic-tac-up is real and the accounts are accurate, then its origin may very well be extraterrestrial or involve unknown physics and technology that we haven't begun to comprehend. The extraordinary nature of the case suggests an equally extraordinary explanation. What do you think? Why are you asking me, bitch? You're chatchie, but what do you think? This extra special visitation seems plausible or is there another explanation that resonates more with you? So type this. I believe it seems plausible that they are extraterrestrial in nature. Good luck. I was gonna say it's good. If true, if true, where do you think they came from? What's it? Identifying where they might come from involves exploring nearby stellar systems known exoplanets and plausible scientific ideas about interstellar travel. Here are the most likely possibilities. Nearby star systems with habitable zones. Alpha Centauri system, 4.37 light years away, the closest star system to Earth, Proxima Centauri. The habitable planet, exoplanet orbiting Proxima Centauri within habitable zone. If light developed there might be technologically advanced enough for interstellar exploration, but not, so it's given me a list of all the potential possibilities. Possible star systems. This one's only 39 light years away. What was the closest one? Alpha Centauri was that, was that four light years or something? I don't know, let's go back up a little bit. 3.9 million. 3.3. 4.3. Alpha Centauri. 3.3 light years away. Pretty close. But here's the crazy part. Pretty close. Remember the twin paradox theory? They say that if you get like two twins, right, as kids, say once 10, they're both 10. You put one in a spaceship that travels a speed of light for one year. He would come back with an atomic clock on board that spacecraft a year old or he'd be 11, and his brother would be an old man. I can't wrap my mind around that. But that's, they say it's pretty much fact. But that's speed. I think what we're talking about is different than speed. I think it's instantaneous. Instantaneous relocation. Right. So I think instead of like, like the space between the two points. So I think the idea is that instead of a rocket that goes five million miles an hour and just shoots off of earth and keeps going until five million years from now, it runs into this planet. I think it's different than that. I think what if I had to guess where something can manipulate gravity and space, what it would do is instantaneously appear in these new places. Like you talked a lot of physicists about this kind of stuff. I have. And the way they explained it is baffling and Bob LaZar's version of it is baffling because Bob LaZar's version of it that he told in 1989 kind of makes sense when you talk to people that are trying to develop some sort of a gravity or warp drive. Right. And the way Bob was are explained it is that this element when bombarded with radiation creates this, I'm really butchering it for sure, creates some sort of a gravity field that allows it the way described it like if you took a mattress, a very soft mattress, they put a very heavy bowling ball in the middle of the mattress. It pushes the mattress down to that area and that this like folds time. Right. So you go from here to here, but when you stretch it down, suddenly those two points connect. It folds it. Yeah. And so wherever it is, it's here. So it's not like it's going a million light years. So it's million light years an hour. Space is malleable. Exactly. It's just, well, it makes sense. If you think about how technology scales and if we do, I mean, Ryan brought up this yesterday as well that there was research and there was papers written about the idea of having some sort of a gravity drive or having some sort of a gravity propulsion system, something that doesn't rely on conventional, you know, rockets or jetty fuel. We're not doing a jetty fuel. Exactly. And he said that this was something that was discussed a long time ago, but then it just stopped. And we brought it up a long, quite a while ago, there was an episode that we brought up, a paper that was written in the 1960s about gravity drives. Was that by hell put off? I do not know. Because he's like a propulsion expert in terms of the propulsion behind the physics behind UFOs. Yeah. And he tried to, I tried to get him to explain it to me in sort of conventional layman terms and of course my tiny little brain. But he, I felt like I almost grasped it for a moment, but the amount of power that it would take to create that gravitational field around the object. And he said, that's why you see them doing these maneuvers that look like a defy physics, right? And then everything inside the craft would just splatter that you're immune from that on the inside according, which also would make sense. That's what I'm talking about. Right. But that would also make sense. If you had something like that, that you could go in the ocean as well, right? Yeah. So because whatever's around you wouldn't matter, because you're not affected by it. Right. You're somehow creating a field of reality. It's that's immune to whatever space. That would be the only thing that would make sense how it could move so fast underwater. Or space, water. And how it would be transmedia. Yeah. You can go from space into the water. It's unaffected by gravity. It's unaffected by all the things around it creates its own gravity field and allows it to just pass through things. I remember Kirk McConnell, who sent an armed service committee who investigated UFOs from 2017 and talked about earlier, but he said that they were picking up ages radar systems. They were picking these objects up from basically from space. And they were shooting down from space all the way down. They'd loiter for as long as they wanted to go in the water, come back out again, shoot back up into space. And they would just do it like, you know, all day long. And there was nothing. Well, we can't see that, right? And someone does have, I mean, if there's someone in the military that does have some like super advanced satellite reconnaissance imagery of these things. I could see why they would hold that back. I could see why they would think that people aren't ready for that. I could see it. Do you think Elon knows? He's real cagey about it. He is cagey about it. And he's got deals with the DoD and he's got satellites. Everything? Probably why. I'd be cagey about it too. He knows more than what he's saying. This is what he said. The aliens are real. They're very subtle. That's what he was saying. I was like, I don't know if they're subtle, man. Phoenix lights wasn't that subtle. That's aliens. I heard from some people around him that because of his contracts with DoD that he kind of keeps quiet about it because I'm sure everybody talks about, I mean, even Ratcliffe talked about the satellite imagery of UAP. I mean, if they're picking it up, why wouldn't his systems picking up? He hasn't said a peep about the drone thing. And you haven't asked him about it? Nope. If you want to tell me he'll tell me I'm not going to be that guy. I'm not going to be annoying. But publicly, like on X, has he said anything about the drones? It's something a couple weeks ago, I believe. I think it was a couple weeks ago. I'll check right now. But it's a bit too much. the publicly like on x as he said anything about the drones it's something a couple weeks ago believe they think it was a couple weeks ago check right now but it's a like there's a big drone storm or big drone fight coming and people are taking that as like he knew this was happening a big drone fight coming well you know he's been real public about the idea that building manned fighter jets at this point kind of foolish you know and he's I think he's correct um you know the unpiloted only yeah I mean I think the fun out of it well it takes the biological mistakes out of it is what it does right it takes the human mind out the human mind is very fallible you know we already know that AI systems like Mike Baker explained to us that AI systems with fighter jets beat actual fighter jet pilots 100% of the time so when they have to simulate yes when they have the simulated dog fights when they take AI fighter jets that we have right now they beat our fighter jet pilots the best of the best 100% of the time so they don't have any biological limitations in terms of what what the deal with change right yes yeah don't you have that right so all you have to do is make the equipment and the materials uh robust enough so they can take insane speeds and not blow apart but it certainly would be way easier to do that than it would be to get a human being to be safe in it so much less badass though so what does he say oh so he clicked on it future wars rob all drones and hypersonic jets so this is us talking about that this is us talking about fighter jet pilots by humans will be destroyed very quickly so he talked about it so he put a clip up of us talking about it on the podcast this is in November, November 28th and so uh neither side is air superiority and tanks are easily destroyed by missiles so that leaves infantry and artillery basically World War I drones are not yet available in sufficient numbers to matter much like aircraft in World War I a defense in depth trench war means and then some monitor example that was like two years ago so did you get the impression when you spoke to Elon about UFOs that he knew more than he was telling you you said he's cagey yeah it doesn't he doesn't he doesn't even entertain the idea of UFOs so if you bring up the favor incident he'll just say no it didn't happen or that doesn't seem interested I don't know I mean I would imagine what you're saying he's true that it's not wise for him to discuss it that's what I would imagine yeah if you want to tell me it'll tell me and if you want to tell no one I'll tell no one yeah if you want to tell me and say don't tell anybody I'll I won't tell anybody but I'm not going to ask him I think his position as you know being the guy at space X yeah why would you fuck around with that he's got too much to stake yeah as way too much to stake yeah also like if anybody's going to find out he's going to find out if there's something going on if something legitimately going on the guy who can catch rockets with a crane he that's the guy he's going to know I thought the first time I saw that I was like AI generate it seems like I was watching the thing I'm down and I just thought that's the ones that land before that those are insane and now you can catch them they don't even have to land it's not like what he's done is just accelerate what we are capable of doing far beyond what NASA was able to do just a few years ago so I used to have a neighbor that worked for Elon Musk and he drove Tesla way early way early on when their testers weren't you know that many out there and I was like well you got to test ladies a gash we were for Elon Musk my mom I saw him a couple years later and I was like hey you know drive and test anymore he goes no he goes I I don't work for Elon anymore I was like oh I'm sorry to hear that what happened he goes he goes well he's he works so hard and his expectations were so high he goes I was at the hospital with my wife giving as she was giving birth to her first child and Elon's like I need you in the oh geez he said he said he goes I could I you know guys got an incredible worth I think work ethic but it was too much he goes I'm at the hospital is I don't care where you're like just work it's like pretty brutal that's brutal wasn't he sleeping in it he was sleeping in the short you know he was sleeping in working 16 hours a day and sleeping on the floor yeah that's commitment well he demands out of other people too and you know maybe you want that maybe you don't and if you don't you can't work there it's just that simple like if you want that hop on in if you're a single guy and you don't have a wife you have children yeah but if you do boy that's not a life for that's not a life for me I don't know what that job I think the closest thing to a spaceship on wheels is the Tesla oh they're amazing pretty remarkable I've had three of them this is my third the acceleration is incredible it's incredible gut punch yeah I mean they're getting better they're getting the autonomous driving is incredible now I remember once somebody said to to me they're like you know step on it you know show me the acceleration and I stepped on it a model three performance and it seems fake I got nauseous yeah I wasn't quite ready I was like I turned myself a little sideways or something I felt nauseous I was like wow all right what is that I was I would do all it sounds like you know but I was like now I prepare myself for that that's really fast super bike fast it's crazy fast and it can actually the beautiful thing is you can merge on the highway and you don't see like a douchebag cuz you don't like bahhhh it's not like really loud just super quiet delty yeah it's all suns going a hundred miles an hour what happened yeah I remember I got to take it years ago on a motorcycle and the guy that bought the bike was we had a lot of exhaust pipe which I ended up getting rid of I didn't like the lot of stuff I'm too loud and I got pulled over and the cop never even saw me he just heard me and he wrote me up exactly how fast I was going he's like you know in nineteen and thirty five I'm like I was he's like oh yeah I could hear you what's like I went through the years and I put it quite so yeah that's quite as nice quite as it's benefits and it does in an motorcycle though you want to be one of the guys too that's true but I drive like the invisible man when I'm on a motorcycle you have to yeah I've had people looking right in the eyes and they pulled right out in front of me people want to you know both sides swiped and also people are like they don't how many people are medicated I don't think they see you as a threat I think they see as like oh you're almost like a that or something I've learned and I tell people that ride Mars I've been riding bikes for 50 years as soon as you get on that bike you become the invisible man right right pretend no one gets handed no one can see you live a lot longer you can make eye contact with somebody doesn't mean they see you right I've had people pull out in front of me like I said I've been t-boned and all kinds of crazy accidents over the years I wish they weren't so dangerous because I would love to drive oh they're amazing you know you just had to be like I said you just you know yeah until you're not I had three friends I was I was getting my motorcycle license yeah I was doing a while ago 10 years so it was a couple of us that worked on fear factor a couple of the guys that worked on set we all decided to go and take lessons together and shout out to Peter Herschel and he wound up getting his motorcycle he kept driving it and but one of the guys we worked with he crashed his bike and fucked up his shoulder and then one of the guys who was fighting for the UFC Frank Mere he got hit by a car he got t-boned and ran into his femur snapped his femur and he almost lost his leg his leg was and it fucked up his career for years so there was that and then I saw a guy on the highway that was covered in a blanket oh god yeah he was alive you can see but his his leg was so fucked up that they covered in a blanket so the passerby's wouldn't rubber neck it there's three of those and then another friend of mine saw someone get hit saw someone get rear-ended someone not paying attention in their car rear-ended a bike and had the guy flying through the air at a red light so that was enough for me yeah I know I became a dad and I had two motorcycles right before I became a dad and I sold them and then after 10 years I was like maybe I could just like a dirt bike because I really enjoy riding I didn't know nothing like it being on a motorcycle so I should be gonna dirt bike and a mountain line takes you out god damn I have a dirt bike with a motor yeah but even with a motor I don't know if a mountain line would be scared of a motor yeah I'd be able to outrun it but yeah the most the time they get bicyclers yeah most of the time they kill bicyclers it's nuts yeah so so let me ask your honest opinion I know we're wrapping up here okay if you had to say whether you believed or you didn't believe and you're looking you can't make any and definitive statements like that but you're very influential individual who's done more for the push for disclosure I hate use the the word disclosure it's got a bit of a bit of a connection to it the push for government transparency on this topic right if you had to say something truly inexplicable that most likely would lead to NHI or non-human intelligence or not conventional what would you pick ultimately that you think there is possibly a non-human intelligence behind this or that there is not I wish I could be definitive like that I know you can't be definitive I don't I just try to stay as open-minded on this as possible which means I fluctuate back and forth to fully believe from fully believing to fully believing it's a military experiment and that it's a bunch of our stuff but then there's stories like the things like the tiktik and where you go okay 2004 how how do they how could they do that in 2004 is there a propulsion system available in 2004 that's that far advanced and if so how come there's so little evidence of it in like in an apractical use like how come that technology you would think that technology would take so much money to develop that you would do something with it in 20 years you wouldn't just have it and just be flying it around like a drone every now and again yeah it would seem like there'd be some sort of a practical application for something like that yeah and it seemed like like the Manhattan project and like the stealth bomber eventually you find out that it's a real thing right so 20 years along to I will not find out that something's real well how about if you take it up to a lot longer than that what about the 1952 two consecutive weekends in July over the White House in the Capitol and that was we had a press conference about that sure I mean in general that basically admit that they're real kind of Arnold you know the total stories phenomenal yeah and then you got to go to the Bhagavad Gita you know like there's stories of things historical stuff's incredible isn't it like think of the guy that showed up with the blue skin is that an angel is that a devil like what if you were living 4,000 years ago you're one of the people that wrote the Dead Sea's role you be a god yeah what is that what is that visitation that you've experienced with a craft it would be yeah it would be right connected with the god right and also the story when you tell the story like what is this it and then someone illustrates it what is even how does it even relay in words especially you're using the words of 4,000 years ago what are you describing and if they really have always been here and they've always been visiting us that's probably how you would describe it you would describe it like Ezekiel did in the Bible yeah you know I was in Africa investigating the alleged landing and close and kind of the third kind it was in Bobway aerial school in 1994 I wasn't there in 94 I was there much later and the teacher Judy Bates who's now they had principal and she was sharing with me these drawings that children did of the alleged creatures and they were amazing these drawings big eyes and big heads arm and shaped eyes blah blah blah and I'm looking at these drawings one after the other from all these school children it was phenomenal and she gave no I took photographs of them and then a month later I went to Australia and I was investigated in a ledge landing that happened at Westall primary school in 1966 and that was that was incredible I was investigating and I was showing some of the drawings of the aliens and I the alleged aliens and I just had investigated in Africa and some of the people were like oh wow these drawings are amazing they look like the one Gina Cave art I was like the what the one Gina Cave art the Aboriginals drew these things and so they pulled it up one Gina and the parallel their thousands of years old right these cave paintings in in Australia the parallels that consistencies the it was the comparison of the two was like let's take a look at those real quick yeah look at one one Gina before we leave cave painting UFO or alien one most likely something there I just don't know and if it's a thing so let's say if it's a real thing is it from another planet or is it more complicated than that is it more complicated than that yeah well that's true yeah very bizarre right I'm looking at the three of them and that the one in the center Jamie yeah that one look how weird that is man that's so fucking weird look at the one with the dark black eyes right there pale they are too it's like yeah it's very weird and then there's that one with the big with the big dark eyes right down just go straight down up down yeah right up to the right right there look at that very weird very weird it's also very weird how this is 4000 years old and then close encounters of the third kind in the 1970s or 1000 years old and I tell him you I could show you the drawings one of the witnesses very weird yeah it's just phenomenal listen man thank you for everything thanks thanks for what you do thank you so much for me on my pleasure the you your fucking dog determination to get this stuff out there it's very important you promise you watch the program I will 100% watch it comment definitely I will I will thank sir awesome brother change James thank you very much thank you it's on Amazon the program and then moment of contact is probably available everyone yeah and the phenomenon yeah I know what I saw out of blue okay 50 years of denial oh my god I goes back yeah you've been you've been deep in this rabbit hole for a long time sir thanks James thank you very much bye everybody