Thank you for doing this. So the similarities between the US and Great Britain are very obvious, often remarked upon. But the one I noticed the most is whenever you talk to people here, they say exactly people in the USA, which is nothing changes. It doesn't matter if you vote for Boris Johnson or Rishi Sunak or Keir Starmer. It was different parties for a labor same result. What is that? Well, I think Tucker, it's basically it's our democracy has gone badly wrong. So what happened is we are the mother of all parliaments and we effectively were the genesis of true democracy. I mean, we get the Greeks for now, but let's just say we are modern democracy. Democracy is scale. If you need a democracy, it was tiny. Yeah, but this is democracy at scale. But they had the right concept, I think. And there's some great philosophers from that era. But I think our parliament was structured so that you had MPs elected by the people, and they were effectively the people's representatives. So the job of parliament was ultimately to put the interests of the British nation first, make decisions that were first of all and above everything else in the interests of the nation. But at the same time, there were internal rivalries about regional competition between each of those MPs to try and do the best for their constituency as well. But most of them were in some way invested in Britain. They were landowners, they were businessmen, they were peers, they were Aristotle aristocrats. They actually had a big shareholding if you like, UK PLC. And I look at prime ministers like Lord Solv'sbury and I look at men who made great decisions. And obviously we can talk about Churchill, we can talk about the great leaders. We can talk about great leaders. But I think what's gone badly wrong, and this is why I've said I have a movement, not a party, to unite common sense thought and to allow those people who share the view you've just outlined that it doesn't matter who you vote for. The smorgasbord of opportunities that you've got at the moment, whether it's the Tories, whether it's Labour, whether it's the Lib Dems, whether it's the Greens, whether it's Scottish National Party, whoever. They're all part of this dying sort of remnant of what was Parliament. So I think we've got to have some form of what in geological terms, rejuvenation and uplift to change the way in which we're governed and make sure that we reempower the MPs, the elected representatives, the people. And we disempower the people who run Parliament, the Quangos, the unelected civil servants who are largely represented by the Permanent Secretary, as many of whom I now see on the public accounts committee. The country, Tucker, is just run by people who don't know which way is up. So we've got a dying body of productive Brits who I have the greatest admiration for, who really fight all this regulation, this red tape, all of the oppression of government, of licensing, of regulations, of rules. They fight their way through all this, not to mention huge taxes which will probably increase dramatically tomorrow in order to basically debit the productive and credit the end of the land. The most extraordinary sort of formula which is doomed to failure. So I think we need the people who ultimately care about the country to rise up now. I don't think the way in which our government is structured is ever going to serve them well. So all they will do is go around crying into their beer about the fact that they voted for, as you say, Rishi Sunak, or they voted for Kia Stama, and they're all the same. There's no real difference. I don't think you're ever stating it. I mean, you'll get their priorities. They're both totally dis- I'm not cider, but I'm just watching this from thousands of miles away, but they seem totally disconnected from the actual country. What happens here? What it looks like, who lives here? They don't seem interested at all. Well, I think what's happened is Parliament, as I say, when it was elected by the people and its interests were aligned with the people. Now, Parliament and the MPs, an MP, and it's about £92,000 a year, something like that. I actually give my salary to charity each month. I give it to a great young of charity. But I think a lot of the MPs need that money. So they've become dependent on that. They've obviously got status as an MP. There's a lot of talk goes on in Parliament. There's a lot of video calls and meetings in room P. All sorts of stuff goes on, and people feel important. But actually, are they delivering to the people? I would argue they're not. So I think we've got to have some form of massive change. And I watch what's happening in the US, and I think we need some help from the US. I think what's happening with Donald Trump and with JD Vance and with Rubio. I mean, you've got some great people who are really trying to change the way things are going. I think I blame you partly for infecting us with this DEI nonsense and all the other stuff that is seeping into the veins of Britain. But I think you've realised that that's not the way forward. That's not how we're going to get the quality of life and the common sense and the logic and the fairness that we used to have. We've got to expunge all that. And the only way we're going to do that is by very strong people standing up and actually affecting change. And I reflect on the US a lot because, as you probably know, there was a man called John Lambert who played a part in the Civil War. Cromwell, Oliver Cromwell is one of my greatest historical heroes. You're a civil war. In the British Civil War. Yeah. And when Cromwell won the Civil War, he said, he always said, if I lose one battle, I lose my head, the King can lose 100 battles and he keeps says, well, he didn't force, he lose a battle and he won the Civil War. And then they had to work out how to govern. And this guy, John Lambert and Henry Artin wrote this paper, which ultimately guided. It was called the instrument of power. And its job was to effectively separate the powers that Cromwell was going to have as law protector and put in the checks and balances, which is what you need in any form of democracy, a proper checks and balances that controls any sort of aggregation of power which can be damaging. You need some power, but you don't want anybody to become omnipotent. And this is an incredible piece of work, which is then used in our Bill of Rights. And then some of it was lifted by your founding fathers, Jefferson Madison Adams and Jerry, who effectively played a big part in writing the US Constitution, which is the best, I think, attempt at setting out a sort of code for governance, which always return power to the individual states and to the individual. Because it's always the individual to get suppressed by the state. And here we've got a state that now accounts for 50% of our GDP. We've got, as I say, all these quangos, unaccountable people who are doing things which are damaging the interests of Britain, aggregating money and influence to themselves, but damaging the interests of those people they're supposed to be serving. You know, they're called civil servants for a reason. That's their job. Christmas season is here, although it's a bit of a cliche, it really is important to keep Christ in Christmas. Should we focus on cookies in presence or on the reason we're doing this, which is Jesus? Obviously, the point is Jesus. That's the whole point. That's the only point. And all the decency and good cheer of this holiday comes from Jesus. The hallowaps pray. 25 challenge reminds us of that. It features Chris Pratt, when Stefani, our friend Jonathan Rumi, and many others, is 25 day challenge guides you through Advent and helps you keep your focus on the true reason for the season. Jesus experienced the nativity story where Jesus brought peace and calm to a world in chaos. That's exactly what we need right now is peace and calm and still. And Jesus is the only one who brings it. Period. Hallowas thousands of prayers and meditations and music can help you connect with God all through Christmas and after, including several Christmas original songs and albums. There's a whole world in how it's like unbelievable. It's changed our family's life. Check it out. You will not regret it. It three months for free at hallow.com slash Tucker experienced greater peace and stillness this Christmas. One of the maybe the biggest factor scrambling every one of these calculations and eliminating the historical knowledge that you just displayed is mass migration. This is very true in the United States as well. It's not just here throughout the West. But what is that? That is the one thing that I notice as a foreigner coming here that does not change regardless of who's in power. Is this constant churn in population, millions of new people? There's never been any indication that native Britons want that. No native Americans. You know, no in the United States wants that. We've gotten it anyway. In my country they used to say we need to do this for economic reasons. We need the labor. They don't say that and we're no one explains why this is happening. Why is it happening here? What's your guess? The essence of immigration is that targeted immigration is good. So if you have a leadership of the country that can identify where skills are short and you can actually attract people who've got those skills, who are going to contribute to the economy and actually... No dentists. Let's import some dentists. Exactly. But you need to have a leadership who's capable of identifying where the shortages are. And that's good immigration. It's targeted. It's small and it basically improves the standard of living and the quality of life for the people in the country. Is that happening here now? No. I was just going to go on to say that what's happened here is it's actually been turned on its head. So what we're doing is we are allowing millions or hundreds of thousands of illegal migrants from different cultures to arrive by boat. And really, since the war, we've also brought in lots of legal migrants who have, in some cases, contributed. But in many cases, they still haven't integrated into what Britain is and what we are in the Christian country. We have our history, we have our roots. And now we've got sort of pools of people from a different culture with a different belief and a different sort of outlook on life. And that's getting worse. So we are now and you're seeing this. We're now seeing our best people leaving Britain. So the rainmakers are leaving in huge numbers now. The non-doms who used to be here are now have been taxed and they're leaving. They don't have to be here. As you know, in the modern world, you can basically do a job from almost anywhere in the world. And what you have to do is create the conditions where people want to live somewhere. And 10, 15, 20 years ago, everybody wanted to be in London. You know, when I was young London was a place to be because it was deregulated, it was fun. You know, people actually could generate wealth. You didn't have too much oppressive regulation and statism. And gradually it's been strangled a bit like Gulliver. So I think a lot of people and a lot of my friends are leaving, they're going to live in Dubai. They're going to live in the land they're going to live in. Bonne Nogre. Could be Montanigre. Could be, could be all Mauritius. It could be all Mauritius. Anyway, we just sent a whole lot of English money out to Mauritius. I mean, they're getting tax cuts out there. So you know, we've given the Chegos Islands away when we didn't need to. We've sort of, I think, per places. Mauritius is an island in the Indian Ocean far, far, far away. Mauritius is an island in the Indian Ocean, but the Chegos Islands, basically a lot of chagossians living crawly here. And they didn't want us to, they didn't want to be part of Mauritius. What's happened is Kia's stama and herma and Philip Sans, this sort of bunch of human rights lawyers. You know, in honor of the history, we actually paid Mauritius some money in 1963 when we gave her independence. So she had no claim on the Chegos Islands. Arguably, arguably the Seychelles and the Maldives have a big acclaim on the Chegos Islands. There were 1300 kilometers away from Mauritius. But these human rights lawyers have indulged their fantasies and at the expense of the British tax per, I mean, we don't quite know what the numbers is somewhere between 18 and 30 billion over the next 90 years. We've literally handed that to Mauritius who've now given a tax cut to their citizens on the back of it. Have you committed a lot of atrocities in Mauritius? No. Why would you owe them those? No. It's a dollar. But the Diego Garcia base, which was... No, I know the actual choice. So, but the Chegosians, a lot of them live in crawly here. So, you know, they didn't want the deal to happen. They basically don't like the Mauritians. But if you take three steps back, like why would you do they would only do that if you hate yourself? There's no potential for gain at all for you, your children, your country. What is that? Well, I think a lot of them do dislike what Britain was. I think they have this sort of hatred of colonial Britain, which... I mean, if you have a hatred of any form of colonialism, you have to have a hatred of the Belgian sort of colonization of the Congo. And the EU empire or the prime minister. And we have France's occupation of North Africa. So, I mean, I'm not allowed to pay Africa to this day. They do. No, they do. They do. Absolutely. But I think... No, Britain may have done some things that weren't great. But on the whole, we've, I think, been a force for good. We've left, you know, sound legal systems in India. We've done good things, not bad things. We've voluntarily ended the slave trade. You know, we actually cost us a lot of money. The British Navy was used to police, the cessation of the slave trade. So I feel very proud of Britain. I love Britain. And I think these people, these human rights lawyers, I actually despise them, Tucker. I think they're the enemy of Britain. And I don't understand what motivates them. So that's it. It's clearly not a hatred of colonialism because Africa has been colonized at a scale never before seen by China. And they won't say a single word about that. I mean, colonialism will never end the weak dominating the strongest to feature of life. It's sad, but it's just, that's what it is. They're not mad about that. They're only mad about the West. But in the end, history will tell you that we always return to real polity. And real polity is basically power, power ultimately dictates what happens. Of course. And as you say, that's happening. China is very cleverly positioning herself, you know, in countries which are struggling for money, obviously in Africa. I mean, her tentacles are going almost everywhere. And I think China in a way is an extraordinary economy because you've got this extraordinary relationship between communism and their capitalism which Deng tried to introduce, which has generated a sort of class of people who, and the Chinese are, in surprising people who have generated wealth. But then you've also got this communist block. And I visited when I was a channel of South Hamptel, I visited Qingdao where we were South Hamptel's twinned with Qingdao. And it's an extraordinary sort of relationship. So very much the capitalist is effectively in hawk to the communists. So they control everything. And if you look what happened to Jack Maar, he built an incredibly successful business in Alibaba. So I think that their blend of communism capitalism, which if you dig deep, all their state aid enterprises are incredibly indebted and almost bankrupt. So I don't think her model is sustainable. Meanwhile, she's generated a huge amounts of foreign exchange from effectively, if you like, she's undercut a lot of the Western capital capitalists in solar panels and in other things. And she's running huge trade surfaces, even if internally her finances aren't great. So I don't think her model is a sound model. I think she is actually quite a dangerous influence. I think bears a very long memory. She never forgets what's been done to her in the past. And I read an interesting book the other day by Colin Thubron called the Amo River. I don't know if you've read about the Amo River. It runs through Mongolia. And it's the history of the relationship between Russia and China. It's a very good book to read, but she never forgets when people breach treaties. It may not happen tomorrow, but it's logged and she remembers. So opium tour. And we've done a few things. We've done a few things. She went to light historically. So I think we've got to be very wary of China. I'm in favor of basically liberating what I see as one of the best and most creative economies in the world, which is Britain. And if we can cut away all of the regulations, and when I was young and I worked in the city, London was the almost the primary center. We had the Euro bomb market. We had a hugely powerful stock market. You know, we were raising money away for people all over the world, everybody wanted to be in London. Gradually the regulatory, and again, you have to blame Tony Blair for a lot of this stuff. A lot of the regulatory legislation that was called the financial services market after 2000, that basically tied the city down and it started this over regulation, which is meant that London is now a shadow. It's for myself. We don't have a position. I mean, now's Dackers flown on the back of London's failure. You still have a much more capitalistic approach to your financial markets. Oz are now so regulated that they've become arguably more interested in protecting the value of people's pensions and they have in matching risk capital with entrepreneurs, which is what they should be doing. They feminized your finance. No, I've watched. So what is the British economy now? Well, I think the British economy is in pretty bad shape. I mean, I don't even know what it is. I mean, I thought it was manufacturing, obviously, greatest manufacturing power in the world and the greatest goods in the world. Still, like 100 years later, that's remarkable how well they're made. Well, it's a service industry a lot of it as you know. Okay, and Jimmy Goldsmith talked about this. I mean, Jimmy Goldsmith, great man. He saved the pan through the re-rendering party web. The other party's promised. He doesn't ever get enough credit for it. So he spoke very well about this and it was happening in the 90s already when we were outsourcing our manufacturing to cheap labor countries. He forecast what would happen, which is that we would become a dependency culture rather than a culture of innovation. Because actually, when you've got your factories in different parts of the world, it's there that the innovation takes place. It doesn't take place in the consuming nations. So I think what's happened is we've gradually been party or our leaders have to closing down our economy, damaging the interests of the British people. But the British people are still incredibly creative. I have every faith in their ability if they're cut free. But they've got to be cut free pretty quickly, Tucker. I mean, our view is if we haven't done it by 29, it could be too late. But you also have elections until 29. Because you're not much time. There's not much time. It certainly feels that way. We're sorry to say it, but this is not a very safe country. Walk through Oakland or Philadelphia. Yeah, good luck. So most people, they think about this want to carry a firearm and a lot of us do. The problem is there can be massive consequences for that. Ask Kyle Rittenhouse. Kyle Rittenhouse got off in the end, but he was innocent from the first moment. He was obvious on video and he was facing life in prison anyway. That's what the anti-gun movement will do. They'll throw you in prison for defending yourself for the firearm. And that's why a lot of Americans are turning to Burma. It's a proudly American company, Burma. Makes self-defense lawn sures that hundreds of law enforcement departments trust. They've sold over 600,000 pistols, mostly to private citizens who refuse to be empty-handed. Those pistols and I have one fire rock hard kinetic rounds or tear gas rounds and pepper projectiles and they stop a threat from up to 60 feet away. They're no background checks or no waiting periods. Bernoucant ship it directly to your door. You can't be arrested for defending yourself with a burnup pistol. Visit burnupbyrna.com or your local sportsman's warehouse to get your stay. Bernoucant.com. And they're continuing, by the way, to change the population dramatically every year. So the calculation changes every year as does the culture, etc. But I don't think you have an election. I think labor's in charge until 29 unless I'm missing. Labor's in charge until 29. But I think the Achilles heel there possibly is the economy. So you talked about what is the British economy. The British economy is, as you know, as the American economy was relied on something I hate called quantitative easing, which is basically getting higher on your own suppliers. It's basically what third-world dictators used to do shortly before their counts is to send it into chaos. But because you've got this sort of manufacturing taking place in one part of the world and the consumption and other part of the world, they've been able to get away with it so far. But it's still further hollowed out productive Britain. So I'm very worried about our level of debt. We're looking at a level of debt of around 100% of our GDP. Our civil service pensions are off-balance sheet and there's another, we don't know, the exact number is somewhere between three and five trillion, maybe a bit more, which is probably 200% of GDP. That's not even on the balance sheet. We have this accounting system called Oscar 2, which I think is probably delusional in that it leaves off chunks of liability and probably enhance these chunks of the asset side of the balance sheet. So I think we're delusional. I'm just waiting for our currency to collapse. And I think when you say there's not an intellectual 29, we have the budget tomorrow where Rachel Reeves who seems to believe that she can tax herself into wealth and prosperity, which nobody's ever done in history before when I search. That's Rachel Reeves. She's our chancellor of the Exchequer. So what's her background, pretty impressive person? Well, she's very seriously. She's Rachel from accounts or Rachel from complaints or she told a few pork is about her CV, which she seems to have got away with that, added a number of other labor MPs. Apparently it's okay to embellish your CV these days and nobody seems to care. But she's not aware of any material accomplishments in her past. Very, very few. I mean, she's not qualified to be doing what she's doing, but she's an incredibly, she's incredibly arrogant, I think. There's a blend of arrogant and arrogant and ignorance, which is always dangerous. We have that in our country. So I think that the Achilles heel is if the economy starts to really go into reverse, which I think from my businesses, we're beginning to see orders slow. The sort of carryover from the COVID in money injections and from what the Tories did in their latter days, which kept the economy going to some extent. Although Britain's growth has been sporadic for a hell of a long time now. So if we start to see a challenge to our ability to finance our deficits and you probably saw, I mean, our deficit is just out of control. So it's going up every year. And in the end, if you have a deficit, you've got to finance it. I always think the definition of credit is suspicion of sleep. So in the end, people who borrow or fund our debt by our gilts, if you like, at the moment they demand a premium in terms of income over other people's debt, so the US debt or German debt. So eventually what they do is they decide they don't want to buy that debt. And then you can't fund yourself and then you have a funding crisis, a bit like we had in the mid 70s. In those days we went to the IMF and we got the IMF to bail us out. I'm not sure that the IMF would come and bail us out at the moment because I don't think an economy which basically robs the productive to fund the indolent and to fund welfare. I don't think the IMF would put up with that. Well, I'm confused. So you're describing a country on the very brink of bankruptcy and solve it. I think we're very close to it. But you're still importing hundreds of thousands of people every year as asylum seekers as if you're a global empire that can just like spend money with. I don't call them asylum seekers because the majority of them aren't their economic migrants. But whatever they are. So that's a big difference because of course. But I don't even understand how my country's in solving also. So I'm not just speaking of Britain. But I don't understand how any cramps is probably worse than us if it's any consolation tucker. But I'm not really interested in race first. France is Europe's Mississippi. You can always point to them and say it's worse. But I don't understand how any country that's on the brink of not being able to serve its own people can decide to serve the world. I just don't get that. Well, this is where we're delusional because we are our own houses and in order and we spend our lives worrying about what's happening everywhere else, including sending vast amounts of money overseas and overseas aid. I mean, we're the countries that a lot of these people are coming from. We're sending them aid. I mean, Pakistan, for instance, I think we send 130 billion, 130 million pounds a year to Pakistan. Why? Just one example. You tell me. And a lot of the people are coming from Pakistan. So I think it's just the people in Pakistan. So do they get a kick like Lattadeemperors who used to travel around the world, dishing hing out sort of cash? I think it gives them a lot of pleasure to think that they are these important people dishing out money we haven't got. Does anyone in London ever go to Switzerland and the winner to ski or the south of France in the summer to relax? I know they do. Do they notice all the Ukrainians, the Hermes store using their money to buy handbags for 50 grand? Like does anyone ever know that? I think people have noticed the Ukrainian money that's flying into Monaco in particular. Exactly. So the number of Ukrainian registered porsches in porsches, Astons, whatever, in Monaco is massive. This is a country in the middle of a four year long existential war. You would think people would be poor, but they're richer than ever. Not the people of Ukraine, but the people buying Aston Martin's in Monaco and spending $10,000 on dinner and course of all, that money is your money. Does anyone bear? You and I know that some people make a lot of money out of war. War works for some people. But it's not usually funded by other people's taxpayers. War profiteers are a feature of every war, of course. But this is this kind of weird war where I'm hoping it looks like there's some hope that there's been a breakthrough today on that front. I mean, I feel for the young men who are on both sides who are... Definitely agree. We need to see losing their lives a bit like in our first world war. We lost relations in the first and second world war. But I mean, those people, if they looked Britain today or they looked at America today, would they be prepared to give their lives as they did so valiantly in the trenches in Europe and Gallipoli and other parts of the world. And many of them, some of them American people. Including the motives of mine. Yes, absolutely. So would they feel comfortable? I'm not sure they would. And I think the... I've always thought that an important element of what made certainly the US and the UK successful was this prosthetic, this ethic of working hard, of contributing, of being part of something which is basically driven in order to create a better community. And I think we've lost that ethic. And we've now lost sight of what we are somehow... we've got to get that back. And if we don't get that back, I don't think... I don't think the outcome is very optimistic. I think it's not going to be good news. How do you get that back? Well, we're trying with the restore Britain. We see a movement as being the key. So in the only way to, I think, show the sclerotic dying organs of power that they need to change what they're doing is for... to I think show the sclerotic dying organs of power that they need to change what they're doing is for a mass movement to grow spontaneously which we are seeing. I mean our social media recently has gone stratospheric and I think people can see that we are trying our best to highlight the deficiencies in part. That's why it's so important to be in parliament because we're able to actually from inside expose exactly how deficient it all is. And then with social media and thanks to Elon Musk, we actually have now got I think a far better, three or more functional platform to get the message of what's happening out. And actually as you know transparency is the best cleanser of any system, a transparent sort of look at what's going on which is why very often a lot of these administrations try and keep things as closed down as possible. I'm always a great believer in if it's transparent and open it usually functions a lot better. So I mean look we haven't got long to do this and I think the people if they agree with us need to now show that they agree and actually do something about it. And I say to my friends that they've had life too good, they have they have leveraged off the back of the people who did fight in the war who did create this post-war respect for the US for the UK for the winners for the Anglo-Saxon sort of alliance. And in that I obviously include New Zealand and Australia and India to some extent other parts of the world who fought for freedom. So I think we've got to stand up and be counted. I don't think we can all sit back and think it's going to be okay and it's somebody else's problem. It's going to be everybody's problem soon. December's already here. Like it was just some of the other day your life is moving fast as always. There's lots to keep track of between Christmas, family, giving presents, keeping up with your regular life. Times like these are a moment of peace become essential. They're the chance to recharge. That's why we love cozy earth. If you're thinking about who deserves a gift that will help them actually relax then cozy earth has you covered bamboo sheets. Are the gift of better sleep? They're actually made from bamboo. They don't feel like it though. They're wild. Very soft. They keep you cozy without overheating and they help you sleep several degrees cooler than you would with other materials. Their blankets make the perfect cozy gift with its textured bubble design and software feel it is perfect for reading by the fire, staying warm in a cabin in the woods. Every single cozy earth product comes with a hundred night sleep trial and a ten year warranty. Every day luxury at a decent price cozy earth.com is the address. Use the code Tucker of up to 40% off order by December 12 for Christmas delivery. After the 12 the code Tucker will still work year round for 20% off. And by the way if you get a post purchase survey mentioned the heard about cozy earth from this show. Some of what's happening here is so humiliating and it's designed to be humiliating, taking migrants and giving them better lodging, better conditions than native born Britons many of whom are poor. That almost seems designed to infuriate people. It's too unfair. I wonder does it stay peaceful to respond to that? Well you hope it stays peaceful and legal. And again in response to the migrants of course they shouldn't be allowing these people. I mean we're quite clear they should be detaining and they should be deporting all illegal migrants. They are economic migrants. They might be not a sign and seek as they're traveled through safe countries. They have no reason to be here. And they should be detained and deported straight away. And I think then we turn our attention to people who have been brought here legally, who aren't contributing to the country. They also need to be looked at and we need to decide how they work. And then we also need to look at the 9 million people of working age who aren't contributing to our society. They've been told it's okay to have mental health issues. It's okay to stay at home not work. 9 million non working or non million people. We also have these schemes like motorbility. I mean the whole country is basically a fraud if you look at it. So you know these people get motor cars I think I'm writing saying 13% of new car registrations is motorbility which basically... I'm ignorant of what you're saying. What is it? Motorbility is like a sort of scheme. So if you've got if you've taken off boxes you get a car paid for by the taxpayer, three name drivers, all the insurance and every three years you change the car. I mean the whole thing is complete nonsense. You get a new car every three years? Yeah my friends buy old motorbility, motorbility vehicles when they've been used by these people who are on benefits. So no I look Tucker there's a lot wrong and we have to have a society Britain voted for a Britain. The British people voted in 2016 despite the fact the government advised them not to but they voted to take back their sovereignty from the European Union. They voted for a British nation state right. The nation state's job is to protect the interests of its electorate, its tax payers, its people who live here, who contribute have contributed historically, who basically fill in their tax reform right the check, work every hour, God gives, try and bring their families up and try and lead good lives. That's what we should be rewarding. We should not be rewarding an indolent, lazy culture but as you probably know the socialist sort of view of life often benefits from a dependency culture because the people who are on dependency tend to vote for more dependency and this is why I think danger in the budget tomorrow is that Rachel Reeves does lift the two child caps at the moment. If you're on benefits there's a two child cap for then if she's intending to lift that and she's then intending to raise the taxes on productive Britain who can't afford to probably have more than two children so they can pay for people who aren't working who won't have more than two children. So the whole thing is completely arse about face and I don't know how long it can go on before people do lose their temper. Hopefully they will join restore Britain and give us the platform to be able to lobby for change and to affect change now. I don't think we've got time to wait and I do think if the economic conditions turn down very badly we will be forced into an election at some stage and maybe before 29. That's the Achilles hit on the election. Where's the fierce island spirit that allowed Britain to rule the world? That is a very good question. I think. I'm just being... No, I think it's a very fair question and I wonder. I mean has everybody had life too good? Are they prepared to stir their stumps and actually contribute because there's no way that a few valiant people are going to be able to live this. This has to be a mass movement of the entirely it has to be spontaneous movement. I think it is happening. I think it's beginning. I think we can see through our social media we can see that people are concerned and I don't think it's a big jump from being concerned to actually doing something about it. But how can your average Britain allow its government to arrest people for saying naughty words on social media thousands of people every year thousands? Well, can they allow that? Why don't they surround parliament like lifted off its foundations or something seriously? Well, as you and I know free speech is the absolute key to a functioning democracy. You've created it. We created free. We created free. And it's so important to everything. And we recently had a debate in parliament because with our membership now we can weaken. There's an empowerment. You can have a debate or force a debate in Westminster Hall with 100,000 signatures on an e-petition. So to your point, there's the best example of this is probably Lucy Connelly who was caught up in the Southport in the whole sort of emotional upheaval of the Southport killings where three young girls were stabbed to death. And I think the country spontaneously reacted. Let Labour say it was some sort of right wing planned. Only right wingers objectically. It's not. It was a spontaneous reaction across the country. So Lucy Connelly posted something ill advice, but I'll be you know, she deleted it three hours later. Obviously after the heat had gone out of it, she said that the people did this came from a migrant hostel, but she went prison for 30 weeks. I think it was 30 weeks. I think something like that bit more than that bit more. So she, but she came we we we we we host her in parliament. No. No. I get death threats, Tucker. And we report it to the police. I got eight death threats in the last three months. And we report it to the metropolitan police and the square root of nothing happens. So I would have thought we were making death threats is far more far more dangerous than people posting something in the heat of the moment on social media that they then they then redact. But you remember a parliament on a member of parliament. Yeah. And you get death threats and I we get death threats on social media. But they took your guns away. Well, I was that was because reform for some extraordinary reason politically assassinated me. And made some false witness statements that that I had Muhammad's ear, Roodyn, Yusuf said that I had threatened him in a meeting which was palpable rubbish and that I stood over him and I was threatened to hit him. Well, I'm 68 and he's 38. So that's a bad idea to start with. And it just didn't happen like that. So, you know, at the end of the day we had a debate about great young life and my branch office and great young life no more in the WhatsApp chain proved it. But he gave this witness statement and then Leanderson gave a witness statement to say that I was was going around parliament saying I was a very fine shot and I was going to shoot serious if well, as a result of which the metropolitan police arrived more pounded and took my guns away. It took me about five months to get them back. So, look, and they also suggested I had early onset dementia, which was again pretty unpleasant thing to do. Do they have any evidence? I don't think I've got early onset dementia, not around where, but I obviously, you know, those people who do have it, it's a pretty horrific thing to hold. Of course it is. And if I did have it and they'd said that it would be more unpleasant. I hope I haven't got it. I hope I haven't got it. You know, anyway, so we again, unfortunately I'm able to fund the legal costs required. I was able to go on the attack. And I think, you know, what they did was just morally and in every other way wrong. But this country, it's authorities can issue up and take your guns without producing a conviction putting you on trial, proving you did anything wrong. They can do anything wrong. I mean, it is going badly wrong. But I think that's probably a symptom of the fact yeah, we've lost our way. People aren't as principled as they used to be. And ultimately it's a function of statism. I mean, it used to happen in the Soviet Union when you get when you get central planning and you get stars you like behavior. Yes. You get little people making maligned decisions behind closed doors and damaging the interests of the good people. So I always say in Russia when the USSR that the qualification you needed to best survive was to be a very good liar. And I think as a result of that, you know, your entire fabric of your society starts a full apart, which is what happened with them. Nobody takes any responsibility and then what was it a generation and a half later, the whole thing imploded. But on the way, a lot of people died and a lot of people had a pretty hellish life. Not least one of my favorite characters, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, who I think made some very meaningful comment about people being free and equal and free or not equal and not free, whichever way you want to look at it. So he made some great comments. So certainly did. I think we are suffering from too much central planning, too much statism and too many small people in positions of influence. Last question. I look at what's happening in Ireland and I know complicated relationship between the two countries. But what's happening to Ireland with mass migration is basically identical to what's happening here in Great Britain. And it's also happening on Australian Canada and the US. It's so close, like almost precise. It's the same template that cannot be in it. Like, what is that? What are the forces pushing that? Well, I think we have to ask ourselves why did the post-war elite think that this experiment with multiculturalism was a good idea? Yes. And I don't think any of them have ever really answered that question. I think obviously, Ireland is a function of what's happening here. I mean, you obviously got the wretched Northern Ireland protocol, which moved into the Windsor agreement, which is shocking division of the United Kingdom, which effectively was, if you like, sacrificed on the altar of Brexit. But on the multiculturalism, again, this goes to you probably know we've got a big... Peter, you just said, because I think I want the question to hang in there. Why did the post-war elite, I think I'm quoting you, decided that this multiculturalism experiment was a good idea? I don't know. I think it's a thoroughly bad idea. I like... So obviously... States who interface with each other, who respect each other, who respect each other's culture, and who basically interface with each other like that to try and create this. And again, does it go to the world economic forum? Is it the Bilder-Bergers? Is it the Council on Foreign Relations? Look, where does the truth lie? I mean, I find it probably like you do incredibly difficult to work out where the truth lies often in our modern age. Most people want to live a healthy life-centered around their community and their family, and they want to be able to wake up in the morning and feel that they've done the right thing by everybody. But it does seem that there is this malign agenda to break down families, to break down communities, to create this multicultural world, where I guess arguably a small global elite are able to exert undue influence on how everybody else leaves their lives. That's the only solution I can come up within my limited intellect, but it doesn't add up. It doesn't make sense. Honestly, it doesn't. And I remember hearing people 30 years ago hint that there were some multinational or pan-global conspiracy from the group she just mentioned and thinking this is obviously a mentally ill person talking. And now you just watch the accumulated evidence is overwhelming. This is not organic. It's not the product of democracy. Not in the interest of our country. It's not in the interest of your country. And no one says. Not in the interest of Ireland and none of the electorate want it. So how are we getting it all at the same time? Well, it's a very good question, Tucker. I just don't know the answer to that, but what I do know is the people who care about it happening need to now coalesce and actually start to show those people who are perpetrating this on us. They don't want it. And if that means that they get turfed out of power, that's what's got to happen. We've got to turf them out of power and make common sense prevail. It's common sense we're lacking everywhere. But I think there are, as I said, there are some signs that in the US, people are beginning to address it and people are beginning to take action. But it's like walking through glue, isn't it? I mean, there's this malign power base that doesn't lie down very easily. And it's always there waiting to pounce again. Thank you very much. We're perfect talking to me. That was great. Pleasure. Christmas is back. And so is our merchandise shop at TCN visit TuckerCrossin.com to see what we have to offer. And it's awesome. Everyone is a long list of people who need to shop for this Christmas. Our new line can help you brighten the day with gifts they will actually love. Not the kind of going to throw away. Well, thank you for but not mean it. Actually good stuff that's great for everybody. Ornaments, wrapping paper, Christmas sweaters for real. The TCN shop has everything you need dozens of news styles and designs perfectly gift giving and spreading the Christmas spirit. That's TuckerCrossin.com. Look, you have the very best Christmas.