[Music] We have like probably 60 accounts from academic journals reported by archaeologists, reported by universities, even presented and displayed at universities. Even in the Smithsonian's own annual reports, there's 17 accounts of 7 to 8ft tall skeletons being found. 7 to 8 foot though, that's not like that's not huge. That that could be that that could be easily explainable with some of like the the gigantism things that people have to do. There's people in the NBA who are 78 foot tall. That's true. That's true. But none of them had gigantism. That's the thing. None of them. They're all perfectly formed and it was just normal that height. That was the normal height. Preine Mohan when he was on the podcast he was showing us articles that were from the New York Times from the like early 1900s maybe late 1800s of I think it was like 15 to 18 foot giants. You do get a few reports like that. Yeah. Yeah. We got a few in our accounts in the New York Times of all places. Oh yeah. I mean our book is like you know there's so many accounts in proper newspapers. Mhm. you know, not just some fly by night publications like, you know, Washington Times, all that kind of thing, Washington Post and all that. Even in Britain as well, we have the same thing. It's all over the world really. But there's little evidence. It's all vanished, right? You know, very little, especially here, especially with NAGPRA. Mhm. So, you got nothing left to really kind of prove a point. So, maybe this is a good opportunity to give your give your uh explain to people what your background is and how you got into all this stuff. Okay, cool. Who are you? Yeah. Yeah. Who am I? Who the hell are you? Hugh Newman. Yeah. My name's Hugh Newman. I'm a researcher, author, explorer from England. I live right near Stonehenge in Wiltshire, which is a very interesting scary place to live in some cases. Why is it scary? And well, we have we live it's very we live next to a burial mound. Okay. You get them there as well, not just North America. We live next to seven burial mounds, in fact. and we have weird activity, paranormal stuff going on in our house. It's pretty freaky. Yeah. But my my main area of research really is away from there. I mean, I've been focused on Britain for a long time, but actually I'm fascinated by what's going on in southeast Turkey. That's where it's all happening. I mean, you got Carahan, you got Sab, you got like dozens of sites now are being reported over there that go back nearly 12,000 years. That's where I'm focused on now. That's my kind of I got I got my little book out. I got a bigger book coming out with my partner JJ Ains's work. This is your little book. That's a little book. Yeah. Gorgeous little book. Yeah. Look at that. Geekly and Carahan. It's even got the uh the foil to the letter. So it's like holographic. Yeah. It's very pretty. Very very pretty. Adorable. Adorable. Adorable little wooden book. Yeah. It's one of a series that the publisher puts out. So, uh, but yeah, we're working on a bigger one, a bigger book with my partner JJ Ainsworth, going deeper into the whole story of what is known now as the Taz Tempella culture, which means stone hills in kind of, you know, translated from Turkish, but actually it's more like sacred stone hills, like the sacred burial, you know, sacred areas where these structures and um, you know, complexes were being built um, over in southeast Turkey, all around all around the city of Shannura. That's pretty much where it's all happening. Have you actually been to Glow Buckley Taboo? I've been many times. Yeah. Yeah. I've been going for like 10 or 11 years. U Yeah, I've been there. Yeah. I mean, it's been it's been known since about 2000, but it was really started to be excavated in the mid 1990s, but it was actually kind of partly discovered in 1963, you know, by some American ar, but they didn't recognize for what it was, so they didn't really dig there. So, what what do you think it was? Geekly um itself is a major megalithic complex. I mean I I believe that it was like uh you know a whole kind of change in consciousness was taking place at the end of the last ice age. This was within 200 years of the younger dus kind of ending. So the weather had improved. It feels like a groups coming in from the south and the tufians. You got groups coming in from the north and coming in through Anatolia all kind of met and kind of like decided we things things had changed now we're going to we're going to monumentalize what we know and put it into stone and like and they did it in a profound initative innovative manner. It was unbelievable because this is like you look at the stone circles in Britain you know they're the kind of rough hume stones mostly just placed in circles or or different slightly different geometries. Here they were doing that to another level. They were carving every stone precisely beautifully with 3D reliefs on them with abstract symbols, abstract human forms, anthropomorphic figures, fingers on them. Fingers. Yeah. Belts. Little bags. That's right. Yeah. And uh strange V-necks with like almost like pendants as well. This is I mean it's just out there. I mean it's like just the it seems like it must have come from somewhere. this remarkable kind of culture just I call I call it like the world's first super civilization because there's actually about they now think although they say there's officially 12 sites which include carahan seir and all these others they're now saying there could be 38 sites but then another one of the archaeologists said there could be nearly a hundred going in this whole area across southeast Turkey based on what what what makes them think there could be a hundred well they they keep finding all these all these uh surface artifacts you know because most of these sites It's appeared to be buried at the Can't they use lidar? They I think they have done. Yeah, I think they have done. But it's mainly kind of rocky terrain. So I think it's harder to get liar penetrating. Think you can get it through trees and see what's on the surface, but not not so much just dirt rock is a bit troublesome. I think they've done GPR of a lot of places now though. So they're going to get that's what they ground penetrating radar. Yeah. So they kind of work out what's going on beneath there to see if it's worth investigating. Now what is the modern consensus of when it was constructed? The gobeci tpillars goly officially dates to 9,600 BC or 11,600 years ago. That's the earliest date although it stretches you know according to the date that's the earliest earliest but that's currently cuz only like small percentage has been actually uncovered so far. So there's actually what five to seven maybe 8% has been uncovered. Right? Because my understanding of it was that it was intentionally buried to preserve it from some sort of cataclysm and meaning that it could have been constructed before some big cataclysm or some big flood if the younger dus was really what it people think it is. Yeah. I mean, the thing about it being deliberately buried, that's uh that's being kind of challenged actually cuz that's what Claus Schmidt, he was the the main archaeologist, the original head archaeologist there along with um um another guy as well, Helman he was called. Um and he proposed that it was deliberately buried. And this is a tradition you find in that part of the that part of the world where they bury sites at the end of their use. They used them for a thousand or 2,000 years. But recent research done by the archaeologists there, they found that the enclosures that have been uncovered, you know, excavated, there's been like some kind of slope slide kind of where the debris has fallen down into it over years and years and years, you know, middens and rubbish and other things build up and some of it kind of filled in some of it like that. But then it's pretty much now believed that some of it was was then buried afterwards because there's obvious repair work done. M they've repaired it, put stuff back in place and like put put it everything where it should be, even artifacts and statues and things like this and then it's kind of covered over and so I don't see how a slope slide would not just knock things out of place, you know. So it seems like there's a bit of both. Bit of slope slide and a bit of burying. But Carahanepe that was deliberately buried. They've proven that now. Oh, they've proven it was deliberately buried. Yeah, there's a cuz Kahanepe the one that Ben Vancer was showing me where it it looked like they performed lots of sacri human sacrifices there. Sacrifices. My god. Really? Oh no. Um I I don't know. I'm not sure. He was showing me a place in Turkey cuz he recently went to Turkey and he was saying he was My audio sounds really weird. Do you know Do you hear that, Steve? Is it just me? It's just your sexy voice, man. That's it's just in my head. Huh. All right. Um Well, here we got Carahan. Yeah. These are the This is Khan. Okay. He was showing me one site in Turkey. Maybe that one down below on the B. Yeah. Right there. Yeah. That looked like there was a place where they would cut people's heads off and the blood would like flow through like a little Yeah. You got a channel actually. Yeah. A channel. Yeah. For blood. Next to the one on the left there next to what's called the pillar shrine or structure AB where you've got like you know these it's carved out of bedrock that by the way. Completely carved out bedrock. Yeah. And then and apart from one only one of them is a freestanding pillar. The the rest of these phallic shaped pillars a car from bedrock but there's a channel leading into it. So some people have suggested it's either for water it's for sacrifice. I mean they found there's a site called Chanu which is near Dia which is further north. that dates to around 8,400 BC where they think they've actually found human hemoglobin and uh animal blood, you know, particles on top of this slab which looks like a sacrificial slab. So, some so some people are saying that's what B was showing me. It could be for that. U some people are saying it's going on here as well, but there's no real evidence of exactly what they were doing, but you never know. It could have been some weird dark stuff they were up to for sure. But there's certainly um certainly something special going on, especially because it's so old. I mean I mean this is like 6 or 7,000 years before Stonehenge, you know, like same as old. It's that age difference with the pyramids as well. And yet the sufficient Stonehenge was supposedly when uh early earliest phase officially around 2,500 to 30,000 BC. So around the same time as the pyramids thing pretty much. Yeah. I mean, there are some older elements in the area around Stonehenge like Blickme and and the wooden post holes that go back 10,000 years, but they're not not megalithic construction. But yeah, this pillar shrine thing is really interesting. I mean, it's got it's quite bizarre. It's got like a port hole stone carved out of the bedrock, almost like a hole going through to the main enclosure, which is a 75 foot wide enclosure, like a stone circle, but it's more kind of elliptical shape. Uh it's actually a very specific geometry and actually yeah down there the uh that image there that's that's pretty good one. Um you got various ones. Uh not that one. Um there's one with the pillar shrine. Um yeah if you type in uh if you actually type in Carahan winter solstice um that'll come up with our article we did. Um and it shows some good images but there's yeah see on the this is our stuff here. So, we we found this uh weird alignment on the winter solstice, myself and JJ Aworth. That's the article. Yeah. The first one we did. And we we accidentally turned up there. We got kind of in a little bit of trouble. We had to go the next morning because officials were going to come in and throw us out, possibly arrest us and this that and the other. And uh so we had to go the first thing in the morning on the 20th December 2021. And you can see if you go to the top of that page, you can see that this blade of light kind of or a bit further down. This blade of light kind of hit was hitting the face. This head, you see this heads coming out of the side. What is that? It's like carved out of the bedrock. This head with this serpentine neck with a V-neck thing. Where where is it? It's just on the right there. If you go down a bit, you can see some other images. Um, what is that line going through this diagonally? That's that's the that's where the winter solstice sunrise Oh, hits the head. So, you're just sort of illustrating like where it shines. Yeah. If you go down a bit, you can actually see um a couple more images. Hopefully, the one there should be. And um maybe it's in the video. Oh, that's where it goes through the main enclosure. Yeah. Then goes through that little hole. And this is perfectly winter solstice. Weird. It's perfectly winter solstice. And it hits this head. And there's light. That's it there. And so the light moves around. It hits the head then moves around the head for 45 minutes. So it's it's perfectly aligned to the winter solstice. It's pretty crazy. And um so that kind of blew our mind because that proves their understanding of solar astronomy nearly 12,000 years ago or at least 11,400 years ago which is the age of uh Carahantepe. And so that and the fact you can go there now and you can see it on the witness socks as it happens. You can watch the light move around the head like from here, this side of the head all the way around here and it's pretty epic. We've actually got um you know time lapses of it and things like this. And so that proves there's a sophistication about these sites and there's astronomy related to these sites. Um that's kind of what the head looks like after it's fully illuminated. Wow. Um but it's pretty pretty weird. I mean I mean that's three times the size of a human head carved out of bedrock. It's got like a flat top. It's got an open mouth. And the eyes, this was actually like straight. Well, apparently cuz Graeme Hancock and Neshme Carral, who's the head archaeologist, went in the pillar shrine where structure AB here when they were filming the first series of ancient apocalypse, look carefully at it and notice that the eyes were looking to the right, his right towards the hold stone where the winter solstice comes in, even though the head faces roughly east. Really? Yeah. So you can't really see it clearly on here, but they said they went in there and actually saw that. So yeah, so we've got like we've got this winter solstice thing going on here, which is bizarre. But then that suggests if they were doing that then, then they must have known about it long before then. They must have developed it and built the site because the head, the whole pillar shrine and the whole stone are bedrock. They're carved out of bedrock. So it's a permanent fixture. They're not stones that could be moved. So they must have been doing it for a long time before they even started building the site. They sort of build up to it. So yeah, I mean it's pretty compelling. I mean then you got possible alignments like this at Gabbec and and as more gets excavated there's going to be a whole bunch more of these these kind of things coming out of this part of the world. Um so there's yeah it's a lot to consider when you're like looking at these sites. What is that that bedrock? How hard is bedrock? Well this is um this is limestone. It's limestone. Okay. Gotcha. I mean it's not it's not super tough but it's still you got to you got to work at it. It's not like easy you know that's for sure. Plus Beckley they were carving out these beautiful 18t tall T-shaped pillars and then moving them half a mile. Some of them weighing up to like 20 25 tons maybe. And but then they carved it. So the lower section the tall section and then they have a top section which looks like it's separate but it's not. It's the same stone. Mhm. On top with a with a no face on it. It's like an no face on it, but it's supposed to represent a head because you got the arms coming down the side, right? With hands across the navl coming around the front. Mhm. Belts around it with like fox pelts underneath it and things like this. So, there's like the intricacy and the abstract nature of the artwork really shouldn't have been exist back then. I mean, it just shouldn't have been. I mean, there is a buildup. There is you can see Nufian sites down south in Syria and places like this um which show geometry which show a bit of astronomy which show stonework but nothing like this I mean this just went bang when Gbecepe was being built and then this came pretty soon after. Now how far is Kahan from Golete? It's about 20 25 miles southeast from that area. Oh wow. Yeah. Yeah. And you got like a kind of a 3D scan of it. That's my buddy did some drone stuff there. They made a 3D scan. Holy That's incredible. Yeah. I mean this and this is a lot more has been excavated since this. This was done in 2021. I'm not George Castanza and I don't want a wallet that feels like I'm smuggling a potato. Sitting on a rock doesn't appeal to me. I purchased this Ridge wallet right here years ago, way before they sponsored the show. And I can tell you it's slim, compact, and I don't even feel it. Ridge Wallet holds up to 12 cards plus cash. And it stays sleek, slim, and modern. No more potato pockets. And it's made from premium materials like aluminum, titanium, and carbon fiber. Basically, if Iron Man had a wallet, this is what it would be. Between its slim design and premium build, this is why I love Ridge. And it's a huge bonus that it blocks RFID devices, which makes my travel worry-f free from digital pickpockets. If you want it custom, Ridge has over 50 colors and styles to match your vibe. And the best part, a lifetime warranty means if anything happens, Ridge has your back forever. And if you tend to misplace things, the Ridge Air Tag attachment helps you track it before full panic mode sets in. And Ridge isn't just about wallets. They make premium everyday carry gear like key cases, suitcases, and rings. All built with the same sleek, durable design. And with over a 100,000 five-star reviews, that many people can't be wrong. Upgrade your wallet at ridge.com and your pockets will thank you. For a limited time, our listeners get 10% off at Ridge by using my code Danny Jones at checkout. Just head on over to Ridge.com and use the code DNY Jes. And you're all set. After you purchase, they're going to ask you where you heard about them. And please support the show by telling them that we sent you. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. Wow. Look at that, dude. Yeah. And see this this one at the front here, that's called uh structure AA. That's called what we call the pit shrine. Mhm. You got the path going up there. And then behind that, you got the pillar shrine structure AB. Then the big structure, the big kind of stone circle structure, structure AD. But on the right hand side of that big structure where where your cursorus is now, that's carved out of bedrock. So some of the T-shaped pillars and benches are carved out of the bedrock on the right hand side. the kind of western side of it and whereas the rest is, you know, got freestanding pillars carved and then placed there. So, so look, look at that. I mean, it's just unbelievable. Have you seen Have you ever seen the Kyasa temple in India? I have. Yeah, I've been up there once. Yeah. That whole thing was carved out of bedrock as well. I think I don't think it was limestone. I think it was even harder than that. It was. Yes. That that is insane. That place that that's like a a wonder of the world, that place. It is unbelievable. Totally insane. I couldn't believe Yeah, I went there in February. It's like a cathedral carved out of the side of a mountain. It's And apparently it's like one It's just It's almost like they come in from the top, had a clear design in their head, and just gone down like this. And somehow I mean, and like how do they know they weren't going to encounter any sort of cavities or cracks or, you know, inconsistencies in the in the stone material that was beneath them? like and then like yeah the level of planning that had to be done to create that is insane. It's huge. I know it's mass. It's like five stories or something. But that's I mean the thing about the Kasa temple I mean uh that's one of about 30 or 40 temples and it's one site you know which is which I didn't realize when I got there. I had a day there and it was not enough and I spent my whole time there and maybe one other temple. I mean I'm sure Pravin talked about this. Yeah man. And he have you been there? I have been there. Yeah. Yeah. And it really got me. I mean, I was like, "Wo, this is like much bigger, much more intricate than I realized." Um, when did they say that was built? When is the uh when is the like accepted for that for the Ka? I think it's only like about a thousand years ago or something or less really officially, but doesn't think so. He thinks it's much older. I mean, now with that, now they found sites like this. They found Carahepe. Everything is going to be looked should be looked at again. You know, there needs to be another look at the dating of these sites around the world because if they were doing this then, I mean, what the hell? I mean, how do you think they carved all this? What kind of tools were they using? Well, officially they were using like antler picks. Um, they were kind of using slightly harder stones like bassout. Yeah. And for the fine stone work, they were using obsidian for like the precise detail, things like this. Um, there's no obviously no metal back then. Although at Chanu and one other site they found copper but it was like it was beaten copper. It wasn't like heated up copper. They weren't smelting or anything like this but they they have but the oldest worked copper in the world was found at one of the sister sites to car. And then what what exactly here did they use to carbonate here? I think they've just used uh materials they found at the very lowest levels. I think they found uh I think they found burnt wood, burnt grains. I think mainly burnt wood, especially at Quebec. But even at Quebec Lee, the problem they got there is that they're choosing stuff that's in the bottom of the walls that are placed in between the outside pillars around the circle. But these walls could have been added later. That's the problem. So cuz you can't, as soon as you get down to the bedrock, you can't go any further. You can't get anything below the bedrock. So they were using stuff on top of the bedrock in the walls which could have been added later. I think they were because I I think that they were just utilizing bedrock initially and the temples were like they were slotting kind of the megalith into like little sockets in the bedrock like within steps and curbs uh which you can see around the site. Um it's interesting the way they build the walls by stacking all those little rocks together. Yeah, I mean they are probably later I mean that's the thing. They are probably I mean because you can see the sophistication is a whole different level here you can't it's diff I mean there's so much I think with car it was kind of deliberately damaged uh before it was buried it was like decommissioned you know by the builders or by the people who were living there at the time then then it got buried and like whereas Quebec it doesn't seem to have been deliberately damaged it was like uh it was preserved almost it was like almost built rebuilt it was uh you know repaired and then put back in place and then they kind of finished the burial there after the slope slide had happened previously. Um whereas here uh it looks like stuff's been knocked knocked about um things like this. So yeah, it's a slight problem when you're kind of looking at um looking at this site. But yeah, there's a whole load of stuff here. I mean even the floor some of the floors of the new enclosures they are made they're not sometimes they're carved flat bedrock I mean it's perfectly level as well I mean perfectly level and but sometimes they use terraso which is like this lime cement terazzo yeah and so they really cuz officially the Romans only used the first people invented it officially but they found it in use in abundance here I mean serious abundance I mean hundreds of square meters of terat So is being used. And so what that means is they were heating up limestone up to uh 850° somehow and like then and then it would turn into this more powdery form which they could then use which is quite toxic kind of process that melts limestone. Well, it breaks it down. Yeah. And then they mix it with water and mud and other things. What would be the temperature to melt down or smelt copper? Yeah, I'm not sure about copper, but I think it's probably less than that. I would imagine less than that, huh? Yeah. But um but when it comes to uh creating Oh my god. 1,900° F. Okay. That's that's pretty that's pretty hot. Um but they were Yeah. But they were making this cement basically and it was really And it was waterproof. It was like this perfect kind of So they were filling in gaps. They were making floors. Wow. They were doing this whole thing with it. Yeah. It's pretty impressive. Type in type in uh limestone melting point. Yeah. If you Yeah. Hey, you put in terazzo terazzo 1500° F. Oh yeah. Let's say 825. Yeah. Yeah. So that would be that's how you make the kind of um you break it down. So a little bit hotter for copper. Yeah. Pretty interesting. Um and uh so they they had all these kind of innovations and technologies happening in this part of the world which really all developed here. This is like loads of inventions, loads of innovations that the world first ever saw were at these sites. Have you ever been to Egypt? Yes. Yes, I've been to Egypt. You've been you've been inside the Great Pyramid and all that? Yeah, that's a whole different level. That is insane. When you come to stonework technologies, my my goodness. Yeah. You got like is this one of the Egyptian? Yeah, that's one of the 3D prints. I mean, you got stuff like this going on. But actually, you've got these plates. If you if you if you want to have a look, there's these ones from Carahanepe. These stone plates, if you want to type in Carahan stone plates, these are insane as well. And so, not quite the level of these these vases or vases, I think you call, but um here we go. Yeah, you can see some of them there. So, these have been found and uh yeah, these stone plates are like, you know, two or three feet wide, sometimes 4t wide max. These Oh, yeah. I think I have seen these. These are carved from bass out and granite and other such. I've got I've actually got some better images than this um in one of my articles up online somewhere. Is that it? Yeah, that's them. That's the that's them there basically. Yeah. Yeah, that's probably uh my photo. I'm not sure. But that's um so these the these were deliberately broken as well at the end of their use and then placed on the benches around the edge of Kahantepe. And again, but these are like 11,400 years old. So, considerably older than the ones in Egypt. Wow. But some of them are extremely hard stone and very well made. And um even that one on the right, it's got almost like a kind of cut mark, like a little kind of indentation, a perfectly circular indentation smoothed out of the middle. Exactly in the middle. That's so bizarre, man. And there were hundreds of these potentially. Yeah. They found a whole a whole kind of cache of them in a a new area of Carahan Tape that they call in the kitchen. Um because they believe they were preparing food there. Um but in the in this kitchen that they found they actually um they found quite a lot of Anatolian viper snake skeletons. Oh yeah. So snake skeletons. So if they don't mention that in the reports, but they were found there. And uh so they were eat either eating snakes which is weird or they were getting the venom out of the snakes for psychotropic purposes. I don't know. So we believe it's more this is it actually. This is like the uh alchemical kitchen we call it. That's the image there. Yeah. Yeah. That's been being published. Click on that. You can see the image. There you go. Yeah. 11,000y old kitchen stone vessels and plates discovered in Kahantepi. Yeah. So this is interesting. Yeah. It's really bizarre. So there's a serious amount of things they were doing there. I mean this was like a kind of and they weren't making any pottery. This is what's called the pre- pottery Neolithic era. So there was no pottery. Everything was made of stone pretty much apart from the terratzo, you know, and the limestone plaster that they were using. This thing right there, is that a a stone base? That'll all be stone. Yeah. Everything. Holy So that would have had to be carved. That wasn't clay or that wasn't that wasn't uh they didn't do any cast or anything. No, nothing like that back then. The the only thing they were doing was the terrarazzo and also similar to they were making limestone kind of plaster covering up some of the walls and things like this and um but not actual vessels. Yeah, that pot looks pretty symmetrical. That pot looks like pretty damn close to perfect. That's full of dirt right there. Some of some of them are in really really It looks even more circular than the actual plates themselves. Well, look at these. I mean, these are in good condition, actually. Some of these. They're not broken. I mean, hopefully we'll get scans of these, you know, that'll be kind of useful. Um, so you can check out the accuracy, but I don't think it's quite the level of what they were doing in Egypt. That That's ridiculous. Look at those other ones, too, bro. Yeah, they're not small either. They're pretty epic. Wow. Some have beautiful carvings on as well. Um, you can actually like see the the carvings all around. Um, beautiful kind of chevrons, abstract figures, animals and things like this. It's pretty pretty crazy. I mean, but I think that they were like, you know, they were into like the Anatolian viper venom and kind of Well, I think like that part of the world was there was snakes were a big problem for people likely. I know like in the classical area a lot of people died from snakes. Snakes were like a real problem and they had to figure out, you know, antivenenoms and antidote antibbody treatments to help people survive snake bites. And people were also consuming viper flesh. Yeah. I mean, there's so many serpent carvings at these sites in East Turkey. It's insane. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That too. A lot. I mean, a lot of serpents. I mean, serious amount. And so, um, yeah. And there's lots of other animals and creatures, leopards, bo, other such things. Um. Oh, look. There's Graham standing next to the head. Oh, that gives you a good scale of it. Yeah, that's it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's bigger. Bigger than you think. Holy cow, that thing's big. Yeah, it looks bigger than it. That looks too big there. A little bit bigger than a human head, huh? Well, supposed to be three or four. Yeah. Yeah. Right. I mean, that is uh pretty epic. But yeah, and that's just I mean, it's just tip of the iceberg. There's a lot more being discovered. If you do, if you put in the carepe new discoveries, it might come up with what's being discovered on the top of the hill because they've discovered this 7 and 1/2t uh statue. Actually, yeah, you can see it there. If you go to the the middle ancient origins one, ladies and gents, the day has finally come where you can use the power of red light to regrow your hair. And you can save some serious cash by using our exclusive code. The I Restore Elite is clinically proven to help regrow hair using 300 lasers and 200 LEDs that send light therapy directly to your scalp. Just pop it on while you're watching TV or reading your book and enjoy the benefits. It's a system with proven results. In a double blind clinical study, nearly every participant saw an increase in their hair growth with this technology. The Itore Elite uses Vixo lasers that feature wider beams of red light, which gives consistent coverage and results. Their unique use of optimal wavelengths, reactivates dormant follicles to restore your natural hair. Lasers provide deeper spot stimulation, while LEDs provide broader uniform coverage to fill in the gaps in between the lasers. Plus, they offer a money back guarantee, so you can get it risk-free. It's comfortable, it's lightweight, it looks badass like Tron, and I don't feel silly when I'm using it. I often get compliments, and people want to know where I got it so they can grow their hair. Plus, I've been learning a ton about the benefits of red light and near infrared light recently. So, that gives me a huge confidence boost that this stuff really works. And if you really want to get the maximum out of your eye restore elite, bundle with the Revive Max Growth Kit, which has a bunch of hair products that works with the wavelengths of the elite. Give yourself the gift of hair confidence this spring. For a limited time only, our listeners are getting a huge discount on their I restore Elite when you use the code danny at i restore.com. Head on over to the letter i s t o r e.com and use the code danny d- a n y for my exclusive discount on the i restore elite. Please support our show by telling them we sent you. Hair loss is frustrating and now you don't have to fight it alone thanks to the I restore. It's linked below. Now back to the show. Um I think that's my I think that's my article. And um and that they found this 7 and 1/2 ft statue is sitting down kind of on the bench. This is the Carahanepe, the one on the right there. Um, and uh, he's holding his part, his fallus, whatever you want to call it. And he's clearly got this kind of emaciation thing going on with the kind of neck. You see the V thing on his neck and the ribs. Yeah. And so it's And he's also got a weird beard. He's got like a almost like a one of them fake Egyptian beards. Yeah. And his haircut is like almost like a mullet going down the back but shaved above the ears. And we we've seen other Moheakin type haircuts carved in stone there as well. I mean, which is which is pretty bizarre. And next, do we know this was carved around the same time? Yeah, I mean, they they think it was pretty much the same time. They're actually saying it might be a fraction younger, a few hundred years younger, right? But, um, we're not so sure. Uh, and also there was like a vulture statue was found there and giant T-shaped pillars. Again, all mainly broken. Again, even this statue was broken in like three parts, right? Yeah. You see this deliberate kind of breakage. I mean, and and then some of the other human statues they found previously, again, they're broken. So, it's kind of is it a sort of ceremonial breaking of the statues, this is what some people have suggested. So, yeah, I think there's a lot more lot more to this culture or could be competing cultures or tribes like coming to destroy them like similar to what happened with the Kyasa temple. Yeah. Yeah. Well, they tried to destroy that and failed pretty miserably. Yeah, they did a pretty good job destroying some of the stuff in there. Yeah. I mean, a lot of the Indian stuff was pretty a lot of the famous Indian sites were ravaged. Yeah. By um the like middle eastern cultures the is Islam. I guess it could be like like the west. Yeah. You get like in Egypt you get like the kind of statues like the nose is broken off and things like this. uh which is takes takes away their power and other such things. So there could be a similar principle at play here. Um there are traditions in some areas in this part of the world where you to decommission and close down a site when you finished with it. You do break things in certain ways kind of carefully and then bury it. You know, this is kind of one of the things. So we don't know. It could be one or both of um these different perspectives. Yeah. Just the comparison from this to some of the you see in Egypt is mindbending. And some of those places that are in Egypt with those perfectly symmetrical granite statues of those pharaohs is is just mindbending, man. Yeah, that kind of thing is a whole different level. It's like almost like computer design technology. I mean, it's it's pretty I mean, I'm very I'm a big fan of Chris Dunn and what he's done in the past. I mean, it's just blown my mind. all these different ideas, but his thing about the precision and the symmetry kind of gets me cuz it's just the symmetry is really hard to duplicate. It's hard to ignore when it's that good, that precise. But there's a lot of a lot of elements here of um extreme, you know, extremely sophisticated geometry um within some of the some of the site. I mean, not necessarily the symmetry within statues, but the layout of the sites are very specific geometries. I mean, I don't know if that you can you'll be able to find it on here. How so? Well, if I don't know, maybe if you type in uh Gbeckley um you might have to go to one of my videos actually. I think I'm not sure. Uh Carahan or or Gbec geometry, see what comes up. I don't know if any of my images will come up. So, you've got some geometry work that's been done by some archaeologists, but there's other stuff that I've done myself, which um none of these ones, unfortunately. Oh, look at that. No, that that's not that's Don't go there. That's not um Is that fake news? That's what I'm looking I'm not looking at that. No. Um you might have to go to one of my uh if you go to the mega maybe go to the Megalithania um you'll be able to find it there. Megalithania YouTube or something. Um and um but there so you got this in in Britain you got these stone circles you got like a thousand stone circles being reported across the whole country you know going into France other places as well. Yeah and uh no no uh the YouTube channel go to the home and then go to the YouTube channel. That's it. In fact it's in the book. I could just uh it's in the little book as well. Some of the geometry I'll find it on here. Yeah. And uh so what you got all these certain geometries that were analyzed, they were surveyed by a Scottish engineer from Oxford University called Alexander Tom. And he published this in several books, two or three really profound books and caused a massive stir within the establishment cuz he proved that the Neolithic people had an understanding of sophisticated geometries. Um if you go to uh go to the top, in fact, you go to the latest one. Yeah, the one on the top left. If you skip through that, you'll find uh the geometries there for sure. Uh there you go. You if you just sort of play it from there, just turn the volume down and I can explain a couple of things. U yeah this is the geometry on the left that was discovered by Avi Gopher where they found the centers of the circles or their kind of geometries were created a perfect equilateral triangle. Um and then on the then this was analyzed by my friend Adam Tetllo who's a metrologist. So if you want to just play it and go through the next few slides, um he found that they were using very specific types of ancient measurements. So looking at ancient metrology like the Sumerian foot, the Sumerian palm, uh the royal Egyptian cubit, that's me doing some kind of lecture conference and yeah, let's and we've got them all here. And he worked out that they were using the Persian foot as well, which these are all very important measurements. You've got even got the Egyptian foot and the cubits also being found in in some of the sites. And these these are the same kind of measurements we find in the British stone circles and in the pyramids being found at Quebec. And but the geometries if you move on move on a little bit um come on to that go to the next uh next couple of slides. That's the they found that it's also perfectly north south. This is the work. So it it was built with the understanding of north and south which they thought maybe was only the pyramids. They found that but actually they now found it at Geekbeck Lee. This is the work of Howard Cro. These are the geometries we find all across the British Isles. We find these six to eight different types including the ellipse right now. And they have different construction ways of doing it. They're called flattened eggs. They're called flattened circles, eggshaped circles, things like this. So I applied this to Quebec Lee to see what I could find. It'll probably be the next couple of slides. Yeah. So, here this is like enclosure D and we've got an X-shaped circle type one. Now, you get different but it might look like it's a bit off, but it's actually you get different widths, heights on there of these different geometries. Um, and if we just keep going on, there's a few other geometries we can look at. And you see these in in British stone circles. You see them in Britany and France. But the fact is you're finding them now in Quebec which is 6,000 years earlier at least, right? Which is pretty amazing. And then even in Napa player in Egypt, we have the same geometry going back nearly 7 around 7,000 BC. Conventional archaeologists, they're not mad about this, right? They're pretty they're pretty in line with all this stuff, right? They accept it. No, not at all. No, they don't. No, they're not interested. I thought it was I thought it was a um conventional archaeologist who discovered it. They discovered the equilateral triangle. That was all. Yeah. And uh I mean I'm talking about go back go back like tepee. But yeah, this one hereated. Yeah. Yeah. No, they're not interested for sure at the site. This one's the most fascinating one. This is the flattened circle modified type B and it almost perfectly fits enclosure C precisely. And you can even even the construction points where the C is um that is actually where the T-pillars are. So, so this is exactly I mean this may not for those that have an understanding of uh British stone circles and you know get get all the different you know Alexander Tom's work and the people like Robin Heath. Mhm. This is pretty compelling because this was supposed to only have occurred in Britain like you know 4,000 years ago at the most well 5,000 years ago perhaps but here it was happening nearly 12,000 years ago. So what is going on? Did these influence the British stone circle builders with their ideas, their different geometries, their different kind of principles? Um, if you if you want to go on a little bit further, I mean, what I found here is that the measurements as well, this is what really gets me, the ancient metrology of these sites. I mean, people have done a whole thing on the the pyramids or Stonehenge. They found the what's called the megalithic yard, which is 2.72 ft or it's uh 0.83 m. Mhm. that's found all across the British sites. This is something Alexander Tom worked out. But there's actually an old cannon of measurements uh which are in the next few slides where there's actually multiple different measurements that you can get here. Here we have some of my crazy Holy smokes. Yeah, this is what I put together. I managed to work out the measurements of Geekly temp. So this is like um work in progress. So I'm still working on this. Yeah. But what we found is is like you got if you find whole number measurements of different ancient measurement systems, they were probably using them. It's highly likely they were using them or something close to them. And now it's when you're looking at ancient sites and trying to understand the nature of, you know, uh what measurements they were using. You're not always looking for one single measurement. You know, people think, oh, there got they only use one measurement. There's archaeologists at Stonehenge who claim there's only one measurement they use, but it's not how it worked. The people, there's people like John Michelle and John Neil who are kind of my mentors for many years who proved that there was a system of different lengths of the foot. There's probably a slide on it in a minute on here as well. Uh different lengths of the foot. So, you got the British foot, then you got like the Persian foot, you've got the Sumerian foot, you got the Assyrian foot, you've got the uh Saxon foot, you've got all these different foot lengths, probably 12, 15 of them, but they're all perfect fractions, harmonics away from the British foot going a bit longer or a bit shorter. And so, what this and how are they related to like the royal cubits and all that stuff the Romans were using? It all fits in. I mean, you can see on here, look, you see the royal cubit is the diagonal of a square. And if you put a double square together, you got the megalithic yard is the diagonal of two squares, things like this. And then the remman is goes is one length of it. So they all everything fits in a really profound weird manner. Um and so what so what we realized and what John Michelle and John Neil realized is that you're not looking for one measurement. You're looking for a cannon of measurements, maybe 12, 15 different measurements, but they all relate to each other by perfect harmonies. So it's almost like music. And so you often find in ancient sites if you look carefully four or five different measurements because they wanted to apply the principles. It's almost like the languages or like the accents of that culture who was involved in building it. So it gets complicated but really this was the elites were doing this that the the commoners weren't doing this. You didn't get the people just the people hanging around the tribes doing the work. There was elite people who had these understandings. And what gets even weirder is that most of these measurements are derived from the size of the earth. So that means they must have had an understanding of the size and shape of the earth going back nearly 12,000 years. And this backs up what Graeme Hanok's been saying for years that they had that these old maps proved that they surveyed the earth in antiquity. And so this is how weird it gets when you start getting into it because these measurements aren't arbitrary. They're not just made up. They're derived from measurements of the Earth, fractions of the degree at certain latitudes and things like this. So, it's quite hard to get your head around without having it fully visualized and and shown, but this is this is what they were doing. And so, there's a high chance. How do you think they knew this the exact circumference of the Earth? I think they were measuring I think I think they had measurement uh they had people going out to different latitudes and taking different measurements using astronomy to do so using shadows at certain times of the day and year um and then you know marking that at different latitudes and then you could work out the angles of the shadows and things like this. It was known they were doing that in ancient Egypt. This has been documented. So it's highly likely they were doing that here. And also if you look into like things like the book of Enoch, you know this remarkable, very weird book that was used to be part of the the whole kind of Old Testament. It talks about him being taken by the watchers or the angels to different latitudes where there was very different weather and different environments and taking cords and going to measure. And this is going back into deep antiquity, the era they were talking about here. So, it's even referenced in some of the old text, some of the old sort of sacred texts. Who did they say was being taken? Enoch. Enoch one, you know, of the biblical line of Noah and all this kind of stuff. And so this is pretty strange. I mean, that can't be proven obviously, but the fact that the evidence is there with the measurements that are being found at these sites, so they must have had some understanding. Now, they could have guessed it, but that's highly unlikely. But what it seems is like there was some very advanced group of people, you know, possibly a large group of people who were travelers as well. They weren't just located at Gbecite. They were going to different places. They were taking measurements. For example, Stonehenge. They found these post holes where giant pine totem pole type objects would be placed in. They could have been up to 30 ft tall because they were like 3 ft wide, several feet deep. They're dated to 10,000 years old. And so this is weird. I mean cuz but Stonehenge wasn't built until 5,000 years after that at least. So why were they marking the position of Stonehenge with these giant timber posts then back in 10,000 years ago? It's it's quite weird. So I I've got the impression. There we go. This is actually the post holes where what they would have looked like. Uh which uh which image and these most I think pretty much all the the top ones there and there's a reconstruction there as well. Oh the the these circle things. Yeah. But they were originally I mean for a while they were blobs of paint in the car park. That's all they were because they they gone. They're just remnants of bits of charcoal at the bottom of them and things like this. But these go back 10,000 years. So these are really intriguing because these it's almost like someone had gone out to different parts of the world and marked specific latitudes for measurements. And the thing about Stonehenge, it's a very important latitude when you start if you want to understand astronomy and uh surveying because it's at roughly 51° whereas Quebec is 38° north but that latitude what you have there is have so between 51 and 52° north that measurement if you actually measure it from 151 to 52 that is the mean polar circumference um degree. So if you were to have a perfect circle, that's what that length would be of each degree, if you know what I mean. So it's a mean of the circle uh at that latitude. And and similar things happen down at 38° as well to do with different elements of surveying. So it gets it gets a bit gets a bit intense, you know, but we're going to write all this out in our next book and kind of explain it in detail with graphics because it's quite hard to kind of get your head around and we're still working on it. We're still trying to work out, you know, the how they could have measured the earth nearly 12,000 years ago. Because if you think about it as well, if there was some kind of cat, if there was this younger dus, which is looking very likely, there was impact event chaos things, everything got destroyed, whatever there was, the ice age was there for a while, this that and the other. Are they going to want to like have another, you know, these very elite, very smart people, there's probably survivors doing their thing. They're going to want to like remap the earth, you know, really. They're going to want to work out where they are cuz things have changed a bit. Flooding's happened. Land masses have changed. The ice has shifted things around. And so, to me, there's a good case for that. I mean, it sounds we're going a bit far out here, but actually, I think there's something something to that for sure. Yeah. Yeah. No, I don't think I don't think it's that crazy of an idea that there's a a group of people back then that maybe, you know, got some sort of warning or saw some sort of signs of a cataclysm coming and maybe like decided to find high ground or to go to a certain spot where they knew they would be safe or build a boat or whatever. Um because I mean the the younger dus wiped out we know like what was it how like of the total human population we think it was like maybe 40 30 40%. Quite possibly. Yeah. Yeah. I'm not really. And then because it it it hit the biggest devastation from it was in North America, right? Because there was an asteroid that we believe that hit or a comet that hit the North American ice sheet like up in where up where Canada is. Yeah. Um I think they found a with some sort of satellites they found evidence that there's a huge comet or asteroid underneath the ice sheet in uh on the North American continent. And then that sort of blasted open the freaking ice wall that was blocking all the water and all the water rushed into um like the western part of the United States. Killed all the megapaa. Took tons of rocks with it. That's why we have like giant boulders in the north uh Midwest that are from like way up north where Canada was. And um and then Africa, like we lost all of the megapa, the giant sloths, the saber-tooth tigers, the the mammoths, but Africa still has all of its megapona. There's still all the elephants and everything roaming all over Africa. So Africa was probably spared for the most part. So um I mean even if you know the people that were right in harm's way didn't survive, there were still tons of other places around the earth where you know you would have been fine. It seems like there's Yeah, there's a place in Syria um that got uh had like an air burst during the the whole younger dus impact kind of it's actually you can probably Google that um Syria kind of air burst or you know impact and actually one of the sites uh I forget the exact name of it but they actually kind of completely flattened the site and then they rebuilt on it afterwards like and this was one of the pre- pottery Neolithic sites but down in Syria and so this is pretty kind of comet air burst in Syria around 12,800 years ago led to the development of agriculture and in the region. Huh. Yeah. Yeah. Abu Abuhera. Yeah. Yeah. That's the Oh, Abu Herrera. Okay. Gotcha. So, that's the one. And so, I think I think Graham's talked about this as well, Graeme Hanok. And uh but this is I mean that's unbelievable. That's super close to Quebec. I mean, that's like couple hundred miles. And so, it's not like it's that far away from that whole area. It's just down south from there down along the uh Euphrates River. And so that to me is really compelling because that is like a direct effect of the younger drius potentially um affecting people very close to Geekly area. So this so it could have it could have been in their consciousness of that happening and and and it being revered in stories and things like this. Then you have people like Martin Sweetman and Graeme as well. They kind of talk about let's the carvings on pillar 43 at Gabbeg actually are a kind of almost like a memory of that like a kind of monument to that and a and a kind of warning about anything that may occur again in the future and so you know so I find that really you know the fact that it was happening and the effects of it were recorded at somewhere very close to the area we're talking about as well where things then really took off afterwards you know really you know massive amounts of innovation just went ballistic and So, you know, so were they kind of like doing things, getting together, you know, putting their heads together, saying, "Well, we need to remap things. We need to kind of get some new places organized, built, and things like this." So, there's certainly, you know, a case for that. You know, the effects were known by the people in this this region. What did did you what did you think of the Graham Hancock Flint Dibble debate that they did? Um, I thought it was cool. Yeah. Cool. It was It was interesting. Yeah, I mean I think it needed something needed to be done, but I I don't know if it if it was essential. I mean, it's fine. I mean, the the academics are going to kind of challenge people like Graeme Hankle cuz he's so popular. I mean, his stuff's I mean, I think Graham's overall. That's the thing that before that no one really challenged him. No one like no one's no one got or stood up face to face with him before that. Oh, they did. I mean, they did. They did back in the 90s. is I mean we had we had this u we had this pan I think it was a panorama TV show in England tried to completely destroy Graeme Hanok foul swoop they had him on they had him on and talked to him face no no no they didn't they just destroyed his TV series I'm talking about like actually face to face yeah but then the problem is he actually I think he then ended up um challenging them and suing them because they lied about things yeah so it got really got really messy and uh so so he's been challenged all along now it's just become because of social media people can see it And so I don't I don't think it's changed. I think he's I I I got a lot of time for Graeme. I think what he's done over the years, he's pushing stuff out into now the mainstream which I think is really important. He's putting Geckley on, you know, helping put Geekly on the map, the younger Dus hypothesis on the map. He's pushing forward, you know, the sophistication of the ancients and things like this. And this really wasn't addressed very well before that. It was in some cases. There were books coming out in the 70s. We had Eric von Danakin and John Michelle and others talking about it but not really you know so he was to me he's like the pioneer who pushed forward and because I think he was hitting some truths quite a lot of truths in his work he's going to get challenged for that because it frustrates the archaeologists and the academics who had their own version of it which is much more mundane and simple. He made it way more interesting. Right. He made it he turned it into something that the everyday working man could get behind and find fascinating. and with his books, right, Fingerprints of the God. Oh, God. I mean, they were I mean, just I mean, in that he does tons of work on the archo astronomy, for instance, which fascinates me, which hadn't really been addressed before and put into a, you know, a kind of popular format, you know, where people can kind of get it and get their head around it and appreciate it. I just think, you know, I think the debate was interesting. It came across okay. I know you had Flint on here, didn't you? A moment back as well. Yeah. Yeah. And so, but thought it was okay. The frustration the frustration I've got with the that whole thing. I mean, I don't want to kind of say too much about it really, but why not? Well, it's because firstly, uh, when you got you got archaeology, you got like academia, you've got them digging up the sites, doing their archaeological work. They're focused on what they're good at. They're really good at that and they can do that well, you know, and they can archive it. They can analyze, you know, the different things, get dating and stuff like this. When it comes to interpretation, that's a whole other story. I mean, because you've got the culture that came from. You got to look at their traditions, their mythologies, their way of life, their way of thinking. So, you have to go into anthropology. But, and I really think this is you need to have a multid-disciplinary approach to interpreting sites. You can't rely on one group of people who are specialized in digging up things, you know, to to interpret everything correctly. And so I think this is where you got people who are experts in ancient geometry in in measurements uh things like that need to come in and have a look you know how they oriented the sites. Archo astronomers need to come in and have a look. One of the issues with uh Gabbeckley and Carahanepe uh recently since myself and JJ made this winter solstice discovery at Carahantepe and before that Graeme was talking about it we have Andrew Collins writing about the signis northern orientation and uh of the structures there towards Signis and Denb and but the thing is we know we're alternative researchers we're independent and you know things like this so we put it out there but it gets dismissed because we're not academics and actually we're I mean with Carahan tempe you can go there yourself you can see the actual phenomenon on the witness solstice happen but since all this has come out it's being put out publicly that there's no astronomy at all associated with Gabbec and Kahantepe whatsoever it's false you know even though many people have already written about it and put it out there and and they say the reason is is because there were roofs on it so therefore they never looked at the night sky and things like this and so so you you get into this kind of almost like a kind of you know kind of battering ram headlock kind of thing you can't get through and actually kind of put this stuff out there. So I'm frustrated by I want the academics to discuss discoveries made by non-academics and open it up for debate in a nice way. Why do we have to be mean to each other and be you know bitching about everything? I mean, and I think that needs to be addressed. I think because there's there's people who you who just focus their whole lives on archoastronomy, then they want to have a look at Quebec and they're dismissed because someone who doesn't know anything about archoastronomy. The the uh academics, the archaeologists say there isn't anything there. So, you can't go in there and do the research. And so I think there's something that needs to be addressed and there needs to be a multid-disciplinary opening for PE other researchers to officially have their say on things as well and discuss it openly. I mean I'd like to we've written a kind of paper myself and JJ on the winter solstice sunrise alignment but we can't get it published anywhere academically because we're not academics and so it won't get addressed. It won't get looked at. It will be ignored you know. So that that that's the frustration we've got. We're actually going to try we're going to put we found a a journal which we're going to try and get one in. Who pays attention to those journals anyways? Just post it on YouTube. That's where everyone goes. Well, that's what we do. We do that whatever. But you know, look at Martin Swedman. He's written this. He's an academic um from Edinburgh University. He he's worked with Graeme in the past. He he comes to speaks at our conferences. Um and he's written this paper. He's written several papers now about a calendar system, you know, encoded on pillar 43 at Quebec and also actually at Carahan in the pillar shrine, you know, the the way like a what's called a looney solar calendar where you're kind of like counting certain aspects of it to like build up this calendar and he got that peer-reviewed and published in an academic journal eventually. It took him like 2 or 3 years to get it through and now that is like that went out that went ballistic that went all over the internet. It it caused this sensation really frustrated a lot of the academics and archaeologists who said well we weren't consulted you know we don't agree with that um and so but so he managed to get one through about the astronomy and astrology even astrological symbols and and calendars at Quebec and Carep. So in a way that's opened the door for other people to now write about that. But since then, the archaeologists have said, "No, none of that is true. There's no astronomy." They weren't looking at the skies since that came out a few months ago. And so, so hang on a sec. But it's been published. We've made this discovery. Yeah. Here's my swean. Here's our conference, our megalithania conference. And and so, yes. So, that so that's my frustration with the whole kind of debate. And I just think everyone needs to be a bit nicer to each other. It's as simple as that. And actually listen to each other because there's no need. I mean, the ideas are flowing. You know, if we're a kind of advanced civilization, which we claim to be, we should be collaborating, not fighting about it. That's my opinion. Yeah, but it's definitely not happening. You're right about that. We are uh we're more focused on on fighting each other and proving each other wrong on Twitter. Yes. About people that lived potentially 10,000 years ago. I know. Again, we're not really innovating anything anymore. We're just sort of it's almost like we're uh we're we're disintegrating as a as a species. It feels like because of technology. Like technology is doing all the work for us now. And now we just want to uh figure out the next place to get our our next dopamine hit. You know what I mean? I Yeah, I get you. I get it's like with with Twitter or X or whatever. That's uh that to me that is like hell. I mean, I got to be honest with you. It's just a a million opinions flying around and everyone thinks their opinion is correct and it's it gets so frustrating and no one's listening and then everyone blocks each other and it's like what the hell, you know, where's the kind of where's the educated enlightened discussion, you know, why can't we why can't I go and talk to the head archaeologist at Cameraanep and have a discussion with him about the winter solstice alignment and actually show him it and we talk about it and actually get it properly tested. It takes a lot of balls to be able to publicly defend your research and your ideas, you know, in the public square and to have and, you know, to risk looking like a fool in front of a lot of people, the whole world, right? Yeah. Yeah. Um, and I don't think people want to do that. People would just rather like leave a comment, you know, anonymously on a social media platform. Yeah. And um Flint did do that. I don't know if he knew the repercussions or what was going to happen. I mean, it seems like there's a huge group of people who just hate his guts. Yeah. You know, that just like, you know, they they hate his exist. They hate every fiber of his being simply because he disagrees with Graham Hancock in every way possible. Um, but it's the way he does it as well, isn't it? It is the way. Yeah, he definitely doesn't do it in the best in the in the not in the best way. I think he could do things differently, but look, we're all we're all human. None of us are perfect. Um, you know, do I think blocking everybody on Twitter who I mean, I don't block anybody on Twitter. I've never blocked anybody on Twitter, but you know, you know, maybe he I I can't I can't judge him for for wanting to block people for calling him names or calling him a or whatever it is, but um you know, I think I think humans just like to not be wrong about They like to be right about things, especially when you're like him and you've dedicated your whole life, you know? Not only that, but like his whole family is tied up in in in archaeology. So it's like his dad did it for x amount of years now he's doing it feel like it's his legacy. Archaeology is his legacy and um and he doesn't want to be wrong about things, you know, and he at least he had the balls to go do that and face Graham headto head. Um I give him that. and on the, you know, I don't agree with him about I I I he's not an expert in the Egypt stuff, but I I asked him about these vases and and some of the stuff like with the pyramids and what their original purpose was, and he buys the the conventional explanation of of how they were built. He thinks that these were just done by hand with like a stick and a rock on the inside doing it like that. I think it's absurd. Um, but that's not his expertise. I think he just sort of falls in line with academia when it comes to that. I disagree with him on it. Um, but one of the things I think was really compelling um with Flint when I had him in here was uh how he broke down Atlantis and the story of Atlantis. Are you familiar with that at all? Yeah. Yeah, I know about the the whole story of it. Yeah. Yeah. Are you familiar with like his theory on it? Not so much. Um, so he's actually his his field of expertise, right, is perfectly in line with Atlantis. So he's actually like the perfect academic archaeologist to confirm or deny Atlantis because he his location that he specializes in is ancient Greece. And the time that he focuses on or the part that he part of the timeline he studies was the time that Atlantis was supposedly there. Um, so it's compelling. And um, he came in here and he broke down, we talked about Plato and Plato's writings and some of the stuff like that's some of the biggest evidence for Atlantis existing is Plato talking about it. And um, you know, he I had also another guy another classical philologist who studies ancient Greek and is very well verssed in Plato. He's basically read all the philosophy of the ancient Greeks and the classical uh, texts. Basically, it seems like Plato was a liar, a prolific liar. Um, some of them were called noble lies, like lies to make society better, to basically lie to the the people in the society, to make them conform to rules to so so humanity could advance, right? So, where like the philosophers, the philosopher kings would run society and then below that you would have like the knights and then like the parliament or whatever. But um there was also many documented account like there's also like many accounts of him actually telling like outright lies in his writings like even about Socrates. Um and this is known this is known by by classicists people that don't even like pay attention to any of this sort of Atlantis stuff or any of like the Graham Hancock stuff at all. So um so that was interesting. And then he also broke down like the the the game of telephone that was um that I guess was told to Plato for his account of Atlantis, right? I guess it was like you'd have to pull it up again. I don't remember it exactly, but but apparently like um Plato got it from someone who got it from someone else, Solon, who apparently his grandfather was told this a thousand years before he ever wrote, before it was ever told by anyone else. And then um it was told to that person by some Egyptian priest a thousand years before that, but there was no text or anything. It was just told, right? So it's like a this is like a thousands and thousands and thousands of years of games of telephone, right? Before it was ever allegedly written down and it was only allegedly written down. It was never actually written down. And then a thousand years after that, Plato wrote it down. Okay. So it's like and then on top of that, Plato is synonymous for telling fake stories. Yeah. Right. He's telling like, have you ever heard of his allegory of the cave? No. the the Plato's allegory of the cave is basically, you know, the idea of of of these people in this cave and people behind them playing shadows on the wall, right? And these people think that the shadows are reality. And then eventually someone finds his way out of the cave and was, "Oh my god, there's this whole new world." And he wants to tell everyone in the cave, but they're like, "No, leave us alone. This is our world. We're living in this. Like, we don't want to hear your theories about whatever else." Like, they're comfortable in their world. And it was a it was a created story of like basically how a society can be tricked and fooled and to thinking reality is something that it's not. And he's basically saying what Flint made the case for was that Atlantis was the same thing as Plato's cave. Okay. Oh, that's that's interesting. It was fascinating. It really was fascinating. And then he go he went into some of the archa archaeological uh evidence to to how you know Atlantis wasn't an actual real place. It was a hypothetical place that Plato wrote about. Yeah. And I know some other people have other evidence for Atlantis that completely you know doesn't rely on Plato um which I believe we talked about. But anyways, that that was, you know, he he made a very compelling case when he came in here about Atlantis and um and Yeah. Yeah. No, my my co-author Jim Vieira, he's Mr. Atlantis. He's Oh, is he? Yeah. Yeah. Talk to him. He'll love he'll love it. I mean, I'm not a big I'm not a big Atlantis fan. I mean, um I don't really um I'm not sure about anything about it. I mean, I'm I'm very aware of it every I mean, there's more books on Atlantis than any other subject on the planet. Um, so, um, I've read a few of them for sure, but you know, if there's anything Atlantean in my opinion, then it's more of a, um, it's not a land mass. It's not a lost continent, you know, with crystal technology or or whatever people say it was. To me, it's more of a kind of um, cultural like a civilization's kind of focus. You know, it's like it could have been it may be a kind of lost forgotten distant memory of just an advanced culture. possibly the Gabbecy people even, you know, it could even be that, you know, because they were quite advanced. They were traveling around. They were measuring things. They were doing this and that. And um and so, you know, maybe it's more like that than is an actual place. That's just my version possibility, but I don't mention the A word in any of my a writings. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think Plato was actually writing about like what a hypothetical war would look like between Athens and this place called Atlantis. Um, and they were basically like trying to he was trying to like simulate some sort of scenario, some sort of like I guess you call could call it a war game scenario on like what would happen to society if if we got into a war with a place like this. Yeah. Yeah. Um but but yeah, no, like as far as people getting back to, you know, like conventional archaeologists and and Graham Hancock, um I can totally understand somebody who spent their whole life doing this stuff, like eating the grl in archaeology, not do, you know, doing a lot of the boring too, along with the fun can see someone like Graham Hancock come along, go on the Joe Rogan podcast, and then be selling millions of books, making all this money, becoming a worldwide celebrity, and getting all attention and you're like, "Motherfucker, I've been doing this my whole life, sludge, sludging through the mud, you know, I haven't written any books. I haven't made a dime. I've just been sitting in class teaching people and, you know, traveling to all these places, but nobody gives me credit for any of it. Instead of this schmuck, this Graham Hancock guy gets to go write all this stuff. I'm going to go find every hole I can possibly find in everything he's ever written." Like, I understand that point of view. I can Yeah, I get that kind of perspective. You got to look at all different perspectives on these things. Yeah, for sure. Um, but maybe you're not saying it's a good thing to do. I don't think it's a good thing to do, but I I can get I it's human nature. But it is. It is. But it doesn't look good for archaeology when when you've got someone trying to call someone else out on and then getting personal and then getting attacked. This whole racism agenda that's behind everything. It's like really weird. So that stuff, I mean, you don't do that. You don't do that. You're you're an adult. You don't do things like that. You just you focus on the actual research, not what some other, you know, author wrote 150 years ago that that grand reference once. When did he say his ideas are based on white supremacy or something like that? I know it's it's absurd. It's absolutely absurd. I mean, it's it's sad, you know, and it makes them look foolish in my opinion when they say things like that because, you know, it isn't. It just isn't. I mean, he's, you know, I, you know, you you read Fingerprints of the Gods. If you I don't think they've read his books. I got to be honest. I think Graham has. No, not Graham. I think uh Flynn has read it. I I'm not sure. I mean, if you'd actually read his books Mhm. There's no hint of that. It's kind of absurd in my opinion. It just it doesn't make any sense um to bring the racist card into it at all. I mean, it's it's absurd. I think it's a misinterpretation or he's quoted people that said stuff in their other works or something like this. It's it's it's weird, but you know, the point is is that um maybe Flynn should write a bestselling book then then that'll be he'll be up there with great Well, he's got a YouTube channel now. There you go. Podcast. Yeah. Yeah. Get a Netflix show. Write a million. Get a Netflix show. Yeah. Also, the thing that the who somebody sent Netflix like a a open letter about the first season of Graham's show. Yeah. Basically saying that they should recategorize the show as like science fiction or something. Yeah, I know. That's that's weird as well. Can you find that find the letter that was written to Netflix for the first season of Ancient Apocalypse um from and who it was from? Society for American Archaeology sent the letter to Netflix and ITN Productions about the Netflix series Ancient Apocalypse. The um Society for American Archaeology requested that Netflix reclassify the series as science fiction instead of a documentary or or docu series. Yes. So I was reading up on this recently actually. We should find out who's behind this society for American archaeology. I wonder who funds them and who like what would their incentive be? Well, if initially they were founded to bridge a gap between what was what archaeology was doing and what amateurs were doing when they were writing and presenting about archaeology and it was all very polite when it was set up. It was all very neat and tidy. It's very polite. Now everyone else is a pseudoarchchaeologist. They kind of dismiss them and call them, you know, names and things like that. But when it was set up, apparently it was all very polite and that they they wanted to genuinely connect with, you know, bringing archaeology and amateur work into it into the same kind of mix. That's actually weirdly that's one of kind of like why we set up Megalithania, our conference back in 2006, is because Steve, you're not going to find it on the website. You're going to have to like do some digging and find out like who's the biggest funer behind it. There's actually um an article called a really horrible It's actually Dan Dunka. He posted this video last night. um who uh Dan Dunking he he he kind of debunks the academics and the the the skeptics but he there's a paper called archaeology not no sorry apocalypse not which they put out a couple about a year or so ago which is kind of strange but yeah so you know we set up Megalithania to bridge the gap between academia archaeologists and the alternative and create a stage for it because we felt it was important back in 2006 and it's still it's still to me there's just too much battling. People need to kind of lighten up, actually talk to each other and like I'm sure we we'll get through and uh make some amazing breakthroughs. Keep scrolling down. Keep going. 6,000 members represents professional avocational board of directors. Yeah, click on board of directors. Let's see what that says. See if George Soros is on here. Daniel. Okay. Sandwise. Daniel Sandwise. He's the president. He's been the president. 2025. What? Doesn't make sense. 2027. What is this? I don't understand that. Is that when their tenure ends? Are these people from the future? Commit. You want to go to committees? Are these time traveling archaeologists? All volunteers to the on the left there. Committees and task forces. I think that's the one you're going to find it. Task forces. Task force. There'll be a pseudo archaeology task force, I'm sure. Um, yeah, it's not really in there, is it? But I think it's like John Hoops and Carl Feige and you know, um, your friend Flint Dibble and things like that. I think people that they wrote this paper called Archaeology Not that Dan posted last night in video. And um it just must piss them off that Graham, you know, is getting all this crazy attention and is pushing these theories and they feel like it's an attack on their on their tribe. I guess yeah, I I guess it is. But I think, you know, a lot a lot of what but the problem is a lot of what Graeme says is true. It's good. It's quality research. He's an exceptional researcher. And I think people overlook that and he he's an investigative journalist. He's superb at it. I mean this the stuff he's uncovered which you know you know no one had ever seen before is quite remarkable. So I think you got to like look at that you know from um from that perspective as well you know and that gets ignored all his good you know he's really thorough you know research you know which frustrates me because I know I've read all his books I know what I know what he's talking about. Yeah. And but I think, you know, there's there's a lot of other people uh who thankfully are getting their books out, they're publishing, they're getting videos out, they're doing TV shows, and a lot of this alternative information is getting out there. I mean, I'm actually involved in ancient aliens quite a lot, History Channel. Now, a lot a lot of people dismiss that, but I find what it's done, you know, is I never talk about aliens. talking about ancient mysteries and things like but what I find it's done is it's a bit like ancient apocalypse now has is that it's pushed out these ancient sites like gbecley kahan all these you know namadol all these other sites around the world and put them into the mainstream television which is actually and some really good theories which are really valid are getting out there from alternative researchers now I don't I'm not I don't necessarily agree with lots of the alien or UFO stuff it's not really my my my specialtity but the fact is they focus a lot on ancient sites and ancient and good and interesting theories and archoastronomy and aliens do. No, the show does. The show does. Right. Right. And so I think it's like it's actually alien. They're bas essentially like aliening the gaps, right? Like with the we don't understand from the past like the great pyramids like we couldn't have humans couldn't have done it. It was too long ago must have been aliens. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That that is a general that's a general way it's looked at. But I mean it's because of the high technology the vase it's almost like computer and so you have to kind of you know so they it's a way of popularizing it using the aliens but at the same time a great title ancient it's getting information like about the you know about this high tech into the public domain in a mainstream way which I think is great you know it needs to be done so it's allowing our alternative researchers and authors to get their information and theories out in that in that world. I think that frustrates a lot of the academics and this this society and things like that. Same as Gra, you know, the same way Graeme Hancock's upset them as well. But it's all good. I mean, I think it's just a case of I just think things need to change. And like I say, the reason we set up a conference was to bridge this gap and put these all these people on the same stage so we can have a discussion about it and not dismiss each other and not because and not ignore people's discoveries, actually discuss them. And you know if you know if the discovery gets proven to be wrong you can let it go then you know you know but you got to discuss it and like work it out but I think the archa astronomy definitely needs to be addressed especially at sites like cameraepe ande. Have you ever heard of Jeffrey Drum? Yes I have. Yeah. The land of chem. Yes. Yeah. What do you make of his theories? Yeah I've had a look at some of it actually. Yeah I think it's it's quite interesting. Yeah. I mean you you go into the red I think the red pyramid. Yeah. It stinks of ammonia. Right. That is weird. There's no way that is just bird poop stinking place. Yeah, bat poop. No, it's like this is weird. That is a weird kind of chemical smell in that place. But yeah, know I kind of I've looked at some of his stuff. It's pretty cool. I know you had him on here once, didn't you? As well. Yeah. Yeah. So, I mean, you look at the I think that's probably one of my favorite theories on on the pyramids and what they were doing in Egypt is the chemical manufacturing stuff. I think it makes so much sense. And they could shape what is that how you shape the stones then like sort of cut them easily using chemicals using well for metallergy they would have used those chemicals for metal to create metals metallergy um and then also for uh like fertilizer right and like the crops that that's what he was saying right Steve they were like using that to to help fertilizer stuff yeah fertilizer agriculture and um you know it doesn't really answer the question of like how did they lift those giant blocks and stuff and how did they move those giant blocks? But like when you get into the capium and you see those giant boxes in there that have those scoops that are taken out of them. Yeah. He makes a case to where you could use some of these chemicals to to do that to soften that and to make turn it into like a soft ice cream and scoop it out. Yeah. Yeah. You got a lot of scoop marks there in the stone as well. You get that in a And if you could use some of these chemicals to soften these stones, it would make a lot more sense. Yeah. Especially when you're dealing with granite and diorite and things like that. Yeah, for sure. Limestone is fairly, you know, workable. But I would love to see Jeffrey Drum and Chris Dunn like collaborate on something. Well, because Chris cuz Chris Dunn in his book, you know, uh the Giza power plant, he talked about chemicals. Yeah. chemicals would go into the queen's chamber down one of the shafts. It would it would it would be um I forget what what chemical it was. Um hydrogen liquid hydrogen or something. Yeah. That would go down one of the like the the uh the left hand shaft into the queen's chamber. It would create a chemical reaction in the queen's chamber. go out there up the Grand Gallery and do something in the King's Chamber where like the the microwave those wave guides that were coming out of the King's Chamber would combine with the the hydrogen in there and do something that created free energy, I guess. Yeah. Yeah, that's it. But yeah. No, but and he also thought that the chemicals were being poured into the ground outside of the Great Pyramid and then they were being like somehow pushed up into the shafts that went down into the Queen's Chamber. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty It's pretty epic really. I mean, that's another level of technology. Oh, yeah. What a crazy thought experiment that book is. The Giza Power Plan. Holy Yeah, that is pretty pretty cool. He's done he's got a new one out as well. He'd probably discuss Tesla connection. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's basically about, you know, that's the idea that there was this uh hammering uh device that was in the subterranean chamber of the pyramid that would hammer the ground underneath the pyramid. Deep underneath the pyramid. I forget how exactly deep it is, but it would basically uh so the foundation that the pyramid sits on, that part of the uh Giza plateau is very, I guess, like seismically active. And when you penet when you pound the ground, when you hit it with like a hydraulic hammer underneath the pyramid, it creates a little mini earthquake. And when the ground does that, it creates these electrons that flow through the earth's surface. Yes. And he was saying that these electrons somehow interact with the pyramid to to do to create this power that the thing creates. Yeah, I think he I think he wrote about magnetism as well and um you know things like natural magnetism in the earth as well can can um be manipulated and things like this. Yeah, there's earthquake lights. Yeah, there's Marfa, Texas where there's like famous place for all these earthquake lights that would come up where the rocks kind of rubbing together under deep under the ground. I mean in uh just coming back to Geekbecepe in Gabbecepe in enclosure D uh something was published in the mid 2000s and it was by Pablo Derbatis of Triest University um and he basically did some acoustic research inside enclosure D which has this very interesting geometry it's kind of elliptical but it's also got this very special geometry we looked at and he also did while he was there and this is when Claus Schmidt was the head archaeologist they found within it a spiraling magnetic anomaly coming up out of the ground in between the two central T-pillars and he and he freaked out. So he got he went around all the different angles and got the same thing from all the different angles to prove his point. Wow. And so they were building on top of a magnetic anomaly which can we know can affect consciousness. you know, we know. So, it may So, the reason they chose the odd, it's really kind of bizarre location when you look at like the middle of nowhere up on these kind of hills in these stony hills. Um, it makes you question what they they must have recognized some kind of special quality about it to choose that site. But also if you know the work of John Burke who wrote seed of knowledge stone of plenty he did a whole book basically like 10 or 15 years of research going around to other ancient sites with magnetometers picking you know working out where the magnetism was the strongest. There was anomalies and he eventually concluded that this these were the places where the ancient people would place their seeds and grains and that this magnetism and touric currents would charge it up. And so and he did test he did tests in labs and everything as well. When you then go and plant the seeds and grains that you get a much higher yield, higher quality crop, frost resistant and things like this. Wow. This was all published. It was it's all like scientifically documented and it's been proven by other people doing tests as well. So many of these sites, these ancient sites, even the pyramids, what they were doing, they were creating like as you mentioned this fertilizing kind of energy to enhance their agriculture. Right. And if you go back to go, right? So this was 9,600 BC. They were doing that here. So I postulate, hypothesize, speculate, whatever you want to call it, that it's known that agriculture developed in that immediate area within 200 years of Quebec being built and the the agricultural revolution went boom. It started happening. People were growing food everywhere, bringing their seeds around, sharing them, planting them, getting good yields and things like this. very fertile kind of area at the time and so were they manip did they have some kind of understanding that of how to enhance their seeds and grains at Quebec Lee to then go and do this effectively so that's another thing we're looking into now but hard to prove can't find much data to back it up but the fact is there is a major spiraling magnetic anomaly right at the heart of the main enclosure at Quebec so that's fascinating yeah it's pretty interesting and who found on this this was Pablo Derbatles of Triest University. Um and uh this is it's in a paper. It's published. You can see it online. Um can you find it, Steve? Yeah, we mentioned it in our little book. We're going to do a big thing about it in the next book. Uh for sure because we think it's really intriguing and we we we problem. I want to get inside these sites. So I'm reaching out to the archaeologist here. Let me in the sites with a magnetometer. Let's see what else we got. You know, because if that's the if that's that's really interesting and it's scientific. It's not like we're just making it up. This was published um how do you spell his name? What about just uh just put acoustics Pablo Turbatto? Yeah, acoustics. That might come up. But yeah, so this is just one of the thing I mean because there are definitely acoustics occurring at these sites. This is something Andrew Collins is a good friend of mine. He's done a lot of research on the fact that these are generally these are kind of um elliptical in shape. So these are very specific acoustic properties. when you have elliptical enclosures and closed structures, you know, with, you know, going around surrounding you. Um, and so he found out that, you know, this guy here, Pablo Deris, that um you might want to look at, um, go back to my lecture cuz it's actually in that. Um, it might be easier. It might be this one right here. No, it's not that. No. Um, okay. Yeah, but it's there is it's definitely online. I downloaded Are there any other places that they found these besides go back? Oh, all over the world. Loads of loads of site. loads of British stone circles, even the mound culture sites of America. There's things that were found at the pyramids to do with ions. I think you were talk mentioning that earlier, like the ions being collected, even the stone chambers of New England. Electrons. Yeah, he's called a solid state electron harvester. His book, I do if you can get hold of a copy of John Burke's book, Stoneh Seed of Knowledge, Stone of Plenty. It's an absolute superb superb piece of seed of knowledge. Stone of plenty. Yeah, I see. I think it's not I think it's he died unfortunately and the book went out of print, but you can get copies of it. But it's it's mind-blowing. This is it here. Unbelievable. He does this was before Quebec Lee, so he didn't mention it in there, but it his research can be applied, right? I think to that area very much so. Um because you got earthquake zones as well. You mentioned creating this earthquake kind of thing, the pyramid, right? You got a whole when the earthquake happened a couple of years ago. It was felt at Gbecepe very slightly but it was felt there. That earthquake was devastating. In fact, yeah. In fact, in Shanura, the nearest town, nearest city to go, something fell off this bell tower or something. It shook it slightly. The main part was in Gaziiente, which is 100 miles away or so. And uh but this and it also felt a carepe as well. So some people and now you know I'm speculating as well based upon his work that just even the subtle earthquake kind of zones you can you know where you got you know stone rubbing together deep under the ground with these balls of light that could also be enhanced and manipulated to enhance seeds and grains according to John Burke. Interesting. Yeah cuz you you're getting all this electric energy coming up you know things like this this electric charge. I find that really intriguing and I think it fits in with Chris Dunn's theories as well, you know, very much so on the pyramid. Wow. So, it's all happening. I mean, so so I mean, and this is obviously long before the pyramids technic officially, right? Even though people say they're Yeah. Who knows how old they are. Yeah. Yeah. People say they're much older and but but there's other innovations. I mean, I could just waffle on about this. I mean there's other innovations that have been recorded in southeast Turkey which one of them is air conditioning. The first ever air conditioning which I hugely appreciate was discovered at a site called Navali Chi. So what what happened here is that this was about 8,300 BC. So you know thousand so years after Quebec it's now being flooded. The whole area is gone. But this was researched by Harold Helpman, uh, Claus Schmidt, and others back in the 1980s going into the '9s. And they found not only these sort of square enclosures there with the terrarazzo floor and these amazing statues, but they also found some of the living structures where people lived. Some of them were like 16 m long or 40 ft long and so forth. But what they found was is like it was next to what's called the Canara Stream, which was a tributary of the Euphrates River, one of the rivers of paradise of the Bible. And uh they found that there were channels carved out under this house throughout all the way along it, all these different channels. And they would it would allow little slle gates and things like this, very cold water to come in from the stream on hot days, and let them in there. Then they would open up the floor part and it the cool air would cool down the environment they're in. So they could live comfortably in very hot weather. No way. Yeah. It's very classy. And and another site called Chayanu which is further north where they possibly did these sacrifices. They found again they found under floor of the domestic structures under floor channels carved out between them but this was for cool air to be blown to flow in and out from. So, and then they would have areas where they come up into the structure. So, that that one was air. So, the water would cool the air. Well, in Nali Chury, yeah, there's no evidence for the water going through the ones that churned, but the cool air may have they think they may have been used for storage, but the Nali chy one's fascinating. I mean, little just little details like that that just mentioned in the occasional academic text from 1983. And to me, it's like, oh my god. I mean, that is like innovation heaven. I mean, that's that is so useful as well. Yeah, I mean if you're boiling to death, you know, like 100° heat and things like this. So, little things like that really get me. Plus, you got um the fact that they found calcium oxalate in some of the the kind of big stone bowls at Quebec, which is a byproduct of brewing beer. So, they were brewing very low alcohol beer. This is just from probably accidental fermentation of barley and other substances and um and but they had an alcoholic beverage. It was more like a grl and it probably wasn't very tasty, you know. It's probably like you have to chew on it, you know, and um but still they had alcohol back then and they were possibly brewing it back then. They found that at the Tufian sites as well. There's even evidence up in u a site called Cortice which is actually a bit older than Quebec. that's further northeast. That's along there's a whole series of sites along the Tigress River. Um, which is, you know, couple hundred miles, 300 miles to the northeast. But this they found possible evidence of wine production going back again to about 10,000 years ago, maybe even older, maybe 11,000, 12,000. And uh there's actually been someone's written a book about early kind of alcohol baby. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. And so it's called it K O R T I K if you want to K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K O O R T I K. And um it might not be on here. This was mentioned briefly in one paper or one book. So they might not mention the wine thing, but then it was proven that big thing that like tea cut out of the ground right there. That's probably probably the site. I mean and also you can see there you see the kind of one on the top left there. That is some of the stonework from Cortic Teepe. Oh wow. So So this is before Quebec, right? Wow. So this about the size of your hand. It's not big, but it's 3D abstract relief carving. So this could be where the ideas of all the abstract 3D relief carving came from before Quebec. So there's a go back to that big T- shape that was cut out of that ground that the floor that Yeah. Right there on the left. What the hell is that? That's Cortech teepe. I don't know. I think that's Halum Semi actually. Um another I think that's the ar that's the trench they've cut out. That's where they cut the T-pillar out. No, no. I think that's just the trench. The shape of the trench. I don't know. Maybe it's called Tic T. Wow. Oh, yeah. Cuz you can see some of the small circular kind of areas which they have there. This is pretty much almost been kind of semif flooded nowadays, unfortunately. So, this is just a huge chunk of bedrock that's just like chilling there and they were No, no. I I think this is covered in mud. I think cortic is lots of these small circular they say domestic structures. Ah, okay. I see. Um but in this area, this is where they think they found uh this certainly this part of the world is where the first ever wine was produced was in Turkey was eastern Turkey, southeast Turkey. And so you got beer, you got wine being produced. And one of the other things that's being talked about a lot, which we're going to get into in our book, I know Graeme Hanok's well into this is the psychedelic use in Southeast Turkey. Because there's evidence at Retect Cave, I think it's called in Israel, where they found evidence of sort of alcohol production there, which is this is 14,000 years old, this site, by the way. It's even older. And they found possibly urgot as well from, you know, so they're they're getting urgot kind of mold growing on the old kind of beer grill or whatever it is or the grains. And that could have been happening at Quebec cuz if they were brewing stuff there and so they may have been accidentally taking a whole load of LSD with their beer grill and tripping tripping the light. Fantastic. Yeah. And and and to me that it's a to me it's a logical kind of uh reality to that because you look at the abstract nature of some of the the stonework. Uh what the is that dude? That's the creepiest I've ever seen. What? Ratfac. Yeah, you spelled that wrong. High priest of rainbow. I totally spelled it wrong. Jesus. Yeah, look what comes up. Oh my god, that's a nightmare, dude. Trim that off. That's what you see if you have too much god probably. Yeah, right. Oh my god. And anyway, but so you got like, you know, so that so the little innovations some of them could have been accidental. They could have accidentally discovered like powerful psychedelics growing on their be growing on their food or their wheat or their beer or whatever because urgot is what Albert Hoffman, you know, synthesize LSD from. It's it's unbelievable. And there's also mushroom symbolism throughout this area. Terrence McKenna wrote about possible mushroom symbolism, possible use of cannabis at um Chattal Hoyek which is was the famous first city in the world for a long time until you know Geek Le is turned up in f that's further west in Turkey. It dates to around um where's that? 7,000 BC. It's near cona. It's in sort of central kind of Turkey and um and that and so so there's quite possibly they were really going full sheamanic at this time. I think that I think there's a strong case for that and that could explain why everything just kicked off because they made these possible accidental discoveries that kind of blew their minds and inspired them in profound ways. Yeah, there was definitely cattle there. We know that there's orox different kind of boines in that area. So in this part of the world when you've got dung of these beasts, that's where that's where that's where psilocybin grows. So different strains of it. And so there's lots of little possibilities like that which really kind of intrigued me because I'm always trying to work out why did they do this? What gave them the incentive to do this? It just seems to there's no there's no clear reason. I mean, maybe it was the end of the younger dus. Things were getting better, but is that really enough reason to create these crazy abstract art carved out of stone in these temples and things like this? So, I think there's more to it than meets the eye when it when you come to that kind of um when you're trying to understand what they were doing. Yeah, I think so too, man. There's definitely a lot of evidence for drug use throughout history um with every civilization. And uh yeah, you never know. You know, you never know how much that stuff inspired everything they did. You know, could it inspire everything? I mean, obviously, they didn't have a have a foundational understanding of chemicals like we do and how the human body works and processes different alkaloids and chemicals and all that stuff. So take eating a mushroom and then seeing God. You got to think that's something, you know, if especially if you're you're living 12,000 BC, you're going to have a way different experience than someone's going to have now when we actually know what the going on inside our minds. Yeah. And and the geometrical nature as well. You see lots of geometry on these things, you know, and things like that. You see uh serpents carved everywhere as well. You see that kind of thing. You see um combinations of human and animal, which you find a lot at these sites, you know, things like this. Right. And you know and and also just the kind of you know inspiration for like you know seeing patterns and movements in the stars you know if you're in you know if you get inspired by that through these different you know substances that could be why they were getting into the astronomy and the solstesses and laying out things in a certain way certain geometrical forms and things like that because you know who knows but it's just a you know bit of speculation going on here right now but um but it's worth worth discussing. Yeah. One day we're going to figure out backwards time travel and we're going to go back there and see exactly what all these people are doing so people won't be able to fight over it anymore. We'll know exactly what the was going on. That would help. Yeah. Yeah. And uh we're going to figure out that people from the future went back and built the pyramids just to confuse the out of all of us that are caught in between. Yeah. I mean Yeah. That would be that would be maybe maybe it was built by time travelers. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe it's built for by people who are way later than we even exist. Yeah. I mean, they're abstract as well. I mean, the pyramids, man, they're proper abstract art. They're like they're like the ultimate abstract art installation. And and I I see like these like a Beckley, I see them like art installations as well. They're not just temples. They're not just um they're not just like places where people lived, right? You know, they're not just where they studied the stars and the sun and the moon. Almost like it feels like there's a kind of art, you know? And and the thing about the artwork there, the stonework, the artwork is that it didn't change for 1500 years at least. It stayed the same. The same style spec, the same almost like the same principles of artwork and design and layout, teillars with hands, everything stayed the same. It barely changed. That's what's I find that really interesting that they came up with. It's also similar similar um with the the head the giant heads on Easter Island. They have those little hands carved into the side of them similar to the Gabbec tears. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that's I mean that blows my mind possible connections with these other cultures as well which people have talked about a lot but um but I just think that the uh it's often overlooked the artistic nature and one of the things that was discovered you might if you want to bring this up you can. This is the bore statue from Geekbecepe. this giant boar statue. Um boar. Yeah, it's life-sized boar statue. Like the kind of beast of the area that was found last year at um Gbeckl in enclosure D. There it is. Um and the thing about this talking about artworks, this had red, white, you blow that up and black pigments on it. So they found paint all over it. And this has then opened up the whole kind of question were all these was this whole site painted was it it wasn't just stone right you know and so that really gets me because it's like you know especially red black and white they're the three colors found here predominantly right so the whole site could have been painted red black and white could have had other colors a couple of other colors as well um that would have looked very different um but this is he's holding like a head in his hand as well in his his hoofs or whatever you call them. Um, and you can still see the red pigment in his mouth. Yeah, that's huge. I mean, that's like, you know, big. It's like the size of this table. Is that how big that thing is? Wow. Yeah, it's huge. And um everything's much bigger. When you go there, you realize the scale of this. How or what is the current plan with Gobeci? Are they plan to keep digging down to try to find more? And what is additional what is plans if any to excavate more of these mounds where they are in go. Sure. Okay. Yeah. We'll start at lee. Yes. So there's been a big drama going on about that. Um people are claiming it's uh you know this is Jimmy Corsetti. He's been talking about this. There's saying they've stopped they've halted excavations there. Now they've certainly slowed down since the whole co re co time for sure. But I've been there. I go there twice a year. We do we do take groups out there and stuff and they're constantly doing things. There's always stuff happening. They're always cleaning up, sorting things out. The issue with Beckley Tippy is that it's buried so deep. It's a huge amount like 30 ft of rubble and stone and dirt. They've got to carefully move out the way of each stone. So you I can understand why it's a bit slow. It makes sense because they got to do it carefully. If they do one little bit of damage, they're in trouble. And so then then they have to get down to the bedrock. They have to clean it all up. They have to preserve things, fix things, glue things back together. And something How much deeper do you think it is? Well, I think they've reached a bedrock in a in in the main one the area they're excavating in the southeast. It's not deeper. But there's a whole there's like 90% of it has barely been touched, which could be just as deep. So a huge amount of work needs to be done. Wow. But they are working on it. They found a new They found some new carvings in enclosure B. They found they found this last year. This was this had a whole load of dirt just above the head of that boar. Wow. For since they exist for years, decades. Yeah. For decades. They only just found this because they just cleared away some dirt. Wow. And so that that really kind of gets me. And so that so they are working away slowly. A new a new uh bit of information has just come out from the head of the whole kind of uh test kind of um you know uh cu people that are organizing it and they're saying that they are now going to remove some trees cuz some trees have been planted up there controversially by the land owners which was done partly to it gives them more value on their own property. Um but they're going to remove some trees and start excavating new areas. this is actually being announced, but I don't know if it's been publicly announced, but we saw the Turkish announcement of it. So, more is going to start to be done for sure. And uh I think they're being kind of pressured into it a little bit from the the general public because of, you know, Jimmy's been doing pushing, you know, that they're not doing enough. In a way, they're not they really they really could do a lot more. I mean, I really want to see the whole place excavated, but they're saying they're not going to do it. They're going to leave it for future generations. But luckily, Carahan, they're going for it. you know, it's like, oh yeah, they're blasting through it. They're not messing around. They got like loads of people up there working on it for like half the year pretty much. I think they extended the dig all the way into um uh right up until November. It Yeah, they put it in the museum. Yeah. Oh Yeah, they they had I think they kind of had to really uh keep it safe. Um cuz they're excavating all around it. They don't want to Look at the toucan. You see that little toucan? Oh, there's all sorts in that museum. It's crazy. Oh yeah, that's in That's supposed to be a vulture. Oh, a vulture from Carahan. That was one of the new discoveries. That's about 2 and 1/2 ft tall. And um but yeah, so now they're so now they're working on an Carahan, which is insane. Amazing place. And they're also now working Oh, focused on that part. Yeah. And this guy's got short short little stubby chess. I wonder what that's about. Why are they showing their dicks? Well, I think it's We think it's fertility. We think it's there's fertility rights going on here. Myself and JJ have been working on that as a kind of possibility because it fits in with other traditions um from other cultures. Are you familiar with Mark John Allegro? Yes, I am. Yeah. Yeah. The sacred mushroom and the cross. Yeah. Yeah. I'm aware of his work very much. So, yeah, I've read all that. Pretty wild. Yeah. I mean that fits in. Jesus Christ was a psychedelic mushroom. Yeah. I mean this fits in this this weirdly fits in with a lot of this kind of era stuff in my opinion that a lot of the symbolism and mythologies come from that kind of um psychedelic kind of inspirations. But yeah, other sites are being excavated. There's one really interesting one called Sabir which is s a y b thing on the sea. You might want to check that out. And um that is a fascinating site. Yeah. And you see Yeah. you can see like any of the images there. I probably got one of mine up there somewhere. And uh this is a whole thing going on. This is like the the second part of the excavation. So they're probably getting ready to build a neighborhood here or something like that. The archaeologists had to come out and survey it and they found this. Well, the the thing about this is that most of the site is buried under a village. They've actually demolished one of the houses. Wow. Yeah. If you go on the one on the left there, you see you see that's like indoors on the No, no, on the left. Um, not that bit on the panel there with a 3D again. He's holding his fus as well. Right. And um, click on them. Yeah, click on one of them. And uh, so that you can see that's under a structure. That's under a house. But that house has been removed now. This is this is all open. You know, I can we've got we went there recently and they've removed the entire house from it. That looks like some sort of like wild beast attacking somebody. On the left you got a or you got a guy jumping holding something in his hand. Then you got two leopards. Oh, look at the Yeah. Look at the leopard eating the guy or getting ready to Yeah. trying to go for the guy. Go for the guy who's having a wank. Yeah, pretty much. Yeah, that's a polite way of putting it. Yeah. Yeah. But this is again this is like full of symbolism. The archaeologists claim this is what's called a narrative scene where there's a different process of like kind of teaching almost going on here. I think it's astronomical. I think it's like you know Taurus, you got Orion the hunter, you got leopards which could be Leo and things like this. There's a lot of this kind of symbolism seems to match what's you know constellations and other such things. Mhm. And this is all carved out of bedrock like we find Carameep. So there's a huge amount going on here. There's even an underground area here as well which you can actually go inside and deep under you know it's almost like Darren Ku like a small small section of an underground city and they found all sorts of things here. So, this is completely carved out of bedrock, this whole thing. It's it's incredible. And uh and they're going to hopefully excavate the whole thing over the next couple of years. There's more sites. There's other sites like Yandel Hoyek, which is going to be proved to be bigger than Quebec. There's um site called Shakmee, which is older than Quebec. all in this the all these little sites are east of um pretty much I think sorry west just west of um Quebec and Shan Lura and there's like 12 official test sites but really there are probably 38 people are saying now so there's all sorts of different um there's different stuff coming and it's all it's all very similar it's all got the same designs it's almost like the same artist but these are all these stretch over one and a half thousand 2,000 years. Yeah. But they're all unique as well. They're all unique, but they've all got the same style. Bit like in Egypt, you know, you get the same kind of look. In the Mayan stuff, you get the same look, but it goes through multiple different sites and eras. And that's happening in this part of the world as well. So, it's a very specific design spec. I mean it must be some genius level people coming up with the first batch of the designs at like Quebec and other places that then kind of spread through this whole area and why they were built so many sites in such a kind of relatively small area is baffling here on the on the one on the left there you got the bottom left you got like these small enclosures are being found with like they're only like 15 ft wide or less right with like seven or eight pillars two pillars around the edge of one in the middle. You've got like the skeletons were found at this place as well. Actually, yeah, found a whole bunch of skeletons here recently. Kind of there's no official like elaborate burials of this culture, right? Hasn't been found yet anyway. They found some bones, some skeletons and various places. They found worked. They found actually skulls in Gbecley that are being kind of worked like trapanned and had holes cut through them and things like this and be removed from the spine and things like this. Yeah. I think I remember um the snake bros were showing me that stuff. Yeah. So that that's weird. I mean basically you've got um what could be a skull cult they call it. You know you get the same kind of thing. You get you get caches of skulls at Chano as well. Um another site. But yeah, so there's a whole I mean this is just it's all happening. I mean this this is it. This is the time of like discovery of this culture. This is happening now. You can go there. You can see it being excavated. It's like going back a few hundred years into like Egypt where stuff was still covered up by sand or you know the jungles of Guatemala finding teal and the Mayan temples as you hack through. Right. This is happening now in this rocky landscape of southeast Turkey. This is like the time of discovery. This is cool. This is cool stuff, man. And I think it's uh I think it's a great thing that Graham's getting such such more wide attention, getting another season of his show on Netflix with uh and Keano Reeves likes it, too. That's fun. Yes. Um, and it's making it more it's making it more available to people and it's getting more people interested into it, which will hopefully bring in more funding to stuff like this and digging up and finding more sites and making more discoveries and maybe even pushing back the timeline farther than we've imagined up till now. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. Yeah. It's cool man. Um, where can people find your YouTube channel and find your books and all the stuff that you're doing? Sure. Yeah, they can uh they can just search for me, Hugh Newman. Um they can go to megalithomania.co.uk. They can um I've got a big Yeah, we've got a YouTube channel. We've got a couple of hundred thousand subscribers. Uh it's just megalithania UK. And yeah, we have a whole bunch of um I've just recently published a video about Jericho. Again, that's that's a that's a very cool site. Oh, yeah. That's actually got a summer solstice sunset alignment as well dating back to 8,300 BC, which is pretty epic. Um and yeah, we've got yeah, we have a whole bunch of um lectures. We run conferences. We've got the Origins conference we do in November in England in Wiltshire. We do the big megalith mania thing in um conference in May if people want to come over and hang out. That's the one that's the one we got coming up and we've got some really cool speakers. Um yeah, but you know, it's a whole uh we're like a project. We do conferences. as we do tours to, you know, places like Quebec and all that. We we want to get out there constantly to check what's going on. It's great to show people around cuz they're like, "Whoa, you know, what the hell is this?" And so, yeah, so we're kind of busy. You know, we're doing a lot of things, but they can just check out Hugh Newman or Megalithania. Beautiful. All right. Well, thanks for your time. Thank you. All the way over here in the US going home back to the UK tomorrow. Yeah, tomorrow night. Yeah. Cool. Well, yeah. again. I really appreciate it. And uh everything's linked below, folks. Good night.