Thanks for coming on AJ Wilkerson. Thanks. I appreciate you doing this job. Oh, yeah, yeah, you're about your van is super dope I love it my van is a shit box on wheels But I love it. It's my shit box. Oh, yeah, everybody needs their own shit box, man So what's your store for people who people aren't familiar with you? What is what's your story and what's your background? Yeah, so I may I'm a stand-up comedian and I'm autistic So I Started stand up like two years ago after I got diagnosed and got my medical marijuana prescription So I was really like that like they anxiety was really the thing that kept me from doing it like I just thought Before I found out I was autistic I just thought I was like just really bad anxiety and I thought I had some other mental health shit going on But I just thought like I love stand up But I was just like that's not something I'll ever physically be capable of doing and then I then I got diagnosed And then I got my medical marijuana card and weed gives you that little bit of fuck around and find out You know, yeah, like yeah So so it was a big help. Yeah, it makes a little ye and the saw awesome. Yeah Give it a shot, you know, how old were you when you got diagnosed with thought? 30 30 yeah That's weird. I seems like super late, doesn't it? Is that not kind of but not really so a lot more people are getting diagnosed later in life now because like It just people just didn't know a lot about it when we were growing up like there's like this Generation gap like with autism. So like I was born in 88 and Asperger's wasn't even a diagnosable condition until like months after I was born You know, so by the time they start testing for that I was like four or five There still was so little known about it, you know what I mean? That and I had I was smart enough that I could pass most of my testing and education stuff And so it just kind of slipped through the cracks, you know And I was intelligent enough that I could I like learned my own like coping mechanisms and like camouflage techniques and like masking Techniques to blend in with everybody so I knew how to fit in, but it was just it just caused so much mental wear and tear from like You know, basically constantly acting and pretending to like I know yeah, yeah Well autism doesn't necessarily mean you're not intelligent, right? Right, right He has Yeah, which if I had been diagnosed earlier in life I would have technically what would be Asperger's they just don't diagnose it as Asperger's anymore It all falls under autism spectrum disorder now really yep since when since like 2007 2010 Somewhere in there Wow, I had no idea I didn't either I didn't know until I was getting diagnosed like when I was doing my initial Like observation and everything and like 15 minutes into like a four-hour appointment Like the doctor just stops and he's like so just so you know you're definitely on the spectrum You know we're gonna keep going and figure out you know exactly where but you're definitely autistic. Yeah So what are the key signs to tell that you're so that it's not that there's really key signs because autism there's It's literally it's a spectrum. There's so many different Faucets like facets to it so like The best way I can explain is like think about like a color wheel like throw darts at a color wheel and wherever those darts Landers like the traits that this autistic person would have but everyone gets the throat everyone like throws their own darts You know what I mean? So like for me like my autism is um, I've like I have issues with Communicating sometimes to like I didn't realize until after I was older and like getting diagnosed was like oh not everybody does this But like I'll build word clouds in my head So I know where I'm going in a conversation and like but then that means I'm not listening as much to the other half of the conversation Because I'm thinking of what do I say next to keep this conversation going and not seem like a weirdo, you know So really to that yeah So things like that I struggle a lot with like executive function So like that that voice you have in your head like when your alarm clock goes off You know and you hit the snooze button twice that voice in your head when the alarm goes off that third time It's like hey, we can't it's news like we gotta get up. We gotta go to work. We gotta pay bills We gotta I don't have that whatever that thing is that kind of keeps you on track Or at least not in like the traditional sense. It's more like Like we have we have terrible radio signal like and we're just communicating through walkie talkies, you know what I mean? So when I'm when I'm up on a hill, you know, I can I can hear him You know, I'm I've got that reception and I've got that inner but then when I'm you know when I'm down, you know in a valley Not getting reception, you know, so can't really communicate with the warden, you know It's really I call him the warden because recently I did acid for the second time And I did like a guided meditation that a friend had sent me and so yeah The whole pink Floyd triangle thing like talk to your inner self and I literally was like hey look Warden the inmates can't be running the asylum here. I like you gotta take control of your Yeah, have my my own little psychedelic come to Jesus moment, you know super cool. Yeah, dude Yeah, you can see that like when you watch Elon talk I always thought that it was just like he was so smart That's why he talked like that because he just has too many ideas to be able to cycle through his well, and that's kind of that's kind of the other Part of it for me is like is like information processing Like if you think about like your brain is like a highway, right? Like most people have so many lanes and so it's easier for them to direct traffic Well, I've got like an 18 lane fucking highway, you know like so I'm just trying to frog or cross and just grab hold of something You know what I mean, yeah, so there's just so many ideas flying by at one time that is hard to stay on track and focus But then the other aspect of that is if I do grab onto something I can fall into that hole and not come out for days Yeah, you know me like during COVID I was I was doing I was working on a tour and we were trying to put together like some video stuff And so I was doing video editing and I literally fell into a hole and I I was editing video for 42 hours straight No sleep not like bathroom breaks and food and that was it and I just cat Was just in a hole I couldn't stop you just hyper-focused. Yeah, it was it was that And I was like I can't let this go until it's done because I knew I had that thing in my brain It's like I know once I let it go. It's gonna be really hard getting back here. Yeah, you know Yeah, they say that a lot of people who are like really good at certain things like a lot of like a lot of people who are I Always thought that pro video game players Some some of them because they're so Anti-social and they're so really good and like laser focused at this one thing this one specific game and There's another guy who Clay Marza who's a professional surfer and he was like a very Anti-social guy didn't like to talk to people didn't like to talk to anybody But he was like one of the best wildest most creative surfers have ever seen and I always for some reason just associated it aspergers with people like that people just like Pray laser focus on one thing. It's all they can think about well, and that's that it's You're you're fucking spot on because that's the deal But for me for a long time like because I didn't I wasn't sure what that thing was for me That I was gonna be really good at and so I didn't realize it But I'd have these really intense hobbies But I would only have them for really short periods of time like I've learned to do all sorts of crazy shit like I grew up in construction Like we were talking about outside Excuse me So I got into like woodworking and like crafting stuff and like making things from wood Now I was you know doing a lot of woodwork and like had like did like an Etsy store And was like selling stuff on there and then from from woodworking then like I got burnt out on woodworking I was like this isn't it I don't want to do this But you know maybe it is something with my head something tactile with my hand So then I went into like leatherworking and then I went into like the kydex making those like molded plastic like holsters and stuff like that And then from there I went into like Like the fucking I don't have any to but like the paracord like how people make like the bracelet in the landards and like yeah So it's making like these braided like you know 12 foot dog leashes out of you know making these weird jigs So I could like you know make all these weird patterns and designs and stuff and so I just I would have these weird Intense focuses and then I would just burn out on them And just so like yes seven eight months and then be like nope. This isn't it what's next, you know and I was in one of those When I was getting diagnosed. I wanted to make like my own cartoon. I was like that's this is the next thing like I want to do something Creative fun, you know and so I was trying to make my own cartoon So I was like trying to teach myself how to draw and how to animate and how to like storyboard and like all of this stuff all at the same time and while we were doing the like the Observation that appointment At the University of Florida at their Center for Autism and related disabilities Like going through all of that and I was telling them about this idea and it's like so you definitely like you like you need like a Creative outlet of some kind But the like what you're trying to do now isn't releasing that pressure valve like there's too many obstacles between you and releasing that actual pressure from your brains Like why don't you just try like you want to make people laugh? It's not like you have like a like humor seems to be like that element you're best with communicating with so why don't you try like Doing like an open mic or something and I was like all right, sure Let's you know And then I fucking did it and then ever since then it was like this is the thing like that first time like you like I got a laugh on stage Like like something just kind of clicked into place. Okay. It was a doctor this is just open. Oh stand up comedy. Yeah That's pretty really yeah because like I said like during that observation We spent like four hours together and literally it's just It's almost like in like if someone were interviewing you for like to to like write your biography You know what I mean like everything about your life like what do you remember from your childhood? What what about this like what about this like all of these questions and as he starts building this up like he's basically building a profile of Like you know these are some of your traits like these are some of the things you struggle with like going through all of that And that was just something that he highlighted was like you need like some like method of Creativity because they're like you you have like so that that talking about that highway earlier He's like you're basically your highways backed up because you can't get this traffic off of the highway Yeah, so you have to find a way to get this traffic off the highway or it's never gonna unblock You know and so that's why he's like you know You have all of these hurdles like teaching you're trying to teach yourself how to draw an anime and storyboard and trying to learn like five Different skills at one time. Yeah, that's a lot of you have to do all of that before you can reach that create creative level Right, so you're you're basically hampering yourself like just go straight to the tap. Yeah You say when you reach the creative level you mean like so Like you mean like releasing it to the public and letting people Experience what you created or the creative process of it. It's a creative process Obviously somebody like a cartoon there's a lot of there's like days and hours and weeks and months of production and drawing and writing And so I would I would call that production versus like the creative process of actually like sitting down and like writing out the ideas But then also getting that feedback of presenting it to an audience You know what I mean like and getting that feedback in response because like you can write it But if you write it and it just sits somewhere like have you actually like it's almost like you haven't finished You know what I mean like it's not done like it's out, but you still need that feedback before like You know like you need to make sure that traffic is safe to exit before you kick it out completely You know what I mean like is this something? I need to I need to bring back and keep in my head because I need to rework on it Yeah, and make it better or is this the final version? So I have to do that before I can clear that traffic from the freeway and he's like that's where your holdup is just get out in front of People yeah get the like that's a immediate feedback right? You know so how do you do any creative writing prior to that? When I was a kid You know like um I won So that was the thing like looking back now I was like wow I should have been on this track of like creative writing the whole time because yeah Second third and fourth grade like I won awards for like children's writing contests and stuff like that I won like a young authors award for like a children's book about a princess and a dragon like it was you know Just stuff kids right, you know But you obviously go down at them. Yeah, but part of talking about like that executive function and and and like task management and things like that Once I got to a certain point in school What we were learning was boring to me because like I learned this on my own like I'm gonna read my own book I'm gonna do my own thing You know so You kind of get like you kind of lose track of what you're doing when you like when you're if you're intelligent and you give your you get free time And there's no structure to it, you know just goes off somewhere Yeah, so it never it never made it to creative writing because that was given as an assignment So it felt like work like I didn't have I never at reach that point where it was like oh no This is a fun thing for me Because it was somebody telling me to do it as opposed to me wanting to do it Yeah, you know and like like if you force someone to do something Even if it's something they enjoy there's gonna be that yeah, don't feel the same Exactly so it took me like rediscovering it later in life To realize like oh you know because I was just I was just in my friends group Because I like I have a small circle of people that I just I'd gotten so comfortable with we've been friends for like decades You know what I mean and like some people like I can meet and things just click like there's no awkward Anything was like oh no, I get this person and then we're good, you know Um But it doesn't happen often so I have like a small group of friends and I was you know I was the funny friend and then you know at a certain point I was like like one of my friends been like you stay encouraged me He's like you should try open mics and I was like like I said I can't physically do it. Yeah, you know Like I tried it I went to try it one time. I went to an open mic when I was like 23 And I was gonna go up on stage and I was just I got I was shaking so bad I went to the bathroom through up and just left. I didn't It was just yeah, it was just so super bad anxiety Uh and then I was gonna try again when I was married so it was like 26 We're gonna try again and I was not a healthy relationship Oh, she talked me out of it. It was like, you know, do you really like do you really think you're funny enough that other people are Gonna want to hear like sit and listen to you and I was like good call good point. No. Yeah Yeah, because who yeah, who's full of themselves enough to be like yeah, this room full of people is definitely gonna want to hear what I have to say Right, so I just didn't have that What was it like the first time you actually went on stage and did a set um Terrifying uh and I and here's the thing like at the time. I wasn't good Like I'm still not good like like I said I was always been a fan of comedy so I've studied comedy and like you know and so Like can like I know what like the great level is, you know in my in my brain I know what that like that marker is and I know I'm nowhere near that marker, you know what I mean Like I am on the footpath outside of the parking lot outside of my Mount Everest, you know what I mean like But you're heading in yeah, I'm heading in. I'm heading in, you know, we're getting a little elevation here But at the time I mean at the time is my first time ever doing it So I had like one like like three minute story Bit that I was doing and it like I had like maybe like three lines in three minutes that got like a laugh But I got that first one and I was like oh and then I had like some giggles and stuff like that. Yeah, you know But those three laughs is like three that's all I needed. I got three, you know And uh from there it was just all in like I found like a comedy like a writer's group like a writer's workshop And that would meet every Sunday and so I started going to that and like working and like like coming in with new material and Workshoping material and stuff and then the guy that led that workshop was like this this old road comic And he kind of like took me under my wing and became like my comedy dad cool and uh, you know Maybe like three months in after after a show um So it we had this show like a world of beer out in like this small little town called Jonesville And it was like it was in one of those like many Shopping centers that was right outside of like a like a gated community kind of thing So there's everyone from that community came to that ball there Right so my first time doing that show I did like 10 minutes and after the show Bob pulled me inside. He's like hey, you did a really great job Overwise like but I know like that's all the material you have right now So I can't have you back out here for a couple of weeks like I have to let people forget your stuff Right yeah, but I in my head I was like oh challenge accepted and that was like a Thursday show and I showed up Sunday to the workshop with a whole new 10 Minute oh yeah, yeah, and so it went through that and he's like after that workshop Um, he pulled me aside. He's like he's like I don't know He's like I don't know if like anyone said this to you yet or anything He's like but the fact that you could do that that quickly and come back and like you have that tenacity for it He's like you could do this for a living if you wanted to and as soon as somebody said that like Oh, you can do this for a living. I was like that. That's what we're doing sick You know, and so I just dove all the way in and I started treating it like I started treating it like my job Yeah, in longs it been two years two years. Yeah, which is which is insane like for me to be where I'm at in two years uh Yeah, like so um so dirt right before COVID I got so I'd been doing comedy like 11 months And I got booked for my first tour and it was through this like entertainment company at a Tallahassee and so it was like it was a variety Tour so it was like a couple like two rappers like an R&B singer Like some spoken word poets and I was the only comedian on the you know um But they they booked us like this Airbnb in Tallahassee for six months We we all went to Tallahassee. We were rehearsing for a couple of weeks and then starting the tour and uh the day after we signed paperwork locked down started Oh, yeah, so we're all in this Airbnb in Tallahassee. I'd given up, you know my place and stuff like that So we were just in this Airbnb for the tour, you know and uh We stayed for a couple more weeks. We like rehearsing and we did a couple like a couple like streaming shows just trying and then eventually We realized like it's not open enough anytime soon like tours canceled. Yeah, and so from there I was like, okay, so I have until this date basically to be out of the Airbnb and then I'm homeless So what do we do like what's the move and so I was like this is what I want to do like I got this tour I can get something else, you know what I mean? And I so I just bought a van converted it into like a shitty camper like a it's a real redneck lanyot man like it's yeah Uh, but it's a 1987 GMC Safari nice. Yeah, it was a it was a wheelchair conversion so it had like the The fiberglass like pop top on it. Okay for some extra room. Yeah for some extra room And it had a wheelchair lift in it But the previous owners when they tried to take the wheelchair lift out after like the The older relative it passed away. They busted out the side window. So it's just plywood plywood window. Yeah Real ski v looking, you know That's a good info. How do you run the ace? Do you leave it running all night or how do you know? So I have a I have a generator on like one of those like hitch carriers on the tailgate Yeah, um, so and I've got like a window a c unit like in the back of the roof So yeah, so I can run the generator and run that air conditioner, but more more often what I do is I've got a I've got like a little solar Battery pack like one of those ones you get from like REI like a 500 watts solar pack that I can recharge through my cigarette lighter and stuff And so and then I've got one of those little desktop Portable air conditioners that you fill with like ice water and then it like pushes out like cold air Oh, really and so I set that up in the back of the van and run it off of that pack nice and yeah, and then I've got like the like that installation like that Like the tin foil with the like the air bubbles and stuff. Yeah. Yeah So I've got those and I've got them like set up like with a Little like adhesive pads like the Velcro yeah, so I put those over the windows and stuff and insulate the windows and my clothes hang up like on a rod So I push them over in front of like the sliding door and that kind of insulates more from the door side Then I roll down like a like a moving blanket between like the front and back of the cab. There you go Wow So you've been in this van for a year now almost a year. Yeah, where were you living before you had the van? Um In in Gainesville like my family's from like Williston and Levy well originally Bronson but Levy County area Which is right outside of Gainesville so Gainesville was like the big city for us. Okay. Yeah Oh, yeah, I'm a real like from the from the woods like you know I just I'm I'm asked it well like I don't have an accent because my entire life I've been oh I can talk like this and blend in here and I can talk like this and blend in over here So yeah, well there's not many parts of massive like guys that are like woodsy Yeah, there's just that like Tallahassee in Gainesville area yep just that little strip in the middle Yeah, little strips of weird strip huh every time I go to Tallahassee I feel like I'm in a different world Tallahassee to the states like that Tallahassee up and down Yeah, there's like that weird that triangular section from like Jacksonville, yeah, it'll Tallahassee Yes, that little section is like not safe for minorities I mean Yeah, that's why it's a fucking well they're good at sports and it's like they're good at sports. Yeah Yeah, I was riding through over by like Lakeland and it's very like in the middle of the state like farmland Area and stuff and there's like one old beat down billboard and it says home a Ray Lewis Where he went to high school and played football is right there But it's like the most raggedy Ray Lewis sign you would think Yeah, no real news is from here, you know, I didn't I've heard that before I didn't know it was like over there in Lakeland, but he went to Lakeland high or whatever that school is but it there's a Run down billboard with a picture of him on it. That's fucking hilarious. Do Florida's a football state. Yeah, you watch football? Yeah, I grew up so I made here's the thing I'm basically I'm like a NASA supercomputer that was programmed by red necks So yeah, so like my like my big hobby is fantasy football because it's like we play a lot of fantasy There's nothing more autistic than fantasy football Oh, yeah, like any actually any fantasy sports like you just zoning my buddy My buddy Brian like one of my oldest friends like we have a regular league with a bunch of our buddies and stuff like that That's our football league, but a couple of them are all in a fantasy hockey league together and so a couple years ago He's like hey man Do you want to play fantasy hockey with us? And I was like I don't know shit about hockey. Yeah, but I did it like I joined like I paid 50 bucks to basically Lose at fantasy hockey and I came in. I made it to the championship game. Yeah. Yeah, just based on numbers Just from like watching the numbers and I was like oh, this is like my rainman skill. Yeah, you know Wow, that's what it's like, but here's the thing on that math But like fantasy stats like just stats for some reason. I'm good with So are you winning in fantasy or what? Yeah, I went pretty like I'm out of hockey now. I played like I played two seasons and the first year I just I didn't have anything else really going on at the time So I was just all in on fantasy hockey like every day going through like waivers and like eating You can like use his website to cheat websites, right? So like find out all this info I mean you can of course I do You can if you don't know anything about hockey, right? But like it's harder if you don't know like because you don't know what sites to check like it's a whole new sport for me So it's like who do I trust in this sport? Yeah, you know what I mean Like with fantasy football like you know, I'm a big Matthew Barry guy, you know, and then It was football guys like a commentator. Yeah Matthew Barry is like a fancy Yeah, and the fantasy football now like the show they do every Sunday like the pre game show that's all fantasy That's Matthew Barry Okay, so like I trust him, you know, and there's a couple other people who's like I like combined their opinions and be like Okay, so this is what the they all think about this guy and you know But I don't know who to do that with in hockey So I was literally just going off stats and like the little updates in the actual app itself like oh this player is you know On this streak and I'm like, okay, well he's on a streak leaving there Yeah, you know that kind of shit and yeah, I made it to the championship game Was not killed it. Yeah, the problem of fantasy shit is such a waste of fucking time That's exactly it's such a big time suck. Yeah, but like I said at the time I didn't have anything else going on like I was like especially like years and years ago like undiagnosed You know thing is other mental health problems. So it was like you know, I don't really I'd started like Like like kind of distancing myself more and more from society and kind of become like a hermit, you know So what else it was not like I was doing anything Yeah, you know so and then now like I'm slacking off on fantasy because I'm fucking always at comedy shows Are you gonna play I could play fantasy for all this? Oh, yeah, I'm still in like that league with my buddies over there Yeah, I'm just you guys bet. I think this year we're doing like 25 Yeah, it's not anything yeah, football one's not big, but it's like it's like a Keeper League oh You can play her from the previous year. You well set like we keep like four you can or no, I'm sorry We keep three That's it. We drop it down. Yeah, that's pretty cool So we can every year you can keep two guys, but you can only keep them up until like so every year They cost you one round higher So like if you keep a guy from his rookie season and he's like undrafted the following year You keep him and he's like a 15th round pick. Oh, that's pretty cool But then the year after that he's a 14th and the year after that He's a 13 and so on and so forth So you can only keep guys up until they reached fourth round Okay, and then after that their freebies or just free balls they go back into the draft pool right? Okay, yeah So like so I've had Patrick Mahomes since his rookie season. Oh shit Ricky season was like the best super fan points That was his that was his sophomore season This first year's a starter because his rookie season he sat behind Alex Smith until like the last game and a half of the season Okay, well the first season he played. Yeah, the first season he started and they fucking won the Super Bowl dropping like 40 50 point games. How about the other quarter? Oh wait, who is the guy Alex Smith? Yeah How about when he broke his shame Yeah, shit in half and he actually came back like he came back and played a couple games Like he played a couple games Then he heard it again, then he had to like hit the new knife. No, he's just just older less mobile still You know things like that. So he just lost the that's like the scariest fucking injury Joe Thizeman and like that was the the same exact injury that ended Joe Thizman's crew with the Lawrence Taylor When he snapped his leg when he played for the Redskins. I don't even know that story. Oh, yeah Joe Thizman like Lawrence Taylor hit Joe Thizman in the leg and shattered his like the same way Alex Smith Really so gross. Yeah, did he have like the complications that Alex Smith had it ended his career He never played another down a football after that Alex almost lost his leg right? Yeah I especially yeah because he had like infections and stuff too But so not only did he get over like the infections in the injury But like just modern medicine and science and physical therapy Still play professional. Yeah, they said he never even walk or anything Yeah, that's great And then the UFC fighter just did that like last weekend where you kicked the guy and his shin snapped in half They tried to stand back down and just like well like think about like think about like Ryan Shays year. Oh, yeah Final injury never walked in never and now he's fucking walking out for fucking into the 50 yard line and shit Yeah, it's super cool. I love I love stories like that. Yeah, dude. That's terrifying That is like worst case scenario when I'm playing football and you break your neck. Oh, yeah I watched a game live. I remember Yeah, I was sure I was absolutely sure that was how Brett Farms career was gonna end I was like the old because remember he kept like I'm gonna retire now I'm coming back. I'm gonna retire now. I'm coming back And then like green Bay's like look we've had enough air air Rogers is the guy And so then he went and played for like Minnesota and then when he went to the Jets So's like he's gonna play until he dies and this is where it's gonna happen. Yeah, the Jets Like it'll happen there. Yeah, like he literally just walked into a dumpster fire and was like this is how I'm going out Like so I was sure he was gonna die on the field You see they're bringing Tim Tebow back? No, I'm a tie-daddy. Jack wires. Just think him. Oh, there's a really deep Fucking way. Yeah, they picked him up for one year. I mean it makes sense I mean it's urban Meyer reunited with Tim Tebow in his hometown of Jacksonville at the very least are gonna sell tickets Oh big, you know, they're gonna sell at least double his salary and tickets so it's paid for a day got that long-haired dude, right? Trevor Trevor Lawrence. Yeah Yeah, that's pretty cool. That's gonna be fun to watch. Okay, so here's the thing So like I'm autistic right and like I love like seeing autistic people succeed at things like Dan Acro It is autistic like fantastic Anthony Hopkins just won an Oscar and can and and came out as like he's on the spectrum Yeah, yeah Anthony Hopkins sir Anthony Hopkins nobody did that's the thing like that's what talking earlier about like masking and being able to like pick up Those skills like where I can step into like a group and and blend into that group like most autistic people like when people like oh, I didn't know your autis because like yeah because I've developed next level Coping mechanism that are fucking Oscar and blend into that group. Like, most autistic people, like when people like, oh, I didn't know your autistic, because like, yeah, because I've developed next level coping mechanisms that are fucking Oscar worthy. All right. So, but that's the thing. Like he's literally a chameleon because he's been that way his whole life and he had to learn those skills at a young age and he just figured out a way to, he's like, I already have these skills, use them as a career. You know, like he found ways to fit that in until he realized what he was. Wow. Yeah. How fucking awesome. Like he made it to fucking 89 years old before he found out. Really? Damn. Yeah, he was just diagnosed like this year. Damn. Wow. That's insane. Why would you, I don't even understand, like the process, like, like I just want to go in and get diagnosed if I have it, like when you're that old, like, wow. I don't know how to buy. I mean, you've probably just knew the whole time kind of right. Well, I think as you get older, like you do more and more like self-reflection and more stuff like that. Yeah. And especially like he, his career had slowed down, you know, he was kind of stepped away from the spotlight and was just doing like limited projects. So a lot more time to himself to think and like spend time with his own thoughts because think about how long his career was playing other people. Do you think autism could just, I mean, I don't want to sound like a dickhead. No, no, no, no. Do you think autism could just be like a personality trait and there's just severity differences? I don't think so. I think it's, I feel like so many people could have, you know, a dash here, a dash there a little bit more, you know. Well, that's, that's, I guess the way I would more describe it as I think autism is just is like, I think, extrovert. Yeah, I think autism is specific human traits amplified. Right. So like it, we're, because like a typical neurological person is basically we were talking about that color wheel earlier. Like a typical neurological person is basically dead center the color wheel. You know, so we're basically all those darts thrown around it. And those are just like those parts of like a typical human experience. Like you may be a completely neurological person, but you may have like one special talent here. Right. And that's how they, well, you know, when they're like, oh, everyone's a little autistic. You might have one dart that you got to throw. I've got 18, you know what I mean? Like so there, it's, it's though all of those human traits, like whatever traits certain autistic people present with, it's just, it's that it's a human trait, but it's just magnified so many times. And it, because it, and it just makes it more intense. So you never sniff out people who maybe have autism or like, oh, the time now it's like, it's like when you buy like a yellow car and then now you see all the yellow cars. Yes. Yeah. It's a very similar thing. Yeah. People who don't even know it maybe. Yeah. Well, so do you guys remember it was like a Disney plus documentary about the dude that climbed like El Capitan, the rock climbing documentary. Like free climb. Yeah, free climb. Yeah. That was the documentary. Yeah. Free soul. Free soul. Yes. Okay. Same. So I, when that documentary came out, I was watching with a couple of friends and literally three minutes of the documentary, I was like, this dude's autistic. And then it got to the point when it was talking about his dad and his dad had passed away. But when he's talking about his dad, he's like, my dad had what would have now been known as like Asperger syndrome. And I was like, fucking knew it. He's autistic. Yep. Oh, yeah. And it was, there was like a line in the, in the documentary when he's like talking to his fiance, right? Cause she's all nervous about him climbing with no safety and stuff like that. And like, you know, he's like, and she's like, whenever you leave and whenever you like untether and you're climbing, like, do you ever in that moment, do you ever think about like me or like what I would do if you didn't make it? And he's like, no, never. He's like, I can't. Yeah, she's saying that. And that was the thing. I was like, I know exactly what that feeling is. Yeah. Like I know that exact sentiment. Cause it's like, you know that's like, you have that option. And you know you should consider that other person, but you're so singularly focused on achieving something that you're like, can't do it. God, yeah, man, that was fucking insane. That what that guy does. Yeah. And that's, but that, and that's what I mean when I talk about like this, that magnification of the experience because like, like, especially for me, like I talk with my therapist about this a lot. Like when I, once I got diagnosed and I started like seeing a therapist regularly, like I'd come in and I'd be like, okay, I want to work on this, this and this. And there was like that's incredible that you're that self aware that you know, like these are the things that you struggle with. And so like, but, but that's one of my magnifications is I'm, I'm constantly, and it's not, it's not self aware like in like a confidence standpoint. It's like I'm always just like thinking inwardly is like, you know, what, like what's wrong with like what can I do better here? Like why can't I do this? Like I'm constantly like trying to rearrange those bricks internally to like how, how can I, how can I like operate better? You know, so and it was more of that. It's like, oh, you've already identified your weaknesses. It's like, yeah, because I know what I'm not good at. I like, I think about it a lot. So I was going with the therapist since I got diagnosed. Oh, really? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I, I, I'm so I was in the army, I joined the army after high school. I was in the army for a couple of years. Um, and so I get like, I got, I got, I was getting, uh, care through like the VA. And so once I got like my diagnosis from our, our, um, recommendation from card because because they're like a research clinic, like they can't do an official diagnosis. So they recommend you to a specialist to do your, your official diagnosis. So they referred me to somebody. I took that up to the VA, the VA mental health care clinic, like set it up, like set me up with like the out, the specialists and everything because they don't have an autism specialist. You know, so they set me up with it and everything was taken care of. Like I got very, I was very lucky in that aspect, but like, that's what it finally took for me to get diagnosed. Like was I had to find a place that could do it for adults? Like first I had to have like the, like the interest and like the idea to even think I was autistic. Right. You know, right. Yeah. It wasn't something I had ever looked into. Like I'd been diagnosed previously with like 80D severe anxiety disorder and, major depressive disorder. So I was just, I was like, it's just those things messing with my head, you know, because those mental health issues can stack up on you, you know, and condense and create more pressure. So I just thought it was all that, you know, just jumbled together. And then a nurse at the VA down in Cape Coral, I was in for, uh, for like an appointment for something else. And she just casually like talking to me, like doing my blood pressure and stuff was like, have you ever, have you ever, uh, like, uh, looked into getting like, like finding out if you have like, if you're on like, autism spectrum. And I was like, no, I thought she was just trying to call me retarded. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, like, but she's like, no, she's like, my nephew has autism spectrum disorder. And he has a lot of the same, like, um, like, you just remind me of them a lot. Like you have like, because I was, I was like rocking on the table and stuff. But while I was sitting waiting for her to come in and stuff. And she's like, you just, like you just have some similar, like physical traits. and then like some of your mannerisms and stuff. You just remind me a lot of my nephew. And like that just set off like the buzzer, you know what I mean? It's like, how old are you then? 29. Okay. Yeah. You're at the art in the army. No, no, no, no, I was out. I was out. I was living in Fort Myers. I was, um, I was finishing my degree in graphic design and working as a graphic designer. And, but just like hearing that, like I went off on a tangent and started, like, researching autism and the more I read, the more I was like, who are these people watching me? You know? Yeah. Did you ever think about it before then at all? Never. Nope. No, because like, because like the way autism had always been portrayed in movies, like I could be more personable than for us. Right. Come. Right. You know, like I didn't, I didn't, I didn't seem slow when people were talking to me. Yeah. You know, like I wasn't, I couldn't like count cards or memorize phone books. Like fucking rain. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so it's like, so I'm not autistic because that's how they portrayed autistic people. So that was the only idea I had of what autism was. You know, and then the, like the extreme side of that being like Leonardo DiCaprio and like what's eating Gilbert great just, like really. Yeah. You know, um, so I was like, those are the only examples, you know, so you don't think of it outside of those terms. Like, you know, what person watches Rainman and then goes and like, like, what is autism and then learns everything about it. Yeah. You know, um, so yeah, it was just never something that, that was, that I'd ever even considered and then that, but that set off the light bulb. And what's weird is I went to high school with two autistic brothers, like, two different ends of the spectrum. Like one was, was like a more severe borderline nonverbal, like very limited, like words and phrases and things like that. And then the other was he was like, overly, um, overly, not vocal. That's not the right word. But like overly precise and like his, um, like his enunciation and like proper sentence structure and like every word he said sound, like every sentence sounded like it was from a textbook. You know what I mean? Like it's like this is a talking dictionary. Yeah. And so again, just never considered that I was either one of those things because my, because it's because exactly my darts didn't land in the same areas. There's there's right. Mine were more in that like internalized thought patterns, executive function, like I was always like sleeping in and late, you know, late for stuff. And, you know, that kind of thing. And he was always early. Like, yeah, you know, 20 minutes before anything. Like he's already there, stretching or whatever the activity is. Like he is fully prepared 20 minutes beforehand. You know, and so again, like you just don't think of those things until someone finds a way, like finds a way to frame your point of reference. You know, and she's like, I have a, I have a nephew and he does this, this and this. And you did this. Just gonna remind me of him and I was like, wait, I do do that. That and that and I don't see other people doing those things. Like, yeah, you know, so then you make an appointment and you, and you go or. Well, then I start like, I start researching autism, like, you know, um, finding websites, finding like any online tests I can do, things like that. And then, um, from there I start looking into like, okay, so based on all the stuff I've gathered now, like, I think I might be autistic. So now how do I find out for sure, you know, and so then I found like I started researching like clinics that could diagnose adults because everything, most stuff online, even is about like kids. Yeah. Um, so it's like what about adults? Like how do and I eventually found like, you know, the card for at the University of Florida. And my family happened to be from that area, you know, and I was living in Fort Myers at the time. So I got in touch with the, the center. Um, they sent me like a packet of stuff filled that out, send it to them and then they set me up it because it's, it's through the University of Florida. Like it's a, it's a research clinic. So it was a free, like a free appointment and, uh, and so got it all scheduled. And then I, I called and told my parents everything that I'd been like, you know, I, like I think this might be what's happening, like what I've been dealing with and all this kind of stuff. And they're like, well, get up here. So rest this history, the rest this history. Now since you got diagnosed, what did they do? Like obviously you're now talking to a therapist. Is there, is there anything else that you're doing to cope with it? Or I mean, kind of. So the therapy has been so helpful because like basically I was able to take all of that, like that internalized thought process and that like, you know, that hyper, like, then help the self awareness and like basically figure out ways like, like handle it, you know, like a pick a topic or pick like a thing I was struggling with and we're and talk to my therapist about like, how can I do this better? Like what can I, you know, finding like a, like special alarms and stuff. Like I just, like I said, I struggle with executive function being able to force myself to get up for stuff and, you know, things like that. Like if it's something, if it's something I'm like excited about and something I really want to do, like that's never a problem, you know, but it's like the, I don't want to do this, you know, you know, whatever it is. I don't want to do laundry today before I leave, like I'll do it later, you know. Like I have like a special alarm on my phone. So like when my alarm goes off, like I have to like solve math problems, you know, which I'm not that kind of autistic. So math's not math problems are hard for me. So, you know, I have to do math problems to get the alarm to turn off. And then like 90 seconds later, like I have to like it checks in with me and I have to like hold down like a button on the screen to prove that I'm still awake. And I didn't go back to sleep after, after turning the alarm off. Is this some sort of app or something? Yeah, it's an app. It's called Alarmy. So I have that app and then I also have one of these, it's like a Pavlock, like a wrist device that I set an, I set like a backup alarm on it and that alarm, like it's got a thing in here that actually zaps me. So it zaps me. So I have to get up, get out of the van and do jumping jacks to get it to stop zapping. And what are the purpose of these things, these apps to help me wake up, like to help me, like to help me with my executive function? Like the Pavlock device is just sounds like some sort of a discipline exercise. Kind of. Yeah. Well, that's what Pavlov Pavlock, like that's where it comes from. So it's like that. Yeah. Okay. So you can literally like, it's literally like a, a positive habit training device. So like what, whether it's like quitting smoking or like exercising and things like that, like whatever it is you're trying to accomplish, you can like set your goals and different things. It's the super cool. Like yeah, when I like, again, my therapist like was telling me about like finding like different apps and alarms and things like that. And I happen to find that device and I was like, Hey, what about this? And she's like, you know, like she's like, I'm not going to recommend something that zaps you. But if you think it's going to work for you, like, you know, like, you know, I'm not basically like, I'm not suggesting a lecture of shock therapy or anything here, you know, but I came up, that was like a solution I found and I just presented as like, Hey, would this work for me because I'm interested in trying it, you know, so it's basically therapy helps me find healthier workarounds and healthier coping mechanisms and things because basically up until then, I basically engineered my own devices, but they were rudimentary devices. So you know, if you're trying to move water with like an aquifer system versus trying to move water with like, you know, bamboo shoots, you know, like one's going to work better than the other. We had this really smart one of our like the smartest people I know, this guy, Nathan Crock, he's a scientist. He actually he works up in Tallahassee and he a crazy smart guy and he was telling me he would like train, try to like do certain things himself to try to enhance his discipline. He would do things like sleep on the floor for a month, like every night he would sleep on the floor or for a month he would try to brush his teeth with his left hand, like weird things like that just so he would be more disciplined and get things done quicker and more efficient. I mean, he treats his brain like like a supercomputer like he tries to just he's always trying to enhance his brain and his mind. Well, and that's kind of where I'm going. I'm getting to now, like I said, after that, that acid trip, you know, experiment, but that's basically what I tried it for because there's been so much research, there's literally tons of research about like the positive effect of psychedelics in like dealing with autism spectrum disorder. Really? Yeah. And so the best way I can explain it was it just it gave me like an extra set of tools to be able to sort organize and focus the things in my brain and basically like reset some things in the control panel and like reset some parameters for myself. You know, like increasing my accountability on like, hey, we have to be producing, like we have to be writing more, we have to be, you know, all of these kinds of things and you know, like again, the inmates can't be running the asylum, like I need the word and to crack down on this, you know. And so I'm getting I'm getting better at that and I also was like, you know, what other things do I need to do to be more productive? I need to start eating healthier because I'm, you know, I'm a stand up comedian. I basically eating garbage every day like drive throughs and, you know, sounds like you're doing things. Everybody should be doing, man. Yeah. But it, but it just it literally took me like sitting down and strapping myself into a chair and taking psychedelics to make it happen. You know what I mean? Like I just couldn't wake up one day and be like, I'm going to do this. Like I literally had to like build up to it and plan out like, okay, how are we going to get us to do this? Hmm. When was the first time he took psychedelics? Um, after I was diagnosed, I've taken acid twice. I took acid. Um, more of our core mushrooms. Um, I mean, it's LSD. So yeah, a little more, I guess, psychedelic than mushrooms. Like the first time I took it was just the experiment of like, can I, can I, will I be okay with this? You know, and it was much more like the external experience like seeing the colors and like the patterns and different like more of the visuals of psychedelics. And then the second time I took it, which was the time where I'm all, you know, conversation with the word and, um, and so that time I took it, it was much more of like the internal and like the, you know, the meditation, the, you know, like the spiritual, you know, thing like that. And so for me, it was more, more of like the mental aspects of like I want to dive in and actually see if like, you know, if I can access these things that people talk about with autism and psychedelics, that was cool. Yeah. Filmmaker dude on here a couple months ago, who he actually made like a really popular YouTube documentary called Florida Man. And he said his dad was going through really severe depression for a while. And he eventually convinced his dad to try acid. And he said his dad is like 100% cured. He's like not depressed anymore. Like they have a better relationship now. They hang out way more. And it said it took him like a long time to build his dad up to try acid to try to figure out his depression. Yeah. It's insane. It took me a while to build up to it. Um, I mean, but it was, it's something, it took me, I got in my medical marijuana card. So it was already like six months into like medical marijuana before I started being like, okay, this hasn't done me any harm. So like what other things could I look into that might help with this? And there's like I said, there's just been tons of research about psychedelics and autism. So, you know, if it's true, thanks a lot government. Oh, yeah. Dad needs medicine. Well, it's a couple of stage rooms. Yeah. The alright. I'm, I'm, so I'm supposed to go to Portland in, we're supposed to go last week, but I got rescheduled because of coronavirus stuff and like theater limits and all that kind of stuff. Wow. Um, in December, I'm going, I'm doing a helium comedy club in Portland with Jamie. So I feature, I feature for Jamie is from Jan Silent Bob. Hell yeah. So we're going up there and I'm definitely trying psychedelics. Cause it's illegal there now. Oh, hell yeah, dude. Yeah. Is Jake gonna do him with you? Jay is 10 years sober. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they got a smoke pot. That's right. No really. Nope. Has one vise to be still has his caffeine. Cause we're in the caffeine. He'll drink like four red bulls and like so his Starbucks order is five shots of espresso with milk on the side. And then he basically like a little bit of milk into the espresso gets it to like a good temperature and then a like drink half, a little bit more milk, drink the other half. That's the only one. And he will do that three times a day. So there's about like 15 shots of espresso for red bulls, but that dude is constantly going. Yeah. Twitch streams like tent like we'll be all like we were in at bananas in New Jersey. You were trying cocaine. It's probably way more efficient. Well, I think that was the problem was too efficient. Yeah. No, we did the the bananas comedy club in Hasbro kites a couple months ago. And while we're there, he was Twitch streaming like 10 hours a day. All right, like splitting like two five hour sessions. Then we'd be at the club for we had two shows a night. We were at the club for like another four hours like for both shows and stuff. So not we're at 14 hours now for his like work day. Right. Then he still like goes back and he'll either like do an additional Twitch stream or he'll do like some promo content or stuff and stuff like you know for his Twitch stream. Or he'll we were doing stuff like the next day we had to do stuff at the secret stash like his and Kevin Smith's comic book store. They were doing meat and treats Saturday. So Saturday he did like like six hours of meat and greets. Ten hours of Twitch streaming and four hours of club. Like I don't know when he's going. Yeah. Wow. But that's what 15 shots. So what made him want to quit everything? I think like becoming a dad and like it just he got to the point where I think it was like stressing his relationships with Kevin and you know and I think and well, I mean this is a pretty like what's he producing alcohol too or just weed or something like that. Yeah. Alcohol and all kinds of drugs. Okay. Everything. Yeah. And it was it was a point like like it's pretty well documented like him and Kevin Smith had a whole thing where he's like if you can get sober we'll do a clerks too. So he's been so burst since clerks too. Oh cool. Yeah. So I never saw that. Really? No. Yeah. Yeah. Well we actually saw the first one. That's the movie that taught. Yeah. That's the movie that taught American culture you never go ask to melt. What's the one where they're in like the one scene that I'll never forget is like they're in there somewhere and there's fucking lasers everywhere and they're like climbing. The laser beams strike back to the movie. Yeah. Yeah. That's the movie. That's the movie. That's when they break into like the animal facility and free the monkey. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's the click commander. Yeah. Click. Click. So I intro him. Yeah. So how I met Jay was so like I said I converted the van right and I put together like my own road show and I did I did a show in Austin, Texas Colorado Springs. I did some open mics in like in like Nashville and Atlanta and stuff and then my buddy what a comedy buddy of mine. He had moved to Kansas City and he I saw like I had an open show and I didn't have to go back through Texas because that would have been the long way to go like because I was going to Nashville next. So Kansas City was on the way and I saw he had a showcase show and I was like, hey, I'm going to be able to make it to Kansas City in time to see your show like, you know, let's catch up and hang out and he's like, oh, hell yeah, awesome. Like, you know, I'll let everybody know you're coming and then he messaged me back. He's like, hey, do you want to do a guest spot? Okay. And I was like, sure yeah. And then so I looked at the club where that show was at and they had an open like the night before like an outdoor like patio mic because of COVID. So I went like I was like, I'm basically instead of sleeping in the van here in Colorado, I'll just go ahead and drive, you know, today make it there. Do the open mic, sleep in the parking lot there. Then do the show the next day. So I did the open mic and the club owner was there. And so I met the club owner and we got to talking and then did the showcase the next night and then after I made it home, the club ran a contest to open for J Muse. And so I messaged them like I submitted for the contest. It was like, hey, don't know if you remember me. I'm the guy from Florida to Rob's friend, you know, I was like, you know, I submitted my video clip or whatever. And he's like, you didn't need to submit a video. I remember you. He's like, are you sure you want to come from Florida? Like all the way from Florida to do a like a seven minute spot on a contest that you might not win. And I was like, yeah, sure. And he's like, bring your ass on. And so I went to do the contest and I figured I was going to lose just because like, I'm not from there. Like other people like, I didn't know how they were doing like any voting or anything like that. And I was like, if it's like a like on an audience vote, like everybody else is bringing people, you know, but I just wanted to go because he had already seen me before. And I was like, even if I don't win, if he sees me again, maybe he'll just book me for something else. Right. So in my head, I was like, that's how I made it worth it. I was like, exactly. But I went and then I won. Oh shit. Yeah. Because they had two comedians judging the contest. So they did those two judge votes plus audience vote. And I won. Nice. Yeah. And so then I came back to open for Jay and because he was there doing a weekend. And so he was like, hey, pick a night. You can be here. And that's the night you'll open for Jay. And so I was doing the Thursday night show because I was booked to be in Orlando Saturday night. So I was like, if I do the Thursday night, I can hit the road. I can make it to the Tennessee like state line. Sleep and there's a rest area there that I from all my trips back and forth to Kansas City at this point. I was like, this is where my where I sleep right before my last stop before Florida, you know. And it's what the Tennessee Georgia state line. This is amazing. Like rest area on both sides like this big like, like, I want to say aquifer, but that's not the right word. But like it's big like water, like retention area or whatever. And there's like, like an island with mountains and shit. So it looks like like Jurassic Park. Yeah. Like a landfill, maybe. Maybe. No, it's beautiful though. It's like it's like a nature preserve and like water, a water reserve. Yeah. So, but it's beautiful. And so I was like, OK, I can do the show in Kansas City with J, make it back to drive through the night to here. Sleep there, wake up, make the rest of the drive the next day and then make it to Orlando, you know, by Saturday and all that kind of stuff. But the show went so well opening for him that I literally I have audio of this like on my TikTok because I record my shows like my Apple Watch. So I have like my perfect audio right here. Like next to my mic. And my Apple Watch was still recording. I went off the stage through the door into the green room. And one of my comedy buddies was who was featuring. He was going up next. And so, you know, we, you know, do our thing like a good, you know, break a leg, all that. And then Jay's man like road manager is right there. And he's like, hey, Jay wants to like get your information. Like, are you OK, like are you OK to fly and like come on, like he wants to bring, had bring on the road to feature for him. And so I'm talking to him about all this and Jay sticks his head out of the green room. And he's like, hey, bro, can you get on planes and shit? Sick. And then we have like a conversation. Yeah. Just as soon as I heard the voice, it's like he's behind me. You know, and that's cool. Yeah, it was fucking awesome. And so yeah, that's amazing. That's my guy. So you've heard all your shows on your watch. Yeah, so I record my audio with just like the voice memos like for on Apple Watch. Yeah. I record my audio here. So because I keep my mic in my left hand, so I get a perfect audio recording of my show. And then I'll sync that with my video. So it's almost like my camera is like the audience audio. Yeah. And then I have my audio to put over it. Wow. Yeah. You got that. I think 100 IQ. Well, no, that's intense focuses and being all about comedy, I listen to like every comedy podcast. And that's a Brian Redbin tip. Oh, is it really? Yeah. Brian Redbin was, I think it was on Rogan, but he was telling Rogan that's what he does. And I was like, check. I like the watch. I can do that. Yeah. And so yeah, I never even thought about that with one of those eye watches. You could just go in and record anything. I thought people know about it. I could do some fucking deceptive shit with one of those watches. Yeah. Because I keep it for like, I keep it on like, do not disturb an airplane mode for my recording. Right. And so once I set it to start recording and put my wrist down, like the screen will not come back on again until I physically like touch the button and unlock it. So it stays dark. So yeah, if you were in a room with other people, like to, again, depending on like the state laws of like recording and conversations, you have to call my lawyer. But yeah, you could definitely do some like spy shit. Jim, he's not even thought about that, dude. That this guy's got two one on each wrist. Who ate it? You know, it's just a fitness tracker. And that's a Casio. Yeah, sure it is. Just a Casio, but it doesn't record us where. Yeah. So huh, red band, Brian, red band. Yeah. You just do a lot of podcasts. Um, I feel like that's a thing with comedians. They're all they're all about everything. I like the podcasts that where you can learn things about comedy. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like, uh, like comedians and podcasts, they always go hand in hand. Oh, yeah. Well, cause like most comedians were the podcasting pioneers. So like that's kind of our art form. You know what I mean? Like if you were taking an acting class, you were watching the Oscars, you know, yeah, conversations are hard to have. Yeah. But well, not just that, but like it's hard to keep a conversation going for a long time and have it be like quick and have it be. You know, yeah conversations are hard to have Yeah, but well not just that but like it's hard to keep a conversation going for a long time and have it be like quick And have it be concise to staying you know what I mean like ping ponging off each other. Yeah Well, not just that but like you add to that like comfort level like if it's like a strange person's like okay Like I don't know how like what I can talk to you about that's gonna keep this conversation going versus like if you're a comic You know a bunch of other comics like we talked to each other all the time We're just gonna record it like you know If two people are in a room together and they have a conversation and it's not recorded on a podcast Well, I mean it's the same thing with comedy right like that's why they say like as a comedian you have to write Everything down or like find a way to record it because if you think of the perfect joke But nobody hears it and you never wrote it down or recorded it did you really think of that joke or not? No Exactly so exactly because good luck remembering that joke like like you think of something funny right before you're following the sleep Good luck remembering it the exact same way the next day right good fucking luck. Yeah That's all the time. Yeah, fuck. I gotta remember this morning. I gotta remember this morning. Please please please and So but now like the way I literally have to think about it as if I got I have a funny thought I'd be like I better write that down or I'll never get paid for it. Yeah, you know I'm so literally it's like just paycheck Talk it into your watch. Yeah, I do my voice memos like if I'm if I have my watch on or doing on my watch I do it in the voice memos on my phone. I'll do it in like notes Google keep like literally whichever one I can get to the fastest or like depending on what the idea is like You know like if I just have like a random thought and I'm like I don't know what I want to do with this yet So I'll just write that in my notes app or something Or I'll go into Google keep and start doing a voice recording Like if it's something like I'm gonna work this out out loud I'll go into Google keep and do a voice recording in that because it Converts it to text as you're speaking it. Oh really yeah accurate It I mean it fucks it up a little bit, but it's decent, you know So I'll do that and like just break it into like pieces and then I can always go back and like okay What can I do to make this piece funnier? We're gonna do to make this piece funnier and at least recording it that way have a general outline of what I want that bit to be You know right right and then I just go through and like oh make this better this sucks, you know and So like I said something for something like that I'll do it in there if it's something like this idea just hit me I'm gonna rant about it right now because nothing I'll ever think of after this is gonna be as funny as it is in my head right now I'll just straight to voice memo the whole thing. Yeah, I love doing the voice thing But I can't do it when I'm laying it when I'm laying next to my wife in bed. I like when I am Mm-hmm. I wake her ass up. I'll be fucked But what I do is I send myself emails. I have a great idea I'll just email myself when I wake up in the morning to the first thing I see when I open my phone. That's smart I like that. I don't know if it's smart, but it's kind of primitive actually But it works. There are other there are comics that do that like I think Todd Berry He just writes emails like he free writes and he just does them as emails and sends them to himself Really back through them. Yeah. Yeah. Well for me I title each email like with the same word at the beginning like I just put like idea slash and then I type it So that way when I go to my email and I search the word idea I just have all these emails of email myself over the years nice. I like that actually I like I like that a lot. I think there's other apps that you could that are probably better at that that you can use but Emails was like the most convenient. Yeah, I think oh no, that's really I like that. Yeah, it's cool So what's your next show? Wednesday night in a land and tamp. Oh in Atlanta. Yeah. Oh, you really are on the road Yeah, I'm going to Atlanta for a satellite for the world series of comedy nice. So yeah, I'm on the Wednesday show Though what doing the wild card round so if I can advance from there Is this new like in the past month or two that comedies clubs have been like doing a lot of shows like this? Like how how suited this open back up like it is now because I feel like now it's happening more than well now basically like they kind of Time to this out to like reopen like as everything else is reopening So most clubs have been have been either limited capacity or like I mean clubs have been open for a little bit in certain places But like I said like we were supposed to do Portland in like March and it's been rescheduled like four times because Portland Just keeps chit like go back and forth on covid restrictions, right? So you know But then like like Kansas City was open in December. It was limited capacity so I think it was like like one 25 you know in a 400 seat room So they had like you know people had to buy like instead of buying individual tickets people you had to buy tables You know and things like that But those shows ended up being awesome You know and then like but then like Florida like we haven't given a few Just pretty wide. Yeah, we stopped caring in July. Yeah, like yeah, so like the I think so like most of the shows We've been here like just fully sold out, you know And some places like they kept tried to adapt like one club had like like raised like there's like a hat like a semi-circle room and Like the front row was like floor level and then the next row behind them was like elevated like 12 inches Yeah, you know and then the one behind them was picked up So they just put like plexiglass like the whole length of like the rail between each row Yeah, so they just separated people like hockey You know in real creative. Yeah Yeah, I remember we decided splitters probably in like July and it was Completely loaded packed to the gills people shoulder to shoulder eating and drinking Fucking everything get wild here. Yeah, bro. Florida. Yeah. Yeah. Florida does not like we literally wild boys We were an e-bora women. We were in e-bora with Mike Fashion months ago. Yeah, it was it was the most insane experience We were in this nightclub for my friend my buddy's a bachelor party and it was Fucking we were crammed into this little last nightclub like sardines dead mid-covid every mid Yeah, it was it was I think it was before July Maybe it was towards the end of the year was it was a wedding was like what August? And we I remember standing in there and it took us so in this little night Club from like from where I am maybe to like That door right there to the bathroom and it took us probably 15 minutes to get that far. Oh Get started to get through other people and we're like if we don't if we haven't had COVID yet We're definitely gonna have it was the breeding breeding around I'm disgusting I went to Parks and wreck oh, yeah, we went there like two weeks ago and that place was fucking lit. Oh, yeah Yeah, yeah, just everybody nuts a butt on the dance floor, you know like like people playing pool like strangers that And like complete strangers just full on licking each other in the face like Yeah, bro like we don't get the bush yeah Like Luke the bush wacker. Yeah. Yeah. I saw you and Jay me and Mike not too long ago And that's where we found you and it was packed there. I mean it was jam-packed there We went to him and not too long ago was packed. Yeah, that was down and you guys saw me down in Naples Yeah, yeah fucking Naples doesn't believe in COVID. Come on. I mean it was packed. Yeah There's a virus. Yeah Before it actually did pretty good right with their numbers with their like cases and their deaths and everything didn't they We sucked at the beginning because no we you know, but then like I think yeah Honestly, I think that we reached a certain level of herd immunity at a certain point And that's when our cases started dropping because again strangers have been out at clubs since July licking each other in the face Right, you know, we're all immune. Yeah, because Florida is the vaccine. Yeah Dude as soon as outdoor open Mike started back up comics. We were full on kissing each other on the mouth, bro You know like sharing microphones and yeah was Dave Chapelle the first one to do the outdoor might the outdoor Comedy sishos during COVID It's the first one I saw He was doing him in Ohio There are a couple different people that kind of like pioneered some things like that like he was doing like the outdoor Shows would like the like the big like onings and like because it was like a wedding venue kind of thing and then like Burt was doing he kept his like his tour going and was doing like drive-in shows You know and and then like in New York a couple people they were doing like riverfront and rooftop shows and things like that Like and drive-in shows and so yeah Everyone everywhere kind of had their own like little pioneers of like you know like this is what we're gonna try and like figuring out different things and I mean you do you like it when there's a big crowd versus a smaller crowd or do you do you have any like preference of crowd size? I know I know some people like to have like just stadiums and some people just like to have small Well, I've 70 people I haven't done a stadium. I think the biggest crowd I've done so far was like 450 Okay, oh, pretty big 450 is big and it's a lot of fun I think I think like 250 300 is like the perfect number you know what I mean? Because in a room that size like if you can get like It would 300 people if you can get 20% of the room to laugh at something that That yeah, it's gonna create a wave you know what I mean and I like like I have the kind I've jokes and I like to sit in the silent sometimes Like I'll say a line and then just sit and wait Yeah, for like it to start traveling because it's one of those things like somebody's gonna giggle Yeah, and somebody's gonna giggle that giggles gonna make somebody laugh that laugh is gonna make somebody else laugh And then by like like eight seconds later the whole room is laughing You know and I dig following that trajectory You know so and that's the perfect size room for it and then it's also like when you hit like the big like that Those belly laugh lines man and you have 300 people just full on laughing from their chest and they can feel awesome Yeah, it's like directing of like a violent orchestra, right? Because you're like I like I they're gonna be moments where I want to hit that like the heavy notes and I'm literally Fourcing air out of all of you, you know, yeah But it's fun. Oh, yeah, fucking love it. You're roast anyone in the crowd. Oh, I do a lot of like the content I have online is like crowd work stuff and things like that and then I've done actual like roast roasts are fun Any roast battles? Yeah like we did a in Gainesville we did like a like a festivist like Christmas roast like and you know And so we do did it like um Like a comedy central roast like a whole game also everybody had a turn to roast everybody else I've done two of those we did one for like a Christmas one and then we did one for a strippers birthday No strippers first. Yeah, cuz she's she's a an open-micher and you know, and so super a comedian. Yes. That's all. She was a yeah her regular job was stripper and then her Passion yeah exactly her hobby was stand up. Awesome. The strip strip strip club pays the bills Exactly. Yeah, but so we roasted her for her birthday and that was like honestly That was the funnest one because I wasn't even supposed to be on it like I didn't I didn't know they were doing it I just came to I was gonna work do some new stuff at the open mic and they were doing the roast after the open mic and so I showed up and Sarah the the girls was like hey like are you doing the roast? And I was like I didn't know there was a roast so I didn't have a chance to prepare for everybody and then her boyfriend and like the like the lady he had hired to like do her birthday cake showed up with the cake And I got to like see this whole exchange and I was like no, I'm doing it. Yeah I'm talking about this, but yeah, but I'm doing the roast so then I got a list of everybody on the roast and like I had like like half hour of open mic time to basically write jokes for like seven people and And it ended up being the most fun. That's awesome. Yeah do you uh How often do you like Come up with stuff when you're doing a set alive set like how often you just like Come up with stuff like right then and there that day and like just think of something on the fly versus Stuff that you've been writing and curating over a long period of time. So most of the stuff like if I think about it Like that day I won't do it on like a booked show like I'll I'll be like okay I'm gonna go to this like this open mic tomorrow to try this thing or like Depending on the show if it's something like I said if it's one of those things that like hits me I'm like I know this is gonna work because that's the cool thing is like I've been doing it long enough now and I've gotten to To a level where like I'll think of something and the like as soon as I think of it I was like that's gonna work exactly the way I thought it first try You know like and would like 89% confidence, you know what I mean and I'll take a risk on 89% You know, I'll like I could always that like in a in a 30 minute set or a 25 or 20 minutes set be like okay I'll have like 12 minutes of good material I can take a risk at the at the 12 minute mark get this joke out See how it lands and then if it doesn't land I'll swap these two things around and come back with like a knock out You know what I mean, yeah, so It could be something it could be like a really good joke really could some really good material But if the timing is off by like a second if the timing is off if it's not the right room for that joke You know what I mean There's all kinds of things that can like a so typically I won't like throw a joke out or make any big adjustments to it until I've done it You know a handful of times at least and then be like okay, this hasn't worked Six times in a row so this line needs to change but this part worked You know 40% of the time so maybe I just need to tinker with this line a little bit right right So I think it was cool. How what's his name was toss I forget who I think it was David Lucas was telling us that at The comedy club on Hollywood Boulevard what's it called the comedy store Yeah, he was saying how like on Monday and Tuesday night just all these like fucking Line up a killer shot comedians would just come in randomly with no notice and just work try to work on new shit that They're that they've written yeah, well That's that's the thing like Rogan talks about that all the time like the Tuesday night lineups that the store used to be killers Because it would be like it would be like Delia and Jezel neck and Whitney Cummings and Rogan and Chappelle and Burr all doing 15 minutes back to back to back to back, you know and Then why wouldn't you would think that the that would be like the night everyone wants to go You know, it is so those are the most packed nights at the comedy stores Those nights and then the weekends like whenever they have like the weekends because on the weekends They'll have like three of those people all headlining in different rooms, you know So though it'll be more those specific fans versus like comedy fans in general, you know I mean like like on a Tuesday night It's not like all Joe Rogan fans coming to see Joe Rogan do 15 minutes Like they're gonna want to see his hour But they're like, you know the people that like listen to the podcast and stuff and they like are they just like comedy in general or they're like I've watched all six of these guys specials like I want to see what they're working on It's more of those people on like a Tuesday night at the seller So it's more of like a regular mic in that it's a mixed crowd, but do you think they marketed on the Tuesday nights in the Monday nights You think they're randomly popular? No, they that a lot of them are marketed, but then you still have guys that'll like Chris Rock might pop in Hell not be on the lineup, but if he shows up they're gonna put him on he's Dave's repel. Yeah I thought it was I thought it was Really cool the fact that they would just show up unannounced. You know, you could be there a lot of guys do you could be there for Fucking whoever Bill Burr and then Dave's repel just shows up. Yeah, and they do that a lot like that's what happened down here in Florida So like rock so Ron White was booked at off the hook in Naples But it'd been so long since he'd been doing comedy that he just brought his bus to Florida and was popping in and doing different rooms and stuff like that at Different clubs just showing like Joe list was at side splitters, right and Ron White just showed up and was like hey Joe Do you mind if I do like 15 20 minutes and he's like yeah, you're Ron fucking why you know what I mean? So that night the people at bot tickets to see go Joe list got to see special guest Ron fucking light You know so awesome. Yeah, and so he's doing that and then a bunch of like private like hard rock gigs You know and stuff for his tequila brand and all that kind of stuff and just sharpening the iron before his book shows And then when I got to see him in Naples, he was fucking razor sharp and then the last night He was there because that club where you guys saw me that weekend went so great like the club owner likes me a lot and I'd been there to see Ron White and so I'd seen him just a couple like two days before and so he called me and he's like hey So Ron White has a closer So Ron White finishes his set and the show's not over The they bring on a closer to come on and do additional time while the club drops checks and stuff like that Like the club doesn't drop the checks at the tables until Ron White's done. Yeah So he's like hey the closer was only booked for three of his four days here Do you want to close these shows for Ron White and I was like oh you want me to follow Ron White? Yeah, I'll do it. Yeah, yeah, you can't turn that down And so but I was terrified because I was like But that was my thought I was like this is what it would be like if I go to the comedy store and where it get on a Tuesday night It's like I'm gonna have to follow some sort of killer legend, you know So I was like this is the test right and so I was like worried because like in comedy like if somebody before you absolutely Kills like it, you know you have to match that and if you can't match that you're in a hole right out of the game You know and sometimes depending on who it is you're just in a whole period You know what I mean like especially in that situation like I'm there doing that like during the check drop like they're In their head they've already seen the guy they paid money to see you know Let's fucking sign this check for this two-item minimum bullshit. Let's get the fuck out of here But so so I was like in my head I was like I've got a dig out of two holes So if I can dig out of two holes and do this like that means I can do this yeah, you know And test no hole hell yeah, no hole smooth as butter just right into material and killed it Yeah, like so normally basically like Normally doing that check drops bot like I just do material until Everybody leaves Like everyone checks are done most people like once they're textured on they might stay for another minute or two But then their table gets up and leave so I'm basically like clearing the room. Yeah, you know But that first show I was doing 15 I was supposed to do yeah, he's like he's like basically do 15 And at one point I like I was looking around and all of the servers were done and just standing around the room And I was like all right, so I just wrapped it up right there I like stop two minutes short because everyone was just still in their seats like nobody's leave nobody had left Yeah, that's amazing. Yeah, so yeah, and so but it went so well like um The second show that he was like dude do 25 like we don't have another show to do after this. So just fucking go, right? So and I did it twice, you know It seems like such a grind to do especially if that's your main source of income. Oh, yeah Like that's got to be fucking one of the most difficult things to do when you have nothing to know I mean I understand it makes so much sense if you already have money and you're comfortable I mean like I want to I mean that's what happens to most people when they make a lot of money or they make it And there's like I want to switch it up. I'm gonna go try this because it's not you're not dependent on that to make money You're just doing it because you strictly enjoy it But that's why those people you don't hear about those people Like they almost know there's very few famous comedians that like come for money Because because you have the money you have the security you never take it serious like it's a it's a hobby to you You know what I mean versus the people that are like look I don't have anything else I'm looking forward to You know, I mean like I don't have a career. I have a job Right, you know or you know, I'm a student or like I've had a bunch of dead-end jobs and none of them went anywhere Like this is the thing I like like I'm gonna I want this to be my career and you know the people that they're like This is what I'm gonna use to feed myself those are the people because they they instill that drive in themselves Right, you know Yeah, that's when you I mean you kind of like that's when you like literally my success in comedy is now necessary for my survival You know, so I have to I have to you know keep my focus on that and I have to keep working And I have to keep pushing and I have to keep calling. I don't have a choice and I wouldn't have it any other way Yeah Like I I had a bunch of different fucking jobs and they all eventually I burnt out from all of them This is the first thing I've had where it's like one it's mine like nobody can fire me from it And nobody can tell me, you know as long as I'm good at doing it I can do it for as long as I want You know what I mean? Oh, yeah and So I'm master of my own destiny now and literally like I try I drive around in a van wherever I decide I'm like I'm gonna go here like I just went down to Fort Myers for the weekend to hang out at the club there because my Buddy was featuring and I was like I'm gonna go watch him feature, you know, I'm just leaving the parking lot, you know So nice is very free Exactly. Yeah, and and and it there's also like the mental benefit of like Every day I wake up. I have something to do. I have like okay. I'm going I'm going here You know like it's literally like you can feel your momentum because I'm literally moving, you know Yeah, like a shark like I can't stop swimming. Yeah, the hardest part for most people is marrying the talent with the discipline Because that's why you say the most creative people in the world are dying are Servers or they're they're waiting tables. Yeah, because they never found the discipline to and they never were able to tie that Lasso around their creativity Around the muse is something you'd like to call it. Yeah and I and I struggle with that sometimes But I also like when I'm struggling with that. I'm like okay. What what like muscle can I build up to make it easier to get around this? Like what muscle can I build up so I can wrestle with this a little bit better, you know what I mean? So when I'm struggling with that like I'll go to an open mic and just Say what I'm thinking and literally just I'm gonna talk out loud until I find something funny and this is what we're doing like and now like I've created that Artificial pressure, you know what I mean like all of these people can't just watch me eat shit for five minutes I got to come up with something and basically forcing myself to respond, you know like You can't once you're on stage like you can't procrastinate anymore. It's time to work. You're there, you know It's got to be very therapeutic too Oh, yeah, yeah, well, it's just cool because like like I said I was so bad at like communicating with people and then like now I found this way to communicate with a large group of people And I just I figured out like my Method of communication that lets me relate to people, you know what I mean? So at this point like I literally need it because this is how I Interact with society. Yeah, like this is my socialization and I have to have socialization Every human being does like even the most like isolated like You know introverted person needs human interaction and now I have it, you know Do you have a podcast too? I'm working on a podcast. There's only person in the world who doesn't have a podcast. I know So I started a podcast early on, but it was during covid and it was so hard to get guests and like I said one of the things Like I'm better in person in the room because I can read body language. I can make eye contact I can do those things and you know versus like a zoom. I hate this. Yeah So it's just it got so hard booking guests that I was like well I just can't do this right now, you know And then with the van I was moving around so much that I was like well it's hard to book guests for this So but net and my current van is so small. I just didn't have a place to record like a solo You know, but now with the new van. I'm literally setting up like the podcast studio in it and um, you know Wherever I'm at like if I'm at a mic like hey who wants to come do the podcast? Hoping that I just have to like lure strangers into my van, but There's some candy in the van The solo stuff is crazy the people that are able to sit in front of a microphone and just talk about shit and ramble That is some serious fucking down. That's the same thing. We've I've been doing in my voice memos You know what I mean like I and that was the thing I realized like I've already kind of been doing this and then like with all of like the software like I have the Adobe Suite right for like editing and stuff And so I'm like I can use like the rolling record And you know like think about something go off on it a little bit Stop and then like right where I left off that start recording again Like my next thought or idea or expand on it and it's all just one because I can roll that recording and keep like stop and go Whenever I want I was like that's the way to do it and just come up with like 15 You know it doesn't have to be long like 15 minutes of that just do like a like a rancor or solo and You know just pick something and go my best person that my favorite rancor right now is like I Tim Dylan. Oh I love some fucking funny dude. He just sits there by himself and just talks I've never found someone someone more entertaining that can just sit there by himself and talk Well, that's the thing that's part of why it's I stopped doing the podcast because I couldn't get guests and I Again talking about like unhealthy coping and like figuring out like how to you know when I was a kid I always thought there was just something wrong with my brain You know like my parents didn't know I was autistic because I was smart So they just thought I was like a nerd you know what I mean? They're like he's just nerdy so they put me in like every sport and club and group Stuff like that to force like socialization. So that's how I learned to socialize was I was like you gotta do it Like you know Throw your kid in the water. They gotta learn to swim, you know And so I learned my coping mechanisms with interaction and stuff like that But the other part of that was like I realized at a certain point in life I was like you can't just talk out loud to yourself people will think you're weird So that was always a part of my brain was like you can't talk out loud to yourself people are gonna know something's wrong with you And now that I'm like doing common and like fuck I have to talk out loud to myself You've been telling yourself the whole time. No, or I'm gonna starve Did your parents put bring you around a lot of other kids when you were when you were young. Oh, yeah, my age my parents Both coached little league sports. Oh, wow like my dad coached baseball and football and My mom coached cheerleading and softball and my mom was like treasurer of like our small town youth league So they weren't like hermits like hoarding you know that no, that's what I'm saying like they made sure we I got socialized Like they said they didn't know it was autism, but they just knew You know, I was an intelligent kid So they just thought I was awkward because I was like a nerd You know what I mean like this is gonna be a real like pocket protector type of kid And we gotta get bullied like we gotta teach them how to talk to kids Yeah, teach them a sport or a skill or something, you know And so I just I just learned by exposure like over exposure. Yeah sink or swim Um, yeah, but I bet that does happen to a lot of people though who have like parents who don't let them out of the house Parents who are lazy you know, I mean who don't try to socialize their kids or mix them in other environments That kids like that could grow up fucked up Hey, you're seeing that soft white underbelly guy Mark later He's a channel called soft white underbelly where he he actually lives in downtown LA He has a studio right on skid row and he just interviews all the homeless people all the crackheads all the hookers all the gang members And he's done probably a few thousand videos already a few thousand interviews people Yeah, it's insane and and um He said like the number one common denominator with all those people is their parents fucked them up when they were young Just like lazy parents or parents who were just already at it They just accidentally had kids and they were like fuck now This is a burden. I have to deal with yeah Well and also just think about how many like people like developmental health issues not even because of like Like Pair like purposefully or like intentionally bad parenting or like think about the kids like messed up because their parents were just trying the bat Like trying their best, but they just didn't know like how many like how much parenting techniques and like things like that and like child psychology It's changing like all the things we know but like you know Spanking's now cause these kinds of like mental health things like just all the stuff our parents didn't know Right and like they were doing the best they could You know what I mean So like how do you fault someone for doing the best they could with the with the information they had at the time? Yeah, but I don't think that's the issue. No, no, I'm not and I'm not saying it is I definitely they're definitely parents that were just like neglectful, you know like irresponsible Right, you know absentee like all of those kind of things and not to mention like abusive violent like all of those kinds of things Definitely fuck you up, but then all but that's what I'm saying like there's also that marginalized group of mental health Issues that it's not that their parents were any of those things. It's just that they didn't have the skills necessary to overcome those things Right, you know what I mean like think about like and again this like Things it's just that they didn't have the skills necessary to overcome those things, right? You know what I mean? Like think about like and again this like people who come from like poor and and like historically impoverished places like that that triangle and Florida, you know what I mean? Like think about the people who grew up out there with like you know parents who it's not that They are trying to be absentee, but your dads having to work 95 hours a week and your mom has an underlying mental health issue That nobody knows about because you live in a place where you can't afford mental health services, right? Yeah, you know think about all of those people is a huge thing too, right? Yeah sure. Yeah money It that's the whole you know that's the whole thing is like money is the primary Like hindrance to most health care Not even just specifically mental health care mental health care is already hard enough on its own To access just because it's so limited and they're such a stigma around it. You know in a in Denmark They will when you have a baby. They will pay you They will pay you to have a babysitter for like the first five or six. They'll also they'll also issue you stipends to take like parenting Courses and right Right, right, which is crazy, but isn't that the way it should it shouldn't be I have to get a license to go on the road and drive because I could I could drastically change the course of someone's life Why do I not also have to have a license to raise two people and drastically impact of the course of their lives? Yeah Yeah, you should yeah. Yeah, I totally agree with that But it works in Denmark if fucking I mean Denmark saw also a very small country so much different than us Yeah, and I think that's the bigger thing. It's like when you have a smaller population It's easier to pick up on outliers than when you have a large massive population because you have to worry so much about that cluster You know what I mean like your outliers can't be your priority because by definition you have to worry about the majority Yeah, definitely yeah, having a I mean To like say that people would have to get a license to have kids. That's kind of crazy Huh, that's a crazy Not a license, but like shouldn't there be some sort of required Chances and classes or something like not saying a license, but like if you're going to have a baby You have to complete these things, you know what I mean? Like you have to fill out all the paperwork at the hospital, you know you have to take you have to pay the bill You know you at least like and I'm not saying like there has to be a test But at least like some sort of like hey, I've completed the the the course materials You know Like I have to To a CNA in Florida, you know a nursing assistant whose primary job is like patient hygiene and things like that like to literally clean clean people and keep them Hygienic You have to complete like a certificate course But you don't have to complete that same course when they hand you a new one right? Yeah But you're telling me I have to complete a course to take care of like the oldest meter on the lot But a brand new one you'll just hand me with no questions asked Yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean when it comes to like kids though It's it's weird because it's like people's right to Fuck and have kids, you know, I mean if they don't if they refuse to do all that stuff They refuse to be conscientious or if they refuse to be responsible I Mean you can't really like there's like we do we do it now It's we do child protective services get called when parents Like like prove to be neglectful and people in the court and the government take people's children away from them Mm-hmm. So why is it not okay to install a preventative measure for that? Yeah, why is it not okay to install another set of checks and balances to To limit that like if we're talking about like protecting kids and that's what everyone talks about as such a priority Why are we not protecting them? From the start yeah Yeah, there needs to be more money that goes towards that kind of stuff Doesn't say even if it's not like even if it's not like a mandatory when you get to have a kid Even if it becomes like make it mandatory high school education. Yeah Make early child education child development and things like that like make that a core curriculum part for schools Because like think about how high the like the teen pregnancy rate is I'm sure Florida's you know most Florida's is like off the chart something something like 38% of high school graduates have a baby within the first year of graduating high school So why are we not teaching them that then? Like why are we not updating what home economics is? I'll vote you for mayor. Yeah, you're you being great mayor. I don't know about that. I don't know if I can handle it I don't think anyone wants a mayor taking drugs About you for the warden. Yeah, I think they do like look guys I'm I'm still trying to figure out like the budget for the winter parade Yeah, so I'm gonna lock myself in the office for three days take some LSD and I'll have it fixed by Monday Everybody good hang tight. Yeah Everybody hang tight. What's it? Didn't know what's his name? Is he like trying to run for governor the Morgan and Morgan lawyer? I'm sure the guy he's like the biggest weed advocate in the state Morgan and Morgan and Morgan guy. He's on Orlando. You know him, right? Yeah, John Morgan John Florida you've heard yeah offices in Jacksonville Orlando, Tampa. Yeah, if you've seen a city bus drove by you know Morgan Yeah, homeless people know who Morgan People with no internet no Morgan and Morgan that's a fact homeless people have no idea who Adam driver is but Morgan and Morgan Yeah, remember ask Gary. I want to whatever happened to that guy one hundred acts Gary. Oh, yeah Call one a hundred acts Gary They used to sponsor the race stadium. Yeah, you need to ask Gary Stadium I mean, they'd always be on he'd always be on every time I listen to Bubba it'd be on you know every ad break There was like four ass Gary commercials in a row always on the radio and that dude was bawling He had like a mansion in the Bahamas They got run over by four one one pain and they're jingles. Yeah, I think my favorite jingle is the cars for kids makes no sense How does that one? One eight seven seven cars for kids. Yeah, I have it. Oh, yeah, it's on the radio. I've heard that recently Really? Yeah, I don't know. I don't know how the radio Yeah, yeah, I don't listen to radio anymore So what's next for you? Next on this journey with the van you know upgrade the van you're gonna you know buy a buy a Buy a house what do you know? So so I started to go fund me so my van like I said shitbox And as a shitbox So it has leaks in the roof You know like I start I got it converted and started driving and stuff and then found out there were leaks in the roof like where that That fiberglass top or isn't stuff and I've tried patching it a couple of times and the leak always comes back and So I was here in Tampa a couple of weeks ago Remember when we had like there was like four days straight of like Tarantula Yeah, so I was here in town at that point in time and like I was getting ready to go to sleep Like the rain had started I was almost asleep and then I just like my wet my legs were wet And I was like what yeah, so in the middle of this rainstorm I have to like go to Lowe's get a tarp and a bunch of those little straps And then like try and strap it down over the roof in the middle of this down poor I get completely soaked through the bone And then I get back in the van after the tarp is done and everything like that and then like I'm trying to get out of the wet clothes I soaked everything as like when I went out like golden retriever just like shakes itself on the carpet You know so everything soaked and I just got so pissed. That's it I started to go fund me and and like just wrote it all out and posted it Like more just out of frustration than anything and then like I woke up the next day to like $3,000 in donation Yeah, wow. Yeah, so I set the goal is like $7,500 because when I was like look like I love this van, but like it's got all of these problems Plus it's just it's such a small van You know what I mean like I need something bigger and more reliable and you know all of this kind of stuff And just the response has been amazing so far it's we were over $5,000 For their goal. Yeah, so we actually it's it's gotten big enough now that actually I bought a van a body 1990 Ford a con online Like the fact the Falcon camper van So it's got like the big topper on it with the two like big bubble windows over the cab. Oh hell yeah 21 and a half feet long It's got like a like a bathroom and like I see you know, yeah full full deal works But I bought it from a guy I had like gone to high school where there was like his grandpas and it'd been sitting since his grandpa passed away But the engine wasn't seized up and it so just needed like tires and Yeah, exactly so we bought it had it towed over to a mechanic So it's there now and they're still going through everything and calculating everything up So we're basically trying to raise the money to make sure that the van is going to be fully operational functional everything like that and Give me enough to to do some like updating and and then you know things for the inside And really make it like like the The van you know what I mean, right? That's super cool. Yeah, because that's the thing like I converted this this one basically just out of Desperation, you know, I mean like this is the Hail Mary move and it was also more of like the experiment like I'm gonna do this Get out on the road and see if this is a lifestyle like an adaptive Yeah, right right and then I got out on the fucking road and like hell yeah, dude There's just something in your spirit that like does That's super cool. So my first trip. I'd say I I had a show in like St. Augustine And then from that show I left and started heading towards Austin So I drove into like three thirty in the morning stopped on I10 like right at the Florida State line Like just literally found like on I10 like all of those big wooded areas in the middle of I10 Mm-hmm. I found one of those like the dirt road pull-throughs that weren't like the official ones And I had like a little clearing off to the side So I pulled in there and up into the clearing and then that's where I slept like my first night on the road and then Leaving Austin going to Colorado Springs like you just basically from Austin You just go straight north through Texas and then you like when you get up to the state line You kind of like go into New Mexico and then up into Colorado But all of that is in the mountains So and because of the way my schedule was all jacked up at the time I was driving at night So I come across the state line and into the mountains as the sun's coming up over the mountains You know like into Colorado and driving up and down these mountains Just like just the sheer beauty of it You know like I literally like I'm not like a posse or anything But I called my sister like in tears. It's like this fucking beautiful. Yeah, you know Like it just does something spiritually like just being out and like seeing that and just that feeling like I said that feeling of like Momentum like I can feel we're doing something. Yeah, you know It just fills that like sense of adventure in your soul. You know what I mean? Yeah Someone was showing was it you show me someone show me this sick Instagram page the other day where people had these vans And they like decked it out and like teak with these badass floors like these surf fans where you can sleep you can eat Is that you show me that? Yeah? Yeah. Yeah. What's that called? Behoven Behoven, yeah, and that's kind of like where I think I'm gonna go with this like when I start redoing the inside because it like there's spots where like one of the like the pop-top windows was leaking so I'm gonna have to tear that out and redo it So I'm gonna do like either like a like a nice wood or like a like a beadboard roof or something like that and give it kind of like a Florida like a beachy vine, you know like a like a beach cabin on wheels or something You know, and I'm gonna turn like I said to the captain's chairs and stuff in the front I'll have a table so I can set up like an actual podcasting studio. Yeah, yeah Aidan pull up some of those Beho vans on the screen. Those are so sick because we we like we were young We always used to just travel back and forth when here in the east coast to a surfing and our friend had a This well kind of and did Luke have Astro-van Astro-van yeah, and we would all just pile in the back and just sit on the floor and fucking So that's basically what my van is my van is the GMC version of the Astro van, but it's the short the short like Passenger version not the long cargo version. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's the Bo Ho vans. Yeah, those things are so sick Dude a lot of money there. Can you throw up a like a 19 I uh Ford Falcon camper van He's got to pull it off back on to his little screen and do it. Yeah Just in case some porn. Is that what you have now the Falcon man. That's the new one that we've got a bot That's that's that's at the shop now and how much was it again? 7,000 no no um That's what it is. I don't know. I was good that thing is sick. No do a 90 1990. Just leave it up The time in the 70s See the tan one to the right the tan one Yeah tan blue basically that one. Yeah basically exactly like that minutes That is dope. Yeah, and you sleep up top above the driver seat. So there's there's a bed up there But I'm probably gonna convert that into like stuff all the like audio stuff for the podcast Like that's where all my equipment will be The back is like a like a dinette that folds down into a queen size bed That is keep the back is like the bed. Yeah That's super sick probably not very good on gas though. Um, I mean not great That is the one downside my van has been great on gas because it's like a v6. It's of Manual my car man's a manual is really and that fifth gear on that is like a cruising gear So I get it on the interstate put it in fifth gear and it's almost like to like turning it into a four cylinder dude like yeah we yeah Hall-ass But that's like a v8 with like dual gas tanks. Yeah, you know But like I said when I remod when I remodel it I'm gonna take a lot of the weight out of it. So hopefully that helps with the gas Definitely, you know, hey, I didn't want to fuck with you when you're like sleeping over Like a weird parking lot like what's the weirdest thing that's happened to you? Um, so I I sleep in like weird places, you know, like I'll sleep like in a like Walmart parking lots coals parking lots bass pro shops rest areas truck stops like I'm Big fan of pilot truck style, you know Especially now because like Walmart's in places like that are closed at night now. They're not 24 hours anymore Yeah, so if I have to take a ship So my current man doesn't have a bathroom. Yeah. They got showers everything. Yeah, well, and I shower I got my planet fitness membership so I normally shower at a gym, you know, are they 24 hours planet fitness? No, okay Um, not currently Some most like during normal everything they were so But yeah, so shower the planet fitness or truck stop because truck stops are 24 hours um and Yeah, man, but like I had a Outside of Austin is like rock ridge Texas. There's like a suburb of Austin and I pulled into a Walmart parking lot there Because I'd looked up like Austin like can't like camping, you know, all that kind of stuff before and it was like yeah Austin like allows like overnight camping at all of their Walmart But like I'd been there maybe an hour and I was just getting settled in and like I get a knock on the window And it's a police car They're like hey, yeah, like this is rock Ridge rock Ridge doesn't allow overnight camping Yeah, they were cool about it like they gave me like a couple. They're like there's a place like oh there's a bass pro shops like two exits south You know, and that's over that line so you can sleep that I don't like okay, cool, you know Um, but then I found like another spot like the next night in Austin. It was like behind a gas station It was abandoned I just from the road like I was going by and I just saw a bunch of like dirt roads going up these hills and I was like I wonder what's up there and It's just a bunch of like Cleared land or like land next to like a big like water reservoir Like system and so there were a bunch of like dirt roads through there and a bunch of camping spots where like people would camp And I was like this is perfect. I just pulled into one of the clearings there and I stayed there the next two nights You know, and it was far enough like away from like the roads and up on this hill where like nobody could see me the sound it And bother me. I was basically by myself I ran like my generator with the big AC all that kind of stuff like it was great That's amazing And then I was at a truck stop in Maryland And I had a I had somebody Okay, I was at a truck stop in Maryland and I was like in the van and I watched TV like like Netflix and stuff on my iPad So I was like watching something on my iPad and I kept hitting this noise and it was like is that part of the show? And then I pause it and I It's like okay, it's not part of the show because I can still hear the noise and it's like this like No, yeah, and I was like what is that? You know, and so I have those like I said, I have those Those insulator panels up over my windows. Yeah, right? So I like undo the Velcro and like pull down the thing to like look outside the van and see where the noise is and there's a Truck stop prostitute sucking dick two and a half feet away from my window That's great. No. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Just the trucker leaned up against his rig just getting his I Know in that close part there are parked literally right next to you. Yeah, right next to me Didn't even bother to get into the camper into the fucking truck or anything just right outside. Yep Just because of the way like the parking lot was turned like there were like we're I was on the like the backside of that parking lot There was like a wooded area back there And then there was like 17 trucks between them like the rest of the you know So nobody could see them back there And they must have assumed like I was inside at like the diner or something right or they were like they could hear the iPad And so they're like oh, he's not gonna notice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah So yeah, so he's a trucker. You said didn't give a fuck. Yeah, so there was that other lot lizard And then here in Tampa I was in a CVS parking lot Because so typically when I stop for the night like wherever I'm gonna like wherever parking lot or wherever I end up I'll get out when I first get there and Like on my Apple watch I'll basically just get away from the van so it doesn't fuck with my compass and I'll make sure like I get exact east so I know where the sun's coming up from so that way I can find like a spot with that's gonna have the Most shade throughout the day You know, so I'm like, you know, I'll get under these trees because the sun's coming up from over here So these trees will block me during noon and that tree over there will like block me from the sunrise You think a real hunter gather little bit. Yeah real front here's men um but uh So I done all that I was under these trees in the CVS parking lot because it was next to a Walmart And I just happened to see it and I was like this looks like the best spot based on sunrise all that kind of stuff So I get parked I get in the back of the van and I just done um That was the night That was the same night as the Ron White shows So because I just driven drove back to Tampa after the second show because I had a show here the next night So I did that's like a two-hour drive two and a half hour drive So I was like I was so amped up. I was like I'm not gonna sleep in the next three hours anyway So just my whole ass back to Tampa So but I get there I get settled into the van and I go back and like start watching my recording from my first set right and And like it was like three minutes in I get like a big applause break And I was so giddy and happy and stone That I was like talking out loud to myself right And so I'm literally like watching my video my phone and I'm giggling out loud like a maniac And like I'm listening to it in my bluetooth headset So like I'm the only one that can hear the video right And so I yell out loud I'm like I'm a murderer right talking about the video right And then I just hear from the ear that doesn't have an earbud in from outside of the van I hear me too bro And I literally have panicked and there's like there's like a homeless guy like who had just been going by That's all the van was just like and then he just heard me yell I'm a murderer and he's like me too Do you want to do this like I guess he thought I was threatening him or something? Yeah Wow Yeah, no he was just checking out my vin he's like this is the coolest homeless setup. I've ever seen Like just admiring my lawn basically as a homeless person, you know You'd bite him in no I just heard basically like I was talking about my video I was like he's not watching a video Yeah, he's serious. I was like I was like seriously man like I'm armed Sure, you guys. We had a great combo Probably I've had conversations with other homeless dudes like all the time like so that's the weird part about living in the van Right like I joke around about it, but I'm I am technically homeless Well, I'm houseless like I have shelter and an engine and that's basically you know But it's weird like Other homeless people will still ask me for money Right so like I was doing I went to an open mic in Orlando. That's right downtown and it's right It's like one block over from the Amway Center So when there's not Amway events we can park on that like on that street for the open mic So as parked and I was early because I was coming into town from somewhere else So I was just early so I had my it was like I don't know like January February So it's like nice and cool outside So I parked I had the windows rolled down and I was just sitting there like with my notebook Just like scribbling notes and writing out ideas and and this homeless guy comes up He's like hey man like you know it starts talking to me. He's like hey like you do you have like a You get like some money or something like you know like I'm homeless and I literally I was like over my shoulders like bro You can see where I sleep like I'm also homeless do you have some money? That's funny man. Yeah, it's like just assume if you can see where someone sleeps from the door of their home Yeah, they don't have money for you. Yeah. That's cool though with a van and the interactive We call those weirdos on the road that probably gives you way more material You know, I mean way more interactions with weirdos. Oh, yeah way more opportunities for material Well, and that's the thing like being out on the road not just being out on the road But like being at mics being with other comedians like again It's like that socialization that I didn't have for a long time. Yeah, and so I'm re I'm getting those skills back And also it's like people I can talk to about pretty much anything because we all have this one Thing in comments so even if I'm talking like going off on a tangent on something else You know like it's everyone understands. It's in the frame of comedy so somebody's like hey that do that as a bit That's a good that was a good bit, you know, even if it's something like you know They disagree with intellectually or like you know things like that but um Yeah, man just like being able to be around like creative people again and getting that socialization of like being out on the road and like Realizing like oh, I have that skill back of being able to talk to people again So now like in gas stations like I'll you know talking to the cashier and talking and I'm like oh, I'm doing that again I'm talking to strangers again. Mm-hmm. That kind of thing so like doing Comedy has helped me rebuild those skills that I had lost because people don't realize like autism can be regressive They normally people are like oh like if you get when you get diagnosed, they're like oh this is what you're diagnosed with This is how you are like this is how it'll always be yeah, but it can get better or worse, you know what I mean Like and people that's just not something people normally think about like um, and I realized I had regressed a lot in those like years where I had started becoming more Hermity, you know, yeah And so now we realize like oh, I've built these skills back up and like Just where my mental health is is just different now like I feel better like comedy has helped me feel better and like You know how how how what better way to guarantee it's not like or to know like it's not one of those Hobbies that I'm gonna get burnt out on and and you know drop again right because it's it's fulfilling something for me you are yeah, and it literally like from the bottom up it literally makes you better at every aspect of what you try to do yeah and enhances your way of thinking and looking at the world So it's it's not only just like this thing that I love to do and not only is it become my profession But it's also literally like an occupational therapy. Mm-hmm. Yeah, like not people talk about comedy as therapy all the time But like it's not so much I mean it is therapeutic to like speak your truth out loud, but it's also just that therapy of like Interacting with people, you know. Yeah. That's really cool man Sweet well, that was two hours dude. Thank you. You have for coming on Absolutely. That was fucking amazing. Thanks for coming. Tell the listeners everybody where they can follow you and find out your work online Yeah, absolutely. Um, AJ Wilkerson comedy on Instagram Facebook and then captain autism on TikTok and Twitter on Twitter. There's an underscore at the end and I think on TikTok there's an underscore in the middle between captain and autism Sweet. Yeah, apparently there's another one of us out there another one. Yeah, unlike Highlander there can be more than one So yeah, so there's another one out there. So I got the underscores Um, but yeah, captain autism AJ Wilkerson Sweet. Yeah, appreciate it. So much guys. Thanks for coming. Thanks again, bro. Absolutely