The Joe Rogan experience. What did that one doctor in the corner say about... Well, what did he say about the results? I presented to him 459 guys who had a 78% improvement in a year. Okay, that was our 2019... In person to what is... No improvement. No improvement. And so... And it was in a long presentation. They only gave me like 20 minutes. It was a three-hour lecture I'd put into 20 minutes. 20 minutes for you is like a couple of blinks. The average person. But it was good, right? But one guy said he appreciates... What do you say? He was sitting in a closer way. He appreciated your willingness to work with people who needed help, but he didn't believe it already said. There were like four or five docs that did that. But that's fine. Did you call them out on their motivations? At the end, I basically said to my colleagues across the aisle or across the pond that if they continue on the paradigm that they're working, they're going to have as many suicides as we have in the United States. Because there was no rationale. It was a psychiatrist. What's the scientific evidence a psychiatrist used before he put you on? Not you. But puts a person on anti-depressants. What's the science? There's none. What's the objective science? You feel bad. It's his perception. Yes, exactly. Here we have... Hard, objective, reproducible clinical data. So I presented 459 cases, flated out into age groups, into what percentage of the people did best. Our failures, I mean, we have failures. Our failures are 24 people out of 4, we're due to them being on medication that blocked our treatment. There's certain medications we've learned. What medications? One called Gabba Penton. It interrupts Gabba, which is extremely important for sleep. So it substitutes in. Did they put you on Gabba Penton? No, I don't believe so. So I didn't go in. What's the benefit of Gabba Penton? For pain and for sleep, for chronic pain and sleep, that's what they're using it for. But the surgeon general loved what he heard. And we actually went him over. Yeah, we're going to do this big study in Birmingham, England, like over four years. So the surgeon general loved it. Yeah. And who did the people who had control of the military project at Imperial College? The scientific advisors. The scientific advisors. Because you just threw a monkey wrench into the wall of their work. Yeah. When his name is Colonel Tim Hodgett. That's a good problem. Did that the guy who had the problem? No, he, that's what he's the one surgeon. He's the surgeon general designated him to talk. Read. How the street was the surgeon general. Was the shot. Shout out to how it's to read. Yeah. So yeah, it feels like truth. Yeah, let's do it. So shut those guys down. Like he came in and shut them up and said, we're doing this. We're doing it in Birmingham. Really? So what I promoted to do is shut down. They shut us down. Yeah, they shut us down. Why they shut it down? They came back afterwards. The advisors and worked however. They worked it and got got them to agree that they didn't bother. Some of them from the Americas coming over. There is not always the case in a movie where you have these like stiff British intellectuals who just don't buy all this new research and they do whatever they can to stop it. It's got this really happened. Yeah. We're in real time. Yes. Do you know the story of various when those kind of stereotypes? Do you know the story of Igor? What his name? He was just dropped his last name. Anyway, he was at the first OB hospital in Austria. And a symbol vice, his last name, a symbol vice. He was an obstetrician gynecologist. And during that time, they would go from cadaver dissection into doing vaginal exams on these pregnant women getting ready to deliver. And they had a very high occurrence of what's called crib death where they die because they didn't understand at that time. They didn't have cotch poshlets that they were transferring infectious agents from the cadaver. Wait, here was this? 1700s. They didn't wash their hands. So a symbol vice, what he did, he says, ah, let's put lemon juice and a lie together and we'll wash our hands. And he took a 20% death rate down to less than 1%. And he did a thesis on this and presented to the first obstetricional gynecological hospital in Austria and what they did, what they refuted his results. Why? If they admitted that what he was doing, all it took was washing the hands because what did they say during those times? It was God's will. It was God's will, the reason why the person died. And it was also admit that they were doing things wrong. They didn't want to acknowledge the fact that here's a guy that's an unknown guy. I'm unknown. I don't have credentials like these people we went up against and he was able to solve the problem, but they refuted it. Like Admiral Small, Admiral Small from the British Admiralty, he's the one who treated the first nutritional illness called scurvy, but it took 50 years for the Admiralty to recognize it because they don't want to believe it. That's how they got the name Limes. They didn't, you know, all you need is vitamin C in order to avoid scurvy. So the doctor's where Limes come from. That's right. Go look it up. Wow. Yeah. It's in my book, my first book, Interventional Endocrinology. I talked about these cases because they talk about the paradigms and how difficult it is to get one generation of medical caregivers to change what they've been indoctrinated in and fixated on to something more modern that maybe solves a problem that they weren't able to resolve. So it would be admitting that what I've been doing all this time has been wrong if I don't wash my hands. And I can't take that heat because I become the culprit now wasn't God's will. Right. And then you become responsible for all those deaths that occurred during your treatment. That's right. Yeah. And that's part of what I think is motivating a lot of the resistance there. The science is there. We're seeing it, we're seeing it stateside just as much. Yeah. It's ego, right? And then it's also influence from some pharmaceutical companies. If I had a Harvard degree or if I had a stamp for it, I had some of the other degrees behind my name instead of just MD, if you see K, what would happen is they might listen to me. One of the, or you might have a different worldview. Correct. I'd say, oh, screw it. Right. Let's go. Let it be. One of our admirals, rare admirals that was been with us for about eight years, connect me with another admiral who got me to the Fort Dietrich Army Medical Research and Development Group to share with them what we're doing. And they were interested in it, but they didn't understand it. Because they asked me, where's the antidepressants? Where are the anxiety medications? They're looking for maintaining the status quo. The only way we're going to improve this is for people to open up and look at the science and say, huh, I didn't know about this. Absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify Now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan Experience.