Joe Roman reagan the Joe Rogan experience Somewhere in the neighborhood close to five years. Yeah, a lot of water into the bridge Your appearance on the show boy that create a lot of problems Yeah, I didn't expect you ever have it me on again I thought maybe Spotify was just gonna say hello. No, you were right Like this is a victory dance like it turned out that all your warnings and all the things that you were saying about the problems Turned out to be true. Well, thanks and I know you've said that on a few shows every time you do Somebody sends me a clip and see hey, Rogan said you're either right there. What was it like for you? First of all, you know, they were trying to label you a quack and a coo Talking about I didn't I don't think it worked with everybody. I mean it worked with people that weren't paying attention But at anybody that really paid attention to your background said no this guy's very credible I mean don't you have like nine patents on mRNA vaccine technology? Yeah on the mRNA Yeah, in the total of about 15 I think yeah, and you also took the vaccine And had a horrible adverse event A series of yeah, yeah that at the time it was so early that was when the National Guard was still doing it and that was Moderna and um The I was embarrassed by to have these experiences And I was embarrassed when I got COVID in early 2020 um, you know looking back uh There was so much so much fear so much Uh Anger and anxiety and everything wrapped around all of this And in retrospect it was you know was promoted, but it was also Very organic, you know, it was it was you know looking back Being honest about it. It was a frightening time. What was happening and And yeah, I you know, I had those experiences My doc who was a cardiologist was like why were you so stupid to take this? Your doctor said that too in 2021. Yeah She was 20 or 20 it was 2021 2021 Yeah, um, I was going to a kind of a cardiologist that had left traditional medical practice at UVA and the associated Hospitals and I was going to her for hormone replacement therapy and Biomedical hormone replacement therapy and She was monitoring a lot of things and and yeah, that was her response. Why did you do this? Of course, I've had that question a thousand times since You know, why were you so stupid? You're the one that should have known And so I have to answer that still It's kind of gets a little tiresome. What was your perspective on the vaccine before you took it? um To be honest, I was a little I was amazed I was amazed that the Claims that the problems that I encountered When I had been working on it had been solved I didn't see how that could be the case But I knew that a huge amount of money had been thrown at it So it was possible. What were the problems? In my hands it was inflammation primarily. It was also, you know, the it was absolutely not localizable It was in in the monkey models that we tested it was incredibly inflammatory It didn't give long Level long prolonged levels of expression It was hard to make it's kind of back then it was Almost a little bit of witchcraft. You'd drop me and for me as a graduate student when I was doing that It was incredibly scary because it was a couple thousand dollars worth of reagents and a little tiny tube and you know back in the late 80s that was real money and It didn't always work the reaction so you know it was it was a little bit of a wing in a prayer but then As I started working with it with animal models and with the different formulations I could come up with a variety of different compounds and formulations that work pretty well in cell culture but not so well in animals and I spent a lot of time trying to do that optimize that and what I ended up with is just seeing that It really caused, you know, I'm sorry to use medical jargon That's kind of where I'm from so that's the language. No, it's probably better if it It caused a lot of inflammation You know white cell infiltrates really aggressive white cell infiltrates in my hands in both mice and monkeys and I had a bad as as something that just You know was was useful in in research in particularly in cell culture but I just didn't see it maturing as a as an efficient delivery strategy with low risk, you know acceptable risk in animals and that also became the experience in at this company that I had first joined where a lot of the original patents were filed by Cal they they abandoned the RNA because they couldn't make it and It turned largely to this strange discovery that we had that was a negative control that the RNA alone or DNA alone was actually more effective in animal models mice for instance than it was to use the positively charged fats this Now people call them in lipid nano plexus. Let's have fancy words around it It was just positively charged fats of various types that were mixed that bind the DNA or the RNA and and kind of spontaneously assemble and a lot of work went into trying to improve that we did what we could in the 90s when I was at Davis to try to advance that technology and Develop new lipids and we had a number of them get patented and they were marketed by Pro Meghan others but could never solve the delivery in vivo but this group up in university of British Columbia that had been bang in a way at this kind of related liposome tech for years and years even before you know I had known anything about it were the ones that kind of came up with the magic sauce that is used essentially by both the Moderna and Pfizer products and that's the stuff that we've all been exposed to those that have taken it so when you were first experiment you said the it couldn't be localized so meaning that in the injection site it was supposed to be there and then your body was supposed to produce antibodies because of the injection yeah and it goes all over but it went out all over the body yeah but the assertion what they were telling you when you got the shot initially was that it was not going to leave the injection size yeah and I and I called my colleagues at University of British Columbia that I had known back in the day as I was grappling with whether or not to take the product because I had to travel and as you call back then forget international travel if you weren't jabbed even national travel yeah you can get an airplane but it didn't Canada it was even worse you couldn't get a train yeah so so I called a Peter and and had a chat with him and he said that they had solved the problems of the distribution that now when you injected it it would stay local it would go to trading lymph nodes it was much more effective and that they didn't have those safety issues anymore so that was one of the reasons why I decided to go ahead did you ask how they solved that problem yeah yeah I asked in detail because I knew some of the nature of the formulations again I don't want to get too technical but what what was claimed was that the incorporation of polyethylene glycol so this is you know you would know that as antifreeze but it's in the liposome world it's long been known as a way to create what are known as stealth liposomes that circulate in your body for a long period of time and make it so that these particles don't get inactivated by extra sailor proteins and the liver and stuff like that and so he was using the gentleman in particular is named Peter Colus by the way he's the one that should have got the Nobel Prize for these products as far as I'm concerned and got slighted in the pick but Peter Colus said that he had they had experimented with a lot of different structures of the fat particles chemical structures so they came up with some that had these properties of staying localized and then built the formulations in ways that were similar to what I'd done with cholesterol and other things but then also added these shorter polyethylene glycol molecules attached with a really short organic you call it fatter or gasoline like molecule that put the peg into the liposome particle and but in a way that once it got into the body it would fall off and so this is you know some people have the sensation as I did with my second jab of you know you get it and then suddenly you feel tingling in the end of your fingers or things like that that may be the peg but it was those advances in the components because these are self-assembling particles that were used that Peter and his group Peter Colus no Peter Colus PIET are from UBC and his group built these products with in this technology and that was they had it available their choice because they created companies for this I mean a ton of money must have been made because they licensed it non exclusively to bio-entech and Moderna and that that's still kind of the core tech that makes this particular category products work and so this was enough to convince you that they had solved that problem yeah I took his word at it I mean he's he's an extremely experienced knowledgeable liposome formulation expert quite senior he's older than me by another decade at least and been doing this forever and he asserted that he had he had solved the problems and I believed him I needed to travel internationally and also there was this buzz going around at the time that if you had long COVID which at you know at the time if you think back to then there was a whole cloud over even using the words long COVID that the idea that you would have these long lasting effects from getting the infection was controversial and not really accepted but partially promoted and there was a narrative that was you know retrospect actively promoted that if he took the vaccines and you and if you had this symptom of this chronic malaise and loss of stamina I mean you're a guy that's it's important to you to be physically fit for me it's been important to be physically fit all my life because I've always been a farmer and a carpenter and worked with my hands and my body and I have farm chores I still have farm chores every day and I couldn't do them I couldn't walk up hills I just had lost my stamina I'd lost my pulmonary function and it wasn't getting better and nobody you know nobody knew anything about this what was causing it whether it was even real but I was experiencing it you know there's there's a whole cluster of people who say there's no virus and there's certainly not any long COVID but I experienced it so and so it was it was promoted that if you took the jab and you had this symptom yeah then it would kick your immune system up you get more of a response to the spike antigen and that would allow you to clear these symptoms of long COVID that turns out now we have data in just fairly recently that in fact the opposite is true so this this idea of long COVID so you got long COVID from the actual infection of COVID-19 before the jab yeah I got infected in late very end of February 2020 I was in Boston at a conference on drug discovery computational drug discovery high-throughput stuff I'm very high tech MIT and staying in a little firehouse that had been converted to a hotel right across the street from the biotech company where that the initial Boston outbreak was associated with and I came home sick as a dog I thought that I had influenza B because that was the what the narrative was that was circulating at the time and I was just I remember laying in bed just feeling sick as hell hard to breathe and my wife came in it's just been on the TV COVID is circulating right there in Boston where you were so so that was that was pretty early on and it hit me pretty hard so that would have been the Wuhan one variant and then there was a couple of genetic changes that occurred apparently in Boston around that time so how long did this affect you this this long COVID? I was I was sick and tell I took the jab you know just not not having stamina just feeling how many months was that? I never really thought about it many months and did you try anything else to mitigate those sometimes? Yeah I did so what my whole story you know the whole bunch of what I did back then that never gets discussed and that's okay but I you know the kickoff was that I got this call from Wuhan I think it was from Wuhan from this guy that used to be CIA named Michael Kellahan who I'd worked with in the past and had told me he told me with call that there was this virus in Wuhan this coronavirus that looked like it was going to be serious and I had to pay attention to it and I ought to get a team wound up to try to address this so what I'd done because this is coming off of what I did in Zika and I'm the vaccinologist at core but I'm developing a vaccine in the face of an outbreak historically has taken a decade and it just isn't a practical way to address an emergent infectious disease crisis and I had become convinced that the best way to do that was through repurposed drugs so after I get this call I put the team together building on technology that I'd been working with at U.S.A.A.M.R.A.D. during Zika for rapid identification of repurposed drugs to address a you know new crisis and this time we'd really taken a computational approach so I used some tech out of U.C. San Francisco to recreate one of the key proteins in SARS-CoV-2 based on the sequence that got published from Wuhan in this January 11th I think and of 2020 and we started doing what's called computational docking a very very large virtual libraries using Amazon AWS and high throughput parallel processing and came up with a list of compounds and then kind of screen those against problems adverse events that kind of stuff more coffee good I would thank you and so I had this list I had this list of compounds and then I was sick as a dog and you know what you get trained in if you do clinical research is docs don't experiment on themselves it's like breaking the rules but I'm lying there so sick that I'm just like what the hell what do I got to lose I'm probably gonna die you know I'd I at that point I'd spend a lot of time already looking into the virus and what it was causing and what people were saying it was causing and how old were you at the time um let's see I'm 66 now so that's what's the 60 60 yeah so you were in a high risk group yeah for sure and and and I was a beast I don't know if you noticed but I've dropped about 40 to 50 pounds cents we last met so so I started taking some of those compounds and one of them was this drug that is normally taken for stomach acid called fematidine and I got an immediate response with that and so I also tried isocarciton that didn't seem to make so much of an impact on me but I experimented myself and the fematidine at higher doses um now has been verified to be helpful and it was one of the first things out of the box that people started taking um even prophylactically before we knew about Ibermectin and other things and then that went on I mean there's a whole thread here we could go on for an hour about about what was done with the repurposed drugs I was working closely with the Fenser reduction agency um and um I managed to capture a few hundred million dollars and direct that towards drug repurposing adaptive clinical trials etc and the thing that I zoomed in on through a collaboration with the doc up in Minnesota was the combination of fematidine another anti-inflammatory called cellecoxid and then the thing that really kicked it in high gear was the forbidden horse medicine uh Ibermectin and uh we got I managed to working with dod got um over a hundred million dollars uh set up a contract uh um it got managed by essay I see and uh we were going to go after that using a very cutting edge clinical trial um design and uh and remember this is the dod we submitted initial drug applications for using this combination of license drugs well known license drugs and the FDA just dug in um again and again rejected the application so long what they said was we were going to have to do cell culture tests to demonstrate the anti viral activity of ibermectin before they would allow us to proceed and so in the end the dod caved and they dropped the ibermectin component and proceeded with the uh fematidine and cellecoxid which showed some effect why would they so has to move the resistance uh your your guess is as good as mine I really people think that I have visibility into the FDA and yeah I've met with them and I have a background in regulatory affairs but the policy decisions that were made during covid uh instilled to this day are perplexing just particularly ibermectin oh it was it was uh like a high sin yeah they they they deployed uh what do we want call it propaganda psychological warfare nudge everything just like they did after you and I had our little discussion um it was it was stunning i mean uh the like after we had our chat uh um i don't know if you remember you asked me about what is this about uh mass formation psychosis and it i mean the use the term broke the internet is overused it broke the internet yeah uh the search results on google went nuts and uh because it perfectly described what was happened oh and couldn't be it it couldn't possibly describe what was happening even though every single person that heard it knew to him well it did but it was forbidden i mean this was forbidden because people didn't hear our first discussion please explain mass formation psychosis so since then i've had a shitsdorm come at me for using the term psychosis coupled with mass formation you can't you know the the grief you think you got a lot of grief from spotify and from spotify was actually great no grief from them it was from like Neil young and jony Mitchell and oh i i artists so you probably then you probably don't know the whole backstory okay um that's we should that's fun to dive into because it relates to the psychological warfare domain that now i've become a pseudo expert on um just in trying to understand what the hell i experienced and what's going on so so mttiest desmat who's a friend um at university again to embellish him who by the way has been pretty well railroaded in his university now not allowed to teach his own on the psychological basis of totalitarianism which is where that book had not come out yet but it was the mass formation hypothesis is what was the kind of core of that book that's now published and and widely regarded uh so so mttiest came mttiest is somebody who uh as a phed full professor had long taught uh 20th century uh psychology work relating to totalitarianism and thought uh that goes back to Freud and beyond really all the way back to Plato and the allegory the cave and in particular there was a number of of philosophers in the 20th century associated with uh trying to make sense of Nazi Germany and what had happened to the German people and really all over the world uh but particularly relating to the Germans and mttiest had been teaching us on a regular basis and the way he tells the story he had in a pithany one day that oh my god the thing that I've been teaching I'm living we're experiencing it we're experiencing this process of the formation of masses um and the you could call it crowd psychology so mass formation it's kind of awkward or mass formation psychosis which is what the term was that was used in the initial podcast that he gave out so that's why I use that term uh but you know it's not in the the the attack was that it's not in the diagnostics and statistical manual uh for the American psychiatric association so therefore it doesn't exist uh um uh but you know all the attacks uh but um the core of it is that when people to make it simple become disassociated from society and from each other they become extremely vulnerable to manipulation of a variety of different types and a leader can come into that environment and uh offer let's to simplify it um offer a solution to their pain because being isolated socially isolated is associated with pain we as human beings have a need to connect with others it's a fundamental aspect of being human it's what you do I mean you connect that's that's the essence of the Joe Rogan experience I think um so we need to connect with others and in in certain situations where people are threatened um and in particular in the modern era where we have all of these things that drive us into isolation most notably are uh electronic tools uh we become disassociated from our community and when that happens we have a strong need to become associated with community and a leader can come into that environment and basically say I have the solution to your pain your psychological pain and uh what will happen is a strange phenomena where people will rather than building social networks let's say horizontal lead to those around them they'll attach to this strong leader and they'll get that they'll get fulfillment for that need to belong by this attachment attachment to that leader and following the edicts of that leader and this leads to this phenomena that gives rise you know enables totalitarianism but uh gives rise to this whole cluster of things that mistiest described uh that um you know he uses the term mass formation in a way that's kind of an odd artifact of translation I guess from the Dutch uh it's an easier way to think of it is a crowd formation um and uh and in his uh examination of the history of what happened in Nazi Germany where things people really went crazy I mean mothers were turning their children in uh you know children are being executed on on you know consequent to mothers testimony which is really strange when you think about it just you know in a fundamental way uh you know we had all of this uh dear leader kind of stuff uh the the um uh linkage of of the self and the soul to this central figure and deriving a sense of identity and belonging from that that went on and and you know there's still uh people from that generation in Germany that um are still caught up in in a lot of that that's why the German laws uh and um so that's that's that's the short version when we spoke before I gave a much more technical precise uh definition of Mathias's uh core thesis uh but um this once this happens then people become very very easily manipulated through propaganda and a variety of techniques that now I have a better comprehension of I mean then I was still just trying to make sense just like all of us of what the heck was going on what's with this crazy uh but now uh it's kind of coalesced into an understanding of of the fact that modern psychology has been weaponized it's been intentionally weaponized in the context of military activities and the domain that you know one way to express it the term is used kind of term of art in military jargon is fifth generation warfare or you could call it psychological warfare and what it distinguishes the present from say uh Sanzu and you know ancient You could call it psychological warfare. And what it distinguishes the present from, say, uh, Sanzu, and, you know, ancient, propaganda has always been part of warfare in humans. But, uh, we haven't had the digital world. We haven't had modern psychology. We haven't had nudge technology. We haven't had all these tools that allow the control of information, thought, perception, feelings, emotions, that have become commonplace. And that, you know, is, is, and has, you know, this, this suite of technology and capabilities that we saw deployed in all of us. We're, uh, built in a kind of a structured way, largely by UK and US leadership in the intelligence community. As a weapon of war to counter these, uh, successful insurgencies that we keep losing wars over. Uh, you know, being, um, being a notable example all the way through Afghanistan. And, uh, um, so that, that's why it was built. Uh, but then that tech, um, got deployed by governments against their own citizens. And this was really launched, uh, in large part, uh, in the United States by a presidential directive from Barack Obama. I'm not making this up. Uh, you can look it up. And by the way, the presidential directive is still in place that established the, uh, uh, um, nudge technology units in the United States. They're already operating in the UK. And in the UK, it's quite advanced. When you look at UK politics right now and what's going on there with all the censorship and everything, you know, this is no joke. We're, we're barreling right to that end point. Same as Canada has. Uh, you know, we're just a little bit behind. And, uh, there they, you know, we have the benefit of the First Amendment in a constitution. And, um, you know, off and on courts. But, uh, there they, they don't have those obstacles. And the government believes in the UK that once they have one election, it's perfectly acceptable to deploy this modern psychology and information control technology on their own population. And I argue that once that Rubicon is crossed, the idea of democracy because the tech is so powerful becomes completely perverted. And we got a good hard taste of that during COVID. What, what you and I experienced, what you experienced with Ibermectin, what you experienced with, uh, you know, just talking about your own experiences. Uh, and the blowback that happened after we did that little hit, uh, um, is, is a super powerful clear case study in understanding this intersection of modern psychology, uh, warfare technology and, uh, the digital world, uh, and, and algorithmic control of information, the, uh, creation of digital avatar, avatars for all of us. The application now in present of artificial intelligence to custom craft messaging, uh, that gets fed into our digital domains on a regular basis in order to, you know, sell us whatever, uh, but also to shape how we think and, uh, to control what information we get access to all the time. Just to give an example, my wife who does a lot of our research for our sub stack was talking me the day. She, she just gave me a couple examples where, uh, um, stories that were in corporate media in the United States that weren't listing certain key names or whatever. Um, she said, I just go to the Henders do Tams. Henders do times is a great source for all the stuff that we're not allowed to see here in the United States. You're now in an environment, in an information environment where you cannot, um, uh, rely on, but we all know that. You can't rely on corporate media, but, but the, but the rules, the boundaries that are being set up about information are profound and it completely distorting our ability to, uh, process what's happening around us. Can I give you the example of what actually happened? You, you said in, in our example with the blowback in Spotify. This is documented by a report out from the house about COVID and what happened. And that report only carries just through to the early part of the vaccines and then it stops. They, for some reason, they didn't really want to go down the road to the vaccines. They did talk a lot about the, um, events around the, let's say, lab leak hypothesis, uh, which is allowed, you're allowed in DC now to talk about that. Finally. Yeah. You're still, well, and it was about four years later. You were allowed. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, uh, so what was documented was that, uh, that the trail of events was that we had our discussion that triggered, and that this is going to sound bizarre, but this is what's documented. That triggered Coca-Cola corporation to complain to the global alliance for responsible media, which is created by the World Economic Forum. It's is one of these global aggregators that controls advertising. The global alliance for responsible media, which by the way, had it dusted up with, uh, Elon Musk and lost and they closed it down as a nonprofit. It still exists in other ways, but as a structure that could be sued by X, it disappeared when he stood up against it. But global alliance for responsible media had a socket with Google AdSense, by the way, so they control the advertising ecosystem, which kind of matters to Spotify. So Coca-Cola complains to GARM saying, this guy Rogan, you got to shut him down. Okay. You've got to put pressure on Spotify. So Spotify gets the message from GARM that we're going to, we're threatening to pull your advertising. Okay. Now, uh, what happens between that and your experience? I don't know. You know, it's not transparent to me what you experienced. Uh, yeah, we all remember the, um, Laurel Canyon crowd saying they were going to pull their catalogs, which they didn't actually own, right? That was, that was another thing. And then they, they went after you with this mashup of inward historic events. Um, you know, there was clearly a concerted effort to take out Joe Rogan much more than to take out Robert Malone. And, uh, so then the question comes, why the heck would Coca-Cola be the socket with the global alliance for responsible, one of the biggest advertisers in the world, right? Coca-Cola give a hooie about what Joe Rogan said to Robert Malone on, you know, New Year's Eve. Uh, Coca-Cola is really tight with the CDC. Coca-Cola has funded buildings at the CDC. Coca-Cola funds the, um, CDC Foundation Foundation for the CDC as does Bill and Melinda Gates has done all the major vaccine manufacturers, et cetera. The appearances, I can't verify this, that CDC acted through its ally Coca-Cola. Why are they allies? What's Coca-Cola got to do with CDC? The angle there is that Coca-Cola wanted the CDC to get a WHO to not implement restrictions in messaging about sugar use. Mm. Okay. They didn't want those messages. Remember this is at the heart of the inverted food triangle now that the old food triangle was the product of sugar lobby. I mean, the sugar lobby is incredibly powerful because this stuff is addictive. I mean, it's like having the cocaine lobby here, right? Um, well, and, you know, that's an interesting analogy because of course the history of Coca-Cola. Right. Uh, but, um, so sugar is addictive. Uh, the, the, the, the, Coca-Cola didn't want the CD, wanted the CDC. To influence public health policy to avoid, um, uh, global positions on the risks associated with sugar intake because it would potentially hurt their market share. It wouldn't be a major globalized company. So that's that little ecosystem that I just described illustrates what we're dealing with here. And the many ways that, um, all of this kind of influence in messaging and signaling happens in this kind of integrated horizontally and vertically ecosystem that we live in right now. And one of the things that came out of that, you'll recall, was that you were asked, as I recall, you gave this, you know, I've had a hostage video. I think that was a close to a hostage video from you back in the day when you were saying this is what I'm going to do. Uh, it was like out on your porch or something. Um, I remember, I was sitting around a campfire and Maui quite literally when somebody said, oh, did you just see this from Rogan? And, uh, a matter of fact, I was sitting around Gavin DeBeckers, uh, campfire at that time, somebody that you know. And, uh, so, um, the compromise was that there would be a little trailer put at the bottom of that episode. And by the way, you probably know that episode for a long time became very hard to find. Uh, it was, it was basically blacklisted from the search engines, et cetera, et cetera. But you, it carries on, I think it still does that little banner that says, you know, you should go to the CDC if you want the true, true about COVID. And you can still find that those kinds of banners popping up all the time on YouTube. If you, if you talk about vaccines and COVID vaccines, that will get, if you pass the filters, if you tubule allow that to still be up, um, because you didn't say something, whatever it is, uh, then you'll get the little banner. Okay. That banner is pushed out by the nudge units at the CDC. Okay. That is nudge technology. It is all around us all the time. And it's, it's basically still, uh, public policy consequent to the old Obama presidential directive that still hasn't ever sent it. Uh, you know, I love President Trump. I think he's doing amazing things. I think he's amazingly brave. Uh, I just mentioned our friend Gavin DeBecker referred to Trump the other day when I saw Gavin and, and, uh, Maui as a once in 500 year leader. And that's, that's not, that's not nothing coming from Gavin. And, uh, so I'm, I'm a big supporter, but the president has still left in place this mechanism that exists, uh, that directs the federal government to use nudge technology and related, uh, what I assert is psychological warfare technology on the American populace. Right. This is from back in what was it, 2015 or something? Yeah. It's quite early. Yeah. And then you had his, you had Obama's subsequent like the notorious speech at Hoover at Stanford, he talks about an order to preserve democracy. We're going to have basically says we're going to have to have censorship, uh, in order to preserve democracy or whatever democracy is. It's for people that don't know where we're talking. We're really into the Smith month. The Smith month, everybody focuses on Smith month. Um, but as I examine Smith month and we didn't essay on this in the sub stack, um, you know, like three years ago, because that was the kind of the narrative that was coming out in, let's say, our side of alternative media. Right. And, uh, in my examination, Smith month's impact is a lot more limited. It has to do with voice of America and some of the things that brought impact wasn't quite, in my opinion, what was believed to be of, of enabling propaganda domestically. More specifically, um, there is a presidential directive that nudge technology that established a nudge office that nudge technology shall be used. Why? I don't call it a nudge office. Right. I don't know. It's, it's got, they've gone through various iterations and I'm sorry. I don't have the latest version. And it's kind of become decentralized. It was called the social behavioral science team. My Wikipedia says that that was stopped in 2017, but continued under the Trump administration under, sorry, uh, the general services administration's office of evaluation science. There we go. Yeah. Boy. Yeah. Yeah. It's, and it's kind of become, it's been, like I said, it's been pushed out into a lot of the agencies. Mm hmm. They don't use that, that lexicon because then it's easy to find them. Right. And they use, there's other euphemisms they use to describe those kinds of activities, but it's become normalized. The, the weaponization of propaganda has become normalized. There's the, worrying from overall behavioral interventions or nudges like the ones implemented by OES have been found to be effective in recent psychological science article. Researchers identified several policy areas of interest, example health care. There we go. 2015. 2015. Exactly. President Obama signs executive executive order requiring federal agencies to incorporate behavioral insights into their evaluation efforts. That's a nice way of saying use of propaganda on the American people. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. And so this, this is kind of become, thank you so much for, for pulling that up. That's super helpful. So this, this is like I said, if I can illustrate, I was on a great Britain news broadcast about four years ago. At the time when they would, you know, I was, there was a window time where they would have me on, but it was sketchy. And GB news was the only one that would do it. And, but the rules were then that if you were going to have somebody that was speaking against the government narrative, then you had to have somebody representing the government's interest in the same broadcast. So that's implemented by basically the UK has an active censorship organization that controls news media. And so I'm on with this guy, great Britain news, pinstripe, bow tie, you know, it's just weeks. And I'm, and I'm talking about psychological warfare and the 77th brigade, which is part of the British Army, which is their psychological warfare unit. It's very open that that's the case as is the existence of, of a civilian branch that they set up and paid people to do social media in opposition of counter narratives that the government didn't approve of. I mean, now they just understormred. They just censor you and send you to jail. No, they just cut out the middle man. But back then they were still kind of buying civilians. So I'm talking about this. And that's that the guy says, yeah, but here in the UK, our belief is that if the government wins the election, they have the right to govern. And that right to govern includes our ability to use this type of technology. And we believe that it's justified to do so. And that when that conversation happened, frankly, I hadn't launched the book yet, Cywar, which is our most recent publication. And it just kind of all coalesced in my mind that, oh my God, what all these things, Matias is teaching about mass formation, what I saw, what I experienced with you, what I experienced with the concerted attacks of the media. And then subsequently it's been validated by this congressional report that talks about, for instance, the juriticket system, juritickets are what it's a system that all the software companies use to track glitches and complaints and stuff like that. Well, the government had their own juriticket system set up to log information about activities of persons that they wanted to have censored and suppressed. And they would build these juritickets with information. And so one of the things that's out on the congressional report was that I actually had a juriticket. I was surprised that this is the case, or I'm not surprised in retrospect. And in my personal sins were that I was listed as an anti-vaxxer and a conservative. Even though you're a vaccinologist. And it conservative. That's interesting. And a conservative. Yeah, exactly right. I mean, the stuff that's coming out. That's wild. It's fascinating to query things like rock, even rock. Um, about certain subjects. And you will find where they have algorithmically built firewalls. And you can approach them and detect them because it will act dumb. You know, it'll lock up seemingly. It won't give you that answer. Or it'll talk around the issue, etc. It's such a, you can identify these things that have been built in algorithmically. And of course, then we had all of the disclosures. The Zuckerberg, oh, I'm so sorry, a apology tour that happened to remember when basically you got out of biconderous. And the rest of the tech bros. And of course, the thing that catalyzed all of that was that Elon decided to pony up a good chunk of change and buy, by Twitter, which I think is one of the most impactful decisions that any American citizen has ever made. Amazing. If he didn't do that, I think we would be really screwed. There's how can you debate that? How can you debate it when you look at the Twitter files and you find out how much the government was involved in censoring, accurate information from legitimate professors, esteemed researchers, anybody who didn't go along with the official narrative. It's all coming out now in spades. And we're dealing, now the lovely thing about all of this. I mean, let's try it up. It is mourning in America, in my opinion. I mean, a lot of people get very dark and there's a darkness to the times. But there's not to push the metaphor too far, but there is new light coming in. And the fact that we can now see this and we recognize that you and I are of a similar generation, I mean, one of my earliest memories was the assassination of the president. And all of the propaganda around that, the propaganda around Vietnam War, ever since. We've just been swimming in information control that's gotten increasingly sophisticated. And fortunately, as Americans, we also kind of have become more and more immune to marketing and propaganda over time because we've been living with it, trying to discern what is real and what is false again. This is a core part of what you do for a living, I think, is just try to have the conversation with people to get to the bottom of the bullshit. But we've been swimming in it and now we can see it. We can see the structures, the power of artificial intelligence and influence mapping and all the things that are going on in the internet right now, that are the cutting edge technology. They're scary because they can be weaponized against us. But they're also super cool because we can now see those relationships. If you want to example of that, look at the threads that are coming out on X, illuminating the networks of affiliation associated with the latest Epstein-Fella release. Just mind blowing. Mind blowing. And it is just like we can sit here in bitch and wine saying, oh, they didn't release that. But this is redacted and all that's true. But still the impact of that information, we're still getting to the bottom of it. It's completely changed most people's narrative of what happened. Like we had this vague understanding. When you see in the email, clear evidence that they're talking about children in pretty obscene ways. Horrifying ways. So that was the thing that like even when I talked to Mike Ben's about that, he was sort of incredulous about that. It's like I don't think they would use children. It just doesn't make any sense if they got caught. But it just seems like if Mike Ben's was incredulous. That's pretty big. Well, I just don't think we really knew until we saw those files come out. And then you go, oh, well, there's no denying it now. My position on his completely ships. And I thought there's probably some really sick people that have an appetite for that. But I hadn't seen any real evidence for it until these files and not on the like, oh, this is demonic. This is clearly demonic. Okay. So thank you for saying that. I'm somebody who was raised a Christian and went to Bible school and that kind of stuff as a kid and youth groups. And then growing up in Central Coast of California, let's say, veered in different ways. But the experiences that we've encountered over the last half a dozen years, it's hard to come up with the language to express what we're observing in the world other than the language of theology. Well, demonic by action. So whether or not demons exist, if they did exist, that is how they would behave. They would pray on children and torture children. And there was the one where there was a suggestion, when a child was praying to Jesus, that like there was a joke that someone should dress up like Jesus. I do you see that one? No, I'm not watching this. I don't even want to. I don't even want people send it to me and I go, okay, because I'm for the most part off social media. But every now and then someone will send me something that I have to look at. I'm like, oh my God. Yeah. And these are, these are emails back and forth. There's one of them where Epstein says, I enjoyed the torture video. There's these references to pizza. A lot of references to pizza that are 100% some kind of a code. Yeah. And then it brings you back to pizza gate. Yeah. And which was widely dismissed. Yeah. Everybody's like, oh, this is a bunch of coogs. Here it is. She said she felt God's presence next to her when she was in bed. She knows that Jesus watches over her and he helps her save, he helped save her life. And then he writes, whoops. And then in response, Jeffrey Epstein says, you should dress up as him when you see her. Um, it is, it is dark. You should dress up like Jesus when you see her. What the fuck? And well, look at the line. Look at the line above it. How am I supposed to interpret? I'm coming trick. The OH Jesus. I'm coming trick. It's just the whole thing. But so we see this darkness. It involves leaders in academia, in science, in industry, in politics. Yeah. And it just, you know, I remember point in this arc of the last six years, where a film crew came on to my farm, and allowed to shoot some segments. And they were talking in this, frankly, I thought it was crazy talk. I kind of smiled and, you know, tried to be civil and nice. Not contradict them. About the New World Order. And, um, and then along comes, you know, then my wife one day says, hey, you gotta look at this book from Closhwap. It's called the New World Order. What? Just saying it out loud. Yeah. I mean, the world economic forum had those ads where they were saying, you will own nothing and you will be happy. Yeah. And, and it goes back to the current King of England. Was the guy that kind of launched that. He was the first one to be really talking about that you can, if you, you can use your, use your favorite AI and track it down yourself. I prefer not to use Google these days to try to find stuff. But it, it, we see vertical after vertical after vertical after vertical where information has been crafted and manipulated. And the same tools of, of, of, delegitimization of, um, a promotion of, these messages that you are a conspiracy theorist or, that you are controlled opposition is another favorite one. A lot of this was pioneered in the 60s by the FBI against the various protest movements. And you can go back and track that. Okay. The, the narrative of, um, being a collaborator, uh, surptitiously is called badjacking. And, and it has its own, its own language and, and protocols for how to do this to people to divide movements. Where, where, where in this, I mean, in a way, it's kind of a glorious moment where you, we're having, uh, a huge amount of social, uh, pressures coming together in this moment in time that you and I happen to live in. How fantastic is that to be at a point in time where there is so much change. There's so much social interaction and pressure and competition between these different philosophies. And, and we're swimming in it. I, for, as somebody writes on a daily basis, these essays on sub-stack, because that's how I make my living now, because I can't do what I used to do. Uh, um, it's, it's, you're a kid in a candy shop. There, there's so much corruption. There's so much falsehood being promoted. There's so much of this, uh, manipulation of, of reality. And so if you're in the business of, of, of trying to help people to make sense out of that, which is kind of what I do now for a living, uh, it's, you know, I wake up every morning, people, I get the feedback, how do you come up with all these ideas? I'm like, how do you not? All you gotta do is keep your eyes open. Yeah, it's not hard to search in the mouth. So, so you talked about Ivermectin. I mean, the Ivermectin story is, is still ongoing. There was an announcement the other day from HHS that they are launching new initiatives to investigate the Ivermectin and cancer. And there was immediate blowback, uh, along the lines of oncologists are outraged, you know, the narrative is, uh, Bobby, you know, not saying this explicitly, but basically, Bobby Kennedy is at it once again promoting falsehoods and conspiracy. You know, the narrative is Bobby, you know, not saying this explicitly, but basically, Bobby Kennedy is at it once again promoting falsehoods and conspiracy theories and it's going to, you know, we're all going to die because, uh, because scientists are going to investigate the use of Iver, Meckton and other drugs. Why I can't say it. So this is the, this is the core question and this is one of the things that puzzled me to know when. I understood that they were upset that I had gotten better without the use of the vaccine that I was a popular person, that I was a famous person and I made a video about a canceled show. Dave Shapal and I were supposed to do a show and I made that video to let everyone know that I couldn't do the show because I got covered. I had no idea it was going to be even controversial. But I listed a bunch of things that I took. And the shit hit the fan. I talked about IV vitamins. Yeah. I talked about monoclonal antibodies. I talked about which were allowed prednisone. Uh, you know, all these things that I talked about Z-pack. I talked about all these different things that I took. There was no mention of any of those things. There was only Iver, Meckton and that's what really puzzled me. I was like, this is fascinating because I listed a bunch of different things, but there's no demonization of monoclonal antibodies, but they did make them much harder to get. Yeah. And eventually pull them. Sure. I have a friend and his friend was in the hospital and they wouldn't administer monoclonal antibodies once he got into the hospital. They wouldn't allow him to have the blood weight on in the hospital. This is a whole nother thing. But that's crazy. But so, so the why, the only medication. The only two threads that I can pull on at all is that Iver, Meckton, is a miracle drug. I mean, Nobel Prize, right? Right. We don't understand completely how it works. In this case, it doesn't seem to be working as an antiviral. It seems to be working as, I mean, a, I mean, stimulant pro-inflammatory or pro-immune response in some way that's subtle because it has this broad spectrum of activity against things that have an immune response component in controlling. But it's off-patterned. Right. They don't understand it. It's off-patterned. And it, the response is as if it represents a significant threat to some business interests. It's hard to discern that. And you mentioned Z-Pack. So that's another fascinating one. And to say that it was only Iver Meckton, Iver Meckton was the most prominent, but they're actually effective in shutting down the Z-Pack, the use of hydroxychloroquine. And hydroxychloroquine has a fascinating story. When you mentioned Z-Pack, you're talking about Zeb's Lanko. And Zeb was the one that wrote the letter to the president saying, hey, here's this data and this information about this drug that is off-patterned. We have a huge portfolio of experience in using it. Millions and millions of doses. It's safe in pregnancy. What's not to like here? And the story of that is a fascinating microcosm because it goes back to Ralph Barrick. Ralph Barrick had published that back years ago when he's kind of the guru of coronaviruses and a good case can be made that he had his fingers all over the engineering of this particular virus. So he had published that this drug was effective against coronaviruses. And Zev Zelenko, who's passed away now, got engaged in trying to find some way to help his patients in New York with recovering from COVID and treating COVID. And he went back to the deep dive into Barrick's work, pulled out this drug, a drug cycloric that had been recommended, wrote to the president about it, started he got clinical experience with it. And you know, caveat, Mickey Willis is doing a bio on Zev now, and I'm involved in that. So, conflict of interest. But he was the one that pulled it out, sent the letter to the president with his clinical experience. And tasked Peter Navarro with sourcing the drug for the end, and Peter, you know, columnist, went to town. I remember the company I was working with all came at the time getting a call from Peter. Can you come up with some way to make more of this drug here domestically? We want to source it so we have enough doses for everybody. And then I think it was Lancet published this paper that had totally made up data that trashed the drug, said that its toxic, doesn't work, blah, blah, blah, blah. It was all fake. Okay? They pulled the paper when it became revealed that it was based on non-existent data, that it was more propaganda published in one of the top medical journals in the United States. But by that time, it was completely crushed. So they didn't have to go after Z-stack. They'd already killed Z-stack. Iber Meckton, though, that was a new threat. And one of the reasons why it was a threat was there was a meta-analysis that had been done at the Cochran. So the Cochran Institute in the UK is like, you know, the Holy Grail for analysis of drugs and biologics. And this process of meta-analysis, they kind of wrote the rules for how to do it. And they had done an analysis that showed that Iber Meckton was quite effective. And then something happened. And there was some influence exerted. And suddenly that meta-analysis got quenched. It got squashed. There were two investigators that were involved in building that. One kind of went underground and got a big grant and carried on as an academic. The other one got so pissed off that she created this organization called the World Council for Health, that's Tess Laurie. And she really objected to what happened. But Iber Meckton, you know, there was a signal there. There was a clear signal there. There was data supporting that signal. And then something happened to cause that meta-analysis to be restructured in certain studies that were showing how effective it was to be thrown out. And then the suppression of the data coming out of India, you remember that? And the predestge. And I guess it kind of, it's like the cat was out of the bag. And they had trouble putting it back in. So they just, my sense is they turned up the amplitude on the propaganda and the censorship in order to try to overcome this. And I'm pretty sure, remember who was it that held the original patent? Merck. Now I was involved as an observer on behalf of DITRA. And I knew the active trials that were going on under the foundation for NIH, which is sponsored in a significant way by Merck. And which is now headed up by the former head of Merck vaccines, Julie Gerberding. Bobby can't get her out. It's the rules. And they were running these clinical trials, including the clinical trial that essentially by tweaking the dosing, et cetera, made it so that they came up with a result suggesting that Iber Meckton is not effective. There was a whole lot of manipulation in the Y part. Still the best explanation I've heard is that it had a lot to do with the risk that if there was an effective countermeasure, then the utilization of the prep act and the emergency countermeasures to process to enable fast tracking of these vaccines using this new technology would no longer be valid. Because those are the rules. Is if there's an existing countermeasure, then you can't implement those clauses. So those are all about emergency use authors. It's the... I don't know the case. It is. It's the only thing to make sense when you see how much profit they made. Which was enormous. Enormous. So it was effective. And all that propaganda, regardless of how much exposed them, and exposed their methods, they made hundreds of billions of dollars. Well and that's the ugly part of all of this. I mean, people, the big, big picture, want to talk to people that are still kind of on the fence, trying to make sense out of it. You know, there's still a lot of those books out there. The thing that kind of gets into their brain is the greatest upward transfer of wealth in modern history occurred during COVID. It wasn't just the vaccines. It was the whole enterprise with the lockdowns. Lockdowns, all the... What was done to small businesses? What was done to the economy, the stimulus packages? They're still digging out of all of that fraud. It, you know, in retrospect, for average folks that are just trying to put food on the table and pay their rent. To look at, in retrospect, what was, you know, quite literally done to them. The middle class was hollowed out in like, on hyperspeed. So yeah, I'm still pissed off about this. No, you should. The thing is not enough people are in so many people let it go. And part of the reason why not enough people are pissed off about it is because they took the vaccine and they want to justify their decision. And you will talk to a lot of people that make this blanket claim the vaccine safety and the millions of lives. And they'll just say that. Yeah. And because that's the propaganda along with, with safe and effective, that was a promoted narrative. Right. And that was, by the way, the rationale given by the Nobel Prize Committee to award to Kariqal and Weissman was that these products, which they had, the thesis is they had been playing the central role. I disagree. I think Peter Colus is the one that should have got it. If you're going to give it for, if you're going to give it for these vaccines, it was Peter Colus and his team at UBC that really wasn't enabling tech. But be that as it may, the decisions made. And the committee said basically, you know, millions of lives have been saved. And by giving this Nobel at this time, we are, we hope that it will promote more people to accept this product. That was explicitly the logic given at the time. And that reflects what was really a thrust vector. Joe, I've, you know, it's what a bizarre world since we met. And so I've been sucked into, to call it the center right of Europe is a little bit of a misnomer because they're all socialist as far as I'm concerned. Georgia, Maloney and everybody else. But, you know, compared to the far left, they're labeled as neo-Nazis. But I've been traveling to Europe, interacting with these people. You think it was bad for us, the European Union, the UK and the Canada were at order magnitude worse. We should be so grateful that we live in this country at this time and that we still have something like a functioning constitution with a first and second amendment. Look at the poor suckers in Australia and New Zealand. Yeah. So it reminds yourself it could be a heck of a lot worse here and it has been a heck of a lot worse in Europe. I've got buddies in Romania in the leading alternative party, you know, calling it center right, let's say, but that, you know, recently I think it was the vice president that came out and said specifically that that last election was stolen. It was in Romania, George Esquu, they tried to put in jail and the logic was that, I think it was TikTok supporting his campaign had been sponsored by the Russians. It was the same game that they played against Trump of Russian collusion. They played that same book in Romania successfully. But in the European Union environment under the European Council, they don't, you know, they ain't got a constitution and they can just step right in and throw you in jail, inactivate your candidacy, do whatever if you represent a populist threat to the existing structure. We talk about the deep state, but it doesn't, you know, yeah, it's a problem here. But and think Mike Benz, I defer to as a notable expert in that space. It's a lot worse in Europe and Australia and Canada and the UK. And I think, you know, we're in a perilous time here in the United States where, you know, we have the midterm coming up. But the people like Bobby are making progress. And these dissident physicians that have risked so many things. And I'm just one, you know, people, I hear people saying, oh, Robert, Robert, they've been so mean to you. I'm like, come on guys, you think they've been mean to me. Then look at what they did to Bobby. And then, you know, and then look, I don't have a nick out of my ear, you know, look at what they did to Trump. What they did to me is just I'm, I'm nobody compared to that. And they're willing to deploy that kind of capability against me. Think about what's really going on at the higher levels where the big games are being played. And, you know, at least we can see it now. At least we have, for those of us that have our eyes open, we have some ability to be aware. But what I've spent the last two years mostly trying to convince people that I hardly ever talk about RNA. I sit, oh, I, Joe, I got to give a caveat. Forgive me. I'm the opinions I'm expressing here are my own and not those of the US government, the CDC or the ACIP. There, I said it. Okay. But, you know, we, we're in a moment where we're seeing this, how the levers, the gears of how all this works. Let me be an example. Tomorrow, Friday, February 13th, what could possibly go wrong? Hopefully my plane flight out of here works. Okay. And they don't have a drone attack or something. Right. So, tomorrow there's a lawsuit, a filed on behalf of the American Academy of Pediatrics, that seeks to shut down the advisory committee on immunization practices and the changes that Bobby has implemented there. And force all of that to go back to the way things were when it was functionally controlled by the professional societies, and particularly the American Academy of Pediatrics. They, they, we talk about this, you know, propaganda and weaponization and, and law fair and those things. And we talk about it as if it only happened in the last administration. It's, it's still ongoing all the time. And it is going to go big time if, if the house turns, which I think it probably will. I mean, there's a good chance that they've already drawn up articles on impeachment against Secretary Kennedy. They're talking about our impeachment against President Trump. We're about to go into another two years of stagnation, and, and, you know, functional, what do we call it? We can't call it civil war. Um, you know, um, war by other means is, is where we're heading right now. But at this moment, I'm seeing major movement. You know, Kennedy is doing great stuff. The President is doing great stuff. We're seeing a transformation in America's global reach, totally restructuring global politics, and on the health side, the make America healthy again movement. You know, there's, there's some push back against that and heck of a lot of propaganda being deployed against it. Well, it's this old quote that seems sort of abstract for most people most of the time, but rings kind of true, but you're finding it true more and more. Money is the root of all evil. Uh, profound. Uh, sympathy is profound. Yeah. The, the COVID thing with Ivermectin and alternative medications, off label medications, why money? I think it also has to do with control. Right. I think there's more money. A fair access to money. Yeah, it's, it's, it's money and power in my mind. The power, yeah, they don't want power without money. They want, they want to benefit from that power. I, I believe for the likes of Larry Fink and Bill Gates, I mean, they can't spend all that they have. Right. It's a marker. It's a, it's like chips. You're stacking up exactly. Right. They're scoring in a video game. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, but also captured by their past actions and constantly trying to obfuscate from all the things that they have done in the past. They could be like, if you just went into Bill Gates's stuff that he did in Africa, giving children polio with their polio vaccine that was from the AP news. Africa in India. Yeah. I mean, he's kind of banned from India. The, yeah, so I don't get it. I don't get where these people live. I, I'm, I'm happy. You know, as far as I'm concerned, I could walk away from all this stuff. It's just kind of a sense of obligation of what are you going to do when you're 66? I have this opportunity to impact in a positive way on the world on my way out the door. Who wouldn't take it? Well, I guess a lot of people wouldn't. But I don't have a need to have power. I have thank God for my substacks, subscribers. I have all, all that I need. My wife is happy. My horses are fed. My farm is paid off. It's, it's, you know, it's, and I have the luxury of doing good works. And that's enough. I don't, I don't get this, this global power thrust. Because that's not what you do. That's not your thing. But if you were a politician or you were some megalomaniacole billionaire sort of business character that just wants to dominate and it was involved in a bunch of antitrust lawsuits in the past, that would be what you mean. Not that we're naming any names. Not that we're naming any names that bribed off multimedia corporations to the tune of $300 plus million so that they wouldn't write bad stories about him or, or owns, you know, functionally owns the World Health Organization. Right. And a giant chunk of American farmland was for a while trying to put, that push that fake meat shit on everybody until that drop off a clip. Yeah. And yeah. So this, the business model is start working out so good for the globalists. Are they? I think a lot of it is because of information that's available now. And if you can't control it like one of the things that did happen during COVID is these places like CNN, people stop going to for information. They don't believe them anymore. There's just too much bullshit and no one got in trouble for spreading that bullshit. There's no corrections, no reductions, no apologies. And so, people now more than ever in my lifetime mistrust mainstream media and polls show that, that polls show that the trust of mainstream media is at an all time low for good reason. They did it to themselves. They prosecuted themselves out to the pharmaceutical drug companies. They had to say what they had to say on television. People knew what they were saying was incorrect and now no one trusted them. So to this thread, about four years ago, I read a report from the trusted news initiative. Remember the TNI was launched by the BBC to counter Russian disinformation and then repurposed to counter vaccine disinformation. And they, and I read this report about I'd gone on your show. So I was a little bit of a fan. And so I'm reading this report and they're talking about threats to the industry because TNI is basically another trade organization. It's another guild. It's a global major media guild. And so they're doing this internal analysis and reporting and they're talking about the risk factors that they face. And they had a whole great big section on Joe Rogan. Joe Rogan represents that was their threat. That was the major threat to their business model is you and what you represent. You as a metaphor for this new information economy. And by God, they called it right. And when I, this again, this has been part of my journey. When I realized what I was experiencing and what it meant to come on your show and have that event occur, which by the way blew up my subscribers on Substack. Thank you so much. I still get a wave every year about in the month following. So January, I get a big bump in revenue. Well, if our subscribers on Spotify too, during the heat of it, we gained in one month, we gained two million subscribers. I had, I had, oh, yeah, please. What is this? What's the Spotify subscribers? I know YouTube is over 20, 20 million. What is Spotify at? So while he's looking that up, I had this bizarre experience. You know, I'm just an old gray haired guy with a, you know, about to have my 47th wedding anniversary. Congratulations. Thank you. I'm proud of it. I would have 20 year olds come up in the street and fist bump me. I'm like, what the hell? Yeah. Well, they don't have a representative. I mean, they don't see all males. All males. Yes, males. Those males don't have anybody in mainstream news that represents anything that resembles them. And I know I'm much older than them, but I never went down this path of decay and weirdness that a lot of adult males go into corporate business and industry and they become something unrecognizable to these young men who have freedom in life and they're being suppressed and they're being told that they're toxic. That was a singer right there. Yeah. Young men that have freedom in life. Yeah. And then they compromise. They don't want to be what their dad is. They don't want to be what their uncle is. They don't want to be these people that they work for. They're like, what is this fucking bullshit life? I don't want that. I know I'm being lied to. I know the news is full of shit. And I know that this one guy who is also a cage fighting commentator and a comedian and doesn't have to lie. Like I'm not being, I don't have a boss really. I mean, Spotify promotes the show. When they put the show out, we're in partnership with them. But there's no one telling me what to do, which is why you're here right now. Because there's no one. I don't have a conversation with no one. I literally like reach out to my guy and say, hey, contact Rob, contact Mr. Malone. And let's get him back on. All I know is I got a message from through X. Yeah. Well, I was saying Joe Rogan, do you want to come on? That was actually me. That message is me, which I rarely use those things. I was trying to figure out how to contact you. So I reached out to you there. And then I said, it's my guy and he takes care of it. Like that's it. There's no one else. There's no one involved in all that, which you could still be you that way. As soon as you get involved in enormous groups of humans and a bunch of bored, you have to sit down at a table with other executives. You have to make decisions based on the profitability of the company and shareholders and stuff. I have none of that. It's a skeleton crew. So as I look back, the question, why were you able to do this Malone? Why were you able to owe you were so brave, Dr. Malone? I could rather Malone, that name became like a majority of it. It became like, oh, you had that Malone guy. Yeah, it's all weaponized. But then on the other side, I tour. I do these rallies and stuff like this. You know, it really makes my wife nervous. I'm middle-aged women come up to me and they want to have selfies. And I get this, oh, Dr. Malone, you were so brave, you're such a hero kind of stuff, which I frankly find a little embarrassing. I mean, it's sweet. But yeah, there's a lot of heroes. Why was that? Yeah, yeah, the guys that defend the nation. But why was able to speak? I think a big part of it was I had no debt. I wasn't holding to anybody. And like you say, I'd been about a decade being a consultant, a free-living consultant, and it got under my skin. I've always been independent, you know, farmer, carpenter kind of stuff. And that's, I guess, been part of my problem as I just don't fit in and corporate life. I can't suck up to people and it's just not in me. Well, it's a very unhealthy environment for anybody to get sucked into that bizarre group thing. It's just good word. Yes, so yeah. So yeah, so this decentralized subscriber-based model, the Piffany was, and I'm being quite sincere. You know, it was one of those moments my wife and I looked at each other and we said, what the hell are we going to do now? Our consulting business is shot. Everybody wants to talk to me. I've been delegitimized. They say, I don't know what I know. I haven't done what I've done. And this has been promoted by all the top liberal publications in the world. And so I said, okay, Rogan built this thing day after day, week after week for years. We just stayed on it and doing it and we can do that too. We can bring that kind of work ethic into our world. Steve Kirsch had told me how to get on Spotify and we took it on seriously. We published thousands of essays now almost every day. It's, you know, the word, substack. Substack. What do I say? Substack. Substack. I apologize. And so we just work at it again and again and again trying to put out content and we're shadow banned and small roomed on X in a serious way. We've got 1.3 million subscribers of which, you know, all the time I get feedback. I never see your stuff. Well, it's algorithmic. Whatever it is. You know, you can ask Rock about Robert Malone and you know, you get back. You know, I'm a controversial figure. You know, not whining. And so we have, we have a lot of subscribers but we just have this core page. You know, not whining. And so we have a lot of subscribers, but we just have this core paid subscribers and they send in their five bucks a month and It's all we need and it totally sets us free We we can talk about whatever we want and yeah now that I pseudo government employee. I'm a special government employee without pay Boy, that's like the worst of both worlds Because there's I have that the truth is I have guardrails that Constrain me in a way that I didn't used to be constrained for talking about some things You know, I I have to live in this world. I interface with the secretary and and with the deputy chief of staff and other people and now I'm working at the state department more and so You know, I have to I have to be more mindful. What is your function? What would you do over there at state or yeah both when you work for the government? Like how do they use your services? So the special government employee category is a designation from the executive branch. It's the one that Elon had. I like to say I'm in the same category as Elon was only with that old money. So he was an SGE without pay. I'm an SGE without pay and Because I serve on the advisory committee on immunization practices of the CDC Which is this? They call it. It's a FACA committee federal advisory committee act that advises the director of the CDC. That's it's only job on vaccine policy. Okay? So I'm the vice chair, which is largely honorary. What that means is that if the chair isn't there I draw the short straw and I have to chair those bloody meetings like the last one for hepatitis B birth those which was just a slugfest ugly the worst meeting I've ever had to adjudicate my entire life But for the most part I sit on the subcommittees. I sit on the COVID working group subcommittee. I'm not supposed to talk about the next meeting. I was told Two days ago So that's one of my my guardrails But stay tuned For what is going to come down if the AAP lawsuit doesn't prevail and we're allowed to actually have the meeting But so that's that I'm also the chair of the influenza working group. Stay tuned for that And now I am So and I from time to time the secretary asked me to help him sort out some issue, you know, I'll get a phone call. Let's got a phone call on On the big island. I did this recent series of rallies to try to To recap the whole reason why that we did that first hit was to try to publicize the stop the mandates rally in DC That was the that was the subtext for that as you recall and I forgot to even mention it. We had to go back in to do another shoot for that remember I'm still fighting that same battle of trying to stop these mandated vaccines. So I'm sitting there in Hawaii I'm going to another one of these rallies. I get a call out of the blue from one of Bobby's people and they want some advice about a topic having to do with the decision he has to make about spending money on another by-a-fed seditative So I get that kind of stuff He called me Soon after he was confirmed to get my opinion about what was going on in the chicken industry and all the slaughter And it was happening for bird flu when I told him this doesn't make sense. It's not good policy There's no way you can get rid of bird flu doing this. It's in the wild bird populations and this is just nonsensical what they're doing. Why do you think they did that? Okay, so that's that's interesting that now we drive into a kind of public health and vaccinology You're asking the why and it's been a long-standing policy. They killed millions of chickens, right? They do it every time Every time it's bird flu. Yeah, it's in any other outbreak. So right now in Spain I just wrote an essay about this. It was the maybe the biggest reveal on what's going on in Spain right now There's a Spanish research lab that's been collaborating with the USDA That is investigating swine fever virus and they're actually doing gain of function research on swine fever virus Swine fever virus African- because It's really compromised the Spanish pork industry. So so this kind of stuff went when this happens The the reaction is we just have to kill all of them. We have to kill all the potential carriers and this has been the wisdom quote in in this kind of a gradient animal husbandry world for a long time in the context in particular of factory farming So the logic is that if you were to vaccinate these birds with a Leaky vaccine which you know COVID was a leaky vaccine Influences leaky vaccine if you give the birds a leaky vaccine what you'll get out of that is precisely vaccine resistant flu, okay, and so we we have no choice has been the logic but To exterminate you know like the ostriches in Canada. Remember that story. That was shocking Okay, there was no logic behind that It's it's gone. It's become entrenched as policy as kind of this reflexive knee-jerk thing That if we have an outbreak what we do is we kill Because we can't control the virus and the things that we could do to control the virus aren't really going to control it And it's actually going to make things worse. Is there any logic to that? We can argue with the margins we can argue the margins But when you got something that if you had something that didn't have a natural reservoir Then then you can make the case That that you could eliminate it in that Geographic population and keep it from spreading outside But when you have a natural reservoir light blame that Explain the natural reservoir. Okay in the case of avian influenza um waterfowl and migratory birds uh are amazing vectors for Carrying and propagating influenza and influenza survives in water for a very long period of time And so you got ducks and geese traveling north to south all over um every continent That are susceptible to infection by avian influenza and all the other migratory birds But in particular the waterfowl uh gala forms my wife would uh um Wrap me on the head if I didn't use the right term So she's a avian specialist. So uh So these these birds uh carry the flu and a number of them are relatively resistant. They've been subjected to avian influenza for centuries or millennia And uh sometimes you'll get a variant come out that'll wipe out a whole bunch of birds uh west Nile virus in crows is a great example And now you have crow populations coming back that are resistant to west Nile. We haven't got rid of west Nile We've just bred more resistant birds. That's kind of you know, that's white steamed space right? That's evolution isn't magical uh And so you if you have a natural animal reservoir uh like the ticks and lime and uh And deer What are you gonna do exterminate all the deer? uh no that's not practical Um bow tried to exterminate the birds because of the thesis that they were eating up all the spare grain and Compromising availability of food to the populace right? And what happened? Major ecological catastrophe You can't eliminate the birds. You can't go and kill all the waterfowl That would just be ecologically insane But you know sometimes we do insane things And in the case of avian influenza It's there. It's endemic. It's in all that migratory waterfowl They poop an amazing amount of influenza It gets in the water supply the water supply goes everywhere Um they you know small birds are interacting with i don't know if you've ever been around a chicken barn Uh or turkey barns. Okay. Yeah, there's chickens and then there's commercial chicken production right? Um so so these operations are like petri dishes for bad stuff And the only way you can interfere with that and by the way the amish is starting to do it is put something in the water supply And what the amish you're using is a compound called hypochloris acid and it's it's stopping these things and it's stopping the E. coli and a lot of other stuff But the u.s. That's another problem is is you know when you have these the momentum of these large government agencies With their consensus about the way things are done You know this is saying that The only time the FDA ever changes is if somebody in a key position Retires or passes away They kind of get entrenched In this is how we do things We we kill chickens if we have avian influenza come out We kill chicken barns and this is the the beauty of secretary Kennedy coming in being kind of not invested in the way things are and the way we do things and Being willing to ask the questions but does this really make sense? um and That has been heresy. It's obviously is still heresy to do that To ask those questions to to you know have the president say we need to restructure the vaccine schedule Oh my god The sky is falling kids are gonna die left and right. There's gonna be death on the street because We ended the thimericol in multidosin influenza vials um This this kind of catastrophic thinking but Kennedy has in the present have the courage To question these narratives these long held standing beliefs in the case of the bird flu You know he he called me up. I said Bobby I don't think this makes sense I think that what we really need to do is we need to breed resistant chickens And the way we breed resistant chickens and by the way We've written about this also in our sub-stack. There are in in the domain of Chicken cultivars and this You you have chickens. You know there are people that are just freaks about chickens. Yeah And and all of these bear but because of that we have this huge repository of different cultivars of chickens Uh, you know we could say they were all generated through gain of function research the old school way uh and In a number of those are relatively resistant to bird flu. Well in a logical world You would have ticens And you know maybe the government has to incentivize this it shouldn't have to you would have ticens in there saying well guys What we need is a bird flu resistant chicken. Let's get on it Okay, um and that is essentially the position that the secretary took is is this policy Of just extremely aggressive mass calling Is not producing the outcome that we want it has never produced the outcome that we want it will never eliminate bird flu Because it has an endemic reservoir and we've got to think different and and now that's starting to percolate through the system and there is more research into alternative strategies including the possibility of various Propylactic interventions in in feed and in water That's you know in a lot of these chicken houses missed as you recall They have the mr. Because they got to control the temperatures So they are set up with a misters and that can also be a way to deliver things that are non-toxic like a chocl that can knock out these viruses and Infant and E. coli and other things that cause reduced growth and and loss of weight In chickens, which is the metric that Ticens and those guys is food conversion. That's the metric they all pray to You know, there's different we can we can think differently and we have been locked into um You know consensus that has emerged over decades Based on old ways of thinking And the same people are in charge so they don't want to change and and they kind of Often kind of have these lineages where they're passing power onto the people that they've mentored um so that's that's my HHS world and then the state department world is a new thing that's come in. I have a I'm I'm starting to support the group under Secretary Rubio that's responsible for uh the various treaties having to do with Arms containment in a particular the bioweapons convention. So this morning I got up early uh and you know there was it so um Honest to god. I don't want to pump you up too much. I mean you might get an ego or something So I say to the state they say Robert we want you to go to Geneva to give this talk on the use of ai for monitoring bioweapons threats because we have no Way of monitoring compliance with the bioweapons convention right now and it's been a historic problem and the president has said that we're gonna we think that we can apply artificial intelligence to this problem set of of monitoring and verifying compliance with the bioweapons convention Which is heresy. It's another one of these thinking outside of the box things So they say we want you to go to Geneva and give this talk and and be the key you know And I say and what's the date? Oh, it's February 12th I say I I don't talk about this because you know it's the general thing you don't tell people that you're gonna be on Rogan You let Rogan say that when Rogan's ready uh And so I said but that I'm scheduled for Rogan that day Um and they're like oh Rogan well, okay Absolutely, you got to go on that one. That's way more important than then going and speaking at the UN So you're the state department thinks you're more important than me talking about bioweapons and they let me uh Web exit So so that's what happened this morning and and uh It is of so I'm I'm supporting that group uh Um, now and maybe increasingly over time and I don't know where that goes So you were talking about These pigs that it's a lab leak that's giving these Yeah, it's amazing and what is it another gain of function laboratory whether So this is this is truly a breaking news thing Our media is not covering it In joker Yeah Um, it it is being covered in europe it and particularly in spain This this is a major economic threat because There I think the number two poor producer in the world Um and you know in the hogs that are feeding on acorns etc. That's that's a big specialty market space Yeah So last November This this laboratory that is ostensibly working this is I mean it's wuhan 2.0 Only the good news is that this is not uh Swine flu People get that confused. I'm not talking about swine flu This is African swine fever It's been around for millennia. It's never crossed in the humans. It's a very different virus So just make sure we got that clear Um, so this highly lethal african swine fever virus Uh is is a threat to the global pork industry and uh so this laboratory in spain Is cooperating with the usda to try to develop a new vaccine for african swine fever And in doing so that the our government once again was unaware that this even existed There's a cooperative agreement between usda and this laboratory To engage in if if you read they don't call it gain of function research. They call it building recombinant viruses Uh and experimenting in different virus structures Uh to allow them to better build a better vaccine exactly the same logic that was used in wuhan Okay, now Then last November so this is ongoing In this little laboratory and what this relates to joe Is the idea that is being promoted that uh for justice and equity and sharing We need to enable there being Uh distribution of highly infectious pathogens all over the world in separate laboratories so that Um we're we and the big bad west are not imposing and enabling our industries to prey on name your emerging economy By taking biologic resources from them in other words new viruses And using them to build stuff we have to cooperate and they have to have access to these regions So the logic right now that's in play and being promoted by the WHO Is that we should have a High pathogen repositories and research programs all over the world Decentralized in these emerging economy states in you know spain is is not germany But so so there's a Spanish lab USDA is cooperating with them. They're going to build a African swine fever virus vaccine They're doing gain of function research And then and by the way just so I can wuhan there's some construction going on related to that and then Suddenly and it's an area that is very dense in wild hogs Now somehow we got to get this through our brain Okay, you don't put the facility in a place That's proximal to the thing that might get infected if you have a lab leak I mean, that's that ought to be like rule number one stamped on everybody's brain You don't do it like the Rocky Mountain labs to make a lot of sense if you can be working with nasty stuff And you got to do it put it somewhere obscure not in Boston Right um so they're doing it they're surrounded by dense wild hogs population And suddenly last November people detect there is wild hogs dead all over around this facility Look it possibly have happened So they start investigating the people police have been in Uh grab the records grab the digital information etc Because the entire Spanish Pork industry is now compromised Their major client china has already pulled their trade barriers No more Spanish port going into china I advocate that President Trump ought to drop the curtain right now Because when I looked at the distribution of wild hogs I mean you've traveled enough you know how important wild feral hogs are in the economy in Italy The wild hogs are all over in Europe And this place in Catalonia is right near the French border I don't and then like right on the other side a couple hundred miles is Italy And and the band of of high density wild hogs spreads like that up through the mountains and then down into Italy And and I think that uh if if I was sitting in the White House right now I think uh to protect you know both for of the president core constituency is ag voted for him you know three times and He's that he holds that near and dear And I think that It's good politics and it's good public health. It's good health Agricultural decision To raise the barriers now Until we can see that Europe has resolved the risk associated with this How are they going to resolve that? So Once again, what's it wild hogs? This is not like it's anything that's contained In in to your point. I don't know the answer I mean that right now what they're doing is they're using drones To try to find you know how hard it is to hunt wild hogs I don't know how to do it Yeah, and and still can't And the hogs are winning. It's like the emu wars in Australia A friend Monty Franklin is from Australia actually has a joke about that That we fought a war with the emos and we lost it's true We have emus on our farm and and they are weird animals man. It's like living with dinosaurs But they are they are weird they my wife says they don't have two brain cells to rub together Talk to a lady who's a falconer and she said the dumbest birds by far emus Second dumbest are owls. She said. Oh really. I didn't know the owls. That's crazy. Yeah, I didn't know that. I thought they're so smart. Give a who don't pollute They're always wearing a monocle There was the wise professor Well, that right it goes back to it goes back to Athens the symbol of learning is right now Very weird. Yeah, so emus are weird, but so they're so the hogs drones I don't know what they're going to do what they did to control in Europe So the former assistant director general of the WHO who I knew this was her claim to fame Well, she had led the development of rabies baits and they would bait With a rabies vaccine To try to control the incidence of rabies in particularly foxes was the problem throughout Europe and a lot of the foxes were crossing from the Less developed part of the European Union into France, which was not acceptable She was French and so what they did is they developed these baits with a vaccine And they would distribute them out of helicopters and there's a whole science about how dense the baits have to be to get immunity against rabies in in fox populations Whole science around it, but that they they was successful They controlled a fox and wolf population rabies in Europe largely eradicated it through the use of baits distributed by helicopters Do they have a vaccine for this? Don't that's what they were supposed to be developing that was the whole purpose They were supposed to be developing but really what they were developing is Well, they were transmissible strain. Oh, whatever. Yeah, they'd order to prove that they could I don't know, you know, it's it's it's the same story over a new hunt to point out exactly and how how are we not going to see this? as an increasing trend and And there's the whole dark side that you know when I you know if you I read my comments Maybe I shouldn't sometimes but I do don't do it after this So so you know you get the blowback Well, this is all by intention because they're building market For whatever it is that they want to market right? That's the there's one of the dark themes about covid was that They wanted to promote the spread of covid in order to sell the vaccines and problem about you know So that's the the narrative and so in this case Well, they want to spread African swine fever because Some other get a profit from that while destroying their pork industry You know, but this is this is the armchair Strategists on the internet but that has it gotten into the domestic pork market Interesting question not to my knowledge yet But I have this interesting colleague that I work with closely at the ACIP named Ritzaf Levy who's the chair of the covid working group and has giving the pharmaceutical industry a run for their money right now and it's of course being vilified by the press etc and Ritzaf is a full professor at MIT and his core competence is Risk analysis and mitigation and He's he reads my sub stack Because we're friends He doesn't subscribe. I'm pretty sure but he reads it and um So he we're talking and he says yeah, I read that thing that you put out about that virus And he said I wrote a proposal years ago About risk mitigation and the need to do something about that because of it the ease by which it can enter the domestic pork population So I infer from that that there is a whole body of science and logic About and he said it's it's it's very readily transmitted Into commercial pork which is why the Chinese have already dropped you know dropped curtain and said no we're not going to allow any of that into our into China Because of the risk I mean what we're talking about so I wrote an essay about um Low-risk high impact Events which is what we're talking about Another example of a low-risk high impact event Is gene drive technology that gates is promoting to exterminate the mosquitoes for example You know gene drive technology can be used to exterminate a species Particularly ones that have a high reproductive rate and You know, it's another one that is a crisper application But there is a whole school of thought That gene drive tech should never be led out of the box into the environment because and That it what's you know, there are those that are actively promoting its use and to eliminate bad stuff and You know, we're all for eliminating bad stuff Um, you know organisms insects worms flies stuff and Yet It and and we can do experiments where we say oh Will cultivate this kind of fly together with that kind of fly and only these flies are going to have gene drive And we're going to look for whether or not it gets over to these flies and if it doesn't then we can conclude that it's unlikely But as Brett would tell you We're dealing with ecosystems here really complex ecosystems and The the risk environment now that I think grown-ups have to acknowledge Coming out of COVID, you know the big lessons. We can we can we can talk about these Agree just things that we've all experienced that have been put on us, but the big picture is this thing Came out and I'm convinced it was engineered I'm I believe the most likely hypothesis is not that it was intentionally released I still think that's a possibility but that it was an unintentional Release an infection of a lab worker or something like that That let it get out because that's what happens again and again in these facilities uh The these low probability events Can have extremely high impacts and as we've seen global impacts and we have to rethink how we're can have extremely high impacts, and as we've seen, global impacts. And we have to rethink how we're managing risk, which is, as I mentioned, Redshift's kind of core competence. And that logic runs up against this belief that, well, it hasn't happened so far, and I'm an expert, and I have the right to play around in this sandbox that I've helped develop, and I know more than you do. How can you tell me that I shouldn't be doing that? You don't have the right to tell me. I'm the expert in this space, and to come into that environment and say, look, guys, you're playing around with stuff that could have a very high impact, even though it hasn't happened yet. And you got to rethink what is acceptable, and I think that, you know, we were talking a moment about the State Department and the State Department and weapon control. We're now in an environment where the speed of growth of the power of biotechnology is accelerating. It's going exponential just like what we saw with semiconductors. And our bioethics, our regulatory structures are way of thinking about those risks is completely enabled to keep up with the pace of the advance. And that is creating a whole new threat to see not to scare people. I mean, as I was thinking about coming on here, I was saying to myself, okay, Robert, just take a deep breath. It's only Joe Rogan. He's a human, and you want to stay positive. And I don't want to go dark and just scare people, but we've got to recognize that this is a different world now. We have all of this digital tech and what it means and information control and suppression and manipulation psychologically, basically programming, customized programming through avatars and all of this power. But we also have in parallel this world of rapidly advancing biotechnology that is for the likes of Yuval Harari and those that are imagining a future of transhumanism and all of that means. We are moving very rapidly into a world that we can hardly even process. One of the big thrust vectors in Silicon Valley right now relating to reproductive rights has to do with the development of artificial looms. You know, these wealthy, privileged people don't want to carry their own babies. And I guess surrogates are too cumbersome or risky. So they're really talking about, it's not talking. They're going to run an essay about this soon. They already have a lamb that they have grown to novo in an artificial womb. We're there. And these people see it as freeing. This is more women's rights. We don't need to have the organic process of carrying a baby. And that's a good thing, they believe. Completely disregarding that there is a whole lot of subtle complex interactions that occur between mother and fetus in the womb. Okay, that gives rise to. Right, who knows what kind of humans you're going to develop with no interaction with the mother at all? The entire nine months, whether developing. But that's the exchange of hormones. But for the sake of convenience, we want to do that. Oh, God. Okay. And that, what that, you know, zoom in on that. Okay. That has all kinds of implications. It has implications for organ transplantation. My friend, Yanya Kellek. I don't know if you know Yanya on, if you've ever had a mind. You might want to sometime. Interesting character. He is the Washington Bureau chief for this newspaper that is defamed all the time, ridiculed, epic times. Okay. Which I think is like the only print newspaper left in the United States that's worth reading that ascribes to classical journalism. But he's just come out with a book about organ harvesting in China. And organ harvesting on demand. Documenting that they are using live prisoners and keeping them in compounds and testing them for their genetic background and characteristics. And then harvesting them when necessary to provide organs for transplantation largely to Westerners. Because it is enormously profitable. And also to leaders in the CCP. This is what all this brew-ha-ha was about the open mic event with Putin about we can use transplantation to let us live another hundred years. Remember that little clip. So that this in a world in which we can have artificial wounds, we can grow our own clones to provide donor tissue to provide an insurance policy. We are right at the doorstep of that. Okay. Again, demonic. It sounds demonic. I mean, is a soul the real thing? Because it can be quantified by science. You can't measure it. I mean, the concept of the soul is existed. If that's a real thing. Who knows what you're doing, creating a human being from an artificial womb? Who knows what kind of processes are happening? We know that stress on the mother imparts all sorts of unwanted characteristics and children. We know that. We know like... All kinds of interactions. Yeah. At least the playing of music. That's real. Yes. That's the same playing of music. Yeah. So that's happening. That vector is proceeding. And once you have that in a world of crisper, you can do genetic modification of a very small number of cells and then grow fetus from that. Okay. So that opens the door to... Did you watch the movie, Gadica? Yeah. Gadica absolutely recommended. If you want to understand our brave new world, the one that's really coming at us and the ethical conundrums associated with that watch Gadica. And by the way, it has great production value too. It does. It's a great movie. Great movie. And totally underappreciated. And terrifying. Yeah. That's really what our future is. And the title G-A-T-T-A-G-A refers to a DNA sequence, by the way. That's why the name Gadica. Oh. Okay. So... So watch the movie. You've already seen it. Yeah. You get it. We're moving to that space where we have custom-built humans. Now it's being... You know, what's driving that? Convenience? Who doesn't want to have a child that's better than... It's like you but better. Stronger, bigger. You know, smarter. Yeah. Better vision. Yeah. Get rid of all the problems that I've got. Right. Or you've got. You know, in your next offspring. And all you've got to do, because here's another fun fact, at bulk, whole genome sequencing is now about 300 bucks. Whole genome sequencing is the portal for selective engineering, with Casnine CRISPR systems. So we're now... We're right on the threshold of that entire spectrum of capability of manipulating animals, life, fundamentals of life, in every species and humans. And, concurrently, we have the incoming vector of robotics technology and modern computational advance. You know, we're moving rapidly. You know, people say, oh, it's going to be next month. We're going to have general artificial intelligence. Well, they keep saying that month after month. What do we got here? This video made about the... The little artificial wounds. Yeah. Oh, boy. I don't know. I made this. I don't think the company... Oh, this is so creepy. Yeah, I'm not BSing. I mean, doesn't this look like it's something straight out of the matrix? 100%. This is all 3D-D-D-D-D-D-D-D. Oh, my God, this is terrifying. This is a business model. Like, what kind of psychology does this child have with no exposure to its mother? Hey, for the nine months of this thing. For mom, it's a lot more convenient. And she can get the perfect baby that she wants. What's not to lie-care-jope? It's a whole fucking serial killer. Oh, boy. Yeah. And you put it on SSRIs. Well, this is the thing about... Do you know the story about Ted Gazinski, one of the stories? Tell him the things that happened to him? In the Netflix documentary, they go into this. He was very sick when he was a boy, when he was a baby. And they kept him in this nursery with no contact with human beings for a long time. For a long time. No one picked him up when he cried. He just sat in this crib with no contact with his mother. Yeah. And he, from then on, I mean, his brother always described him as just like off. Yeah. Just off. Yeah. He never had that. Early stage neural development is amazing and profound. By the way, this looks back to the vaccine story. When we're doing all these jabs and these little tiny kids like that potato to be birth, those there to stage where this thing is just growing like crazy. And so is there liver and everything else. And you're injecting toxic chemicals to their body. Which you really haven't characterized well and you're stacking them. Yeah. And no one's done the studies. So this is- Thank you for your profit. This is another thing that the secretary is adamant about and that the president has led on. Well, having them exempt from any legal ramifications of the adverse side effects of vaccines, they did during the Reagan administration. It's really, it gave them this free license. Yeah. Free license. Let's go crazy. Just go crazy and jack up the vaccine schedule as high as they could justify and then along with it, corresponding profits rise. That's what's fucking scary. Well, it's, so if you want to go down that rabbit hole, it's even worse. Once functionally, because of how difficult it is to prove an end point and get a vaccine request, once you get it licensed, you basically have a cash cow in perpetuity. And if you get it down on the pediatric schedule, in other words, you manage to jam it through the ACIP. Because the ACIP, the wisdom of Congress, is vested with the authority of authorizing the vaccines for children program acquisitions. So if the, there's no other program in the entire US, United States government that is outside of congressional oversight, the ACIP can decide that this vaccine needs to be purchased for the vaccines for children program. And historically, because the ACIP has been captured by pharma and by the CDC itself and by academia, those decisions, they never go backwards. Right. And so you get the product down onto the VFC, the vaccine for children program and the pediatric schedule. And then that triggers the indemnification clause that you're talking about, which by the way is different from the one that kicked in with the COVID situation with the prep act. That's, that's even worse. But what you end up with Joe is a situation where, as the vaccine manufacturer, I think it, you now have no legal liability. Guaranteed purchasing distribution and marketing, because the CDC does all the propaganda vaccines are safe and effective. You must take this, right. And then, then you end up with, and it's in many cases it's school district level. It's not even state level. The states have the right to regulate the practice of medicine. The federal government doesn't. That means the CDC can advise that this is the vaccine schedule. And many states, because they don't have the infrastructure to actually process what's going on. They say, well, if the CDC advises it, then we're going to mandate it, or school districts do. And so you end up in this situation where you as the manufacturer get your product on the market, you get it down into this special program. You got guaranteed purchase, guaranteed profit, full indemnification, marketing, purchase distribution, all paid for by the taxpayer. And no liability. It's perfect as a business model, what's not to like? It's so scary how many people just go along with it too. Oh, there's, there just go along with it. They're propagandized into believing it as a... And promoting it, because of theology. They've administered to the exactly. I was going to say it's religious dogma. They've administered it to their children. They believe it wholeheartedly. And when someone says something like vaccines don't cause autism, the whole audience will applaud. And you're like, how do you know? How do you know that? Well, you're so confident that you're applauding. Well, it's because what I've heard, I've heard it so many times. Of course, I believe it. That's what's twisted about it. It's just, it's just, well, that it, it, it, it illustrates the power of what we're dealing with. Yeah. And it once you get it by thinking through the vaccine story, I mean, you've, you're, you're ruined now, my friend. Because once, once you get it about vaccines, then you see it everywhere. Well, I had Suzanne Humphries on who wrote that book, Dissolving Illusions. Uh-huh. And, you know, that, that book is a must read for anybody who wants to really understand the history of vaccines. And what really happened in terms of the end of pandemics and the introduction of these vaccines, like what actually took it. Yes. Yes. Oh, that, that, and you know, there's a whole thread of, of how prevalent, uh, um, lead was in the population in, in the powdered wigs and so many things that we had. And then when they got rid of the lead, that was concurrent with, uh, the onset of, uh, widespread vaccination. And so the loss of life associated, or the improvement in loss of life and birth outcomes. Associate with getting the lead out of the population. Well, that's a scribe to the vaccines by the people that are busy marketing vaccines. And likewise, the all the, all the work associated with, uh, water sanitation and all of that. No, that's all true. The first time I credit what credit is due as a vaccinologist. The first time I really encountered that logic was Candace Owens had me on years ago. And she said, you know, we've done this deep dive. And we've looked at this thing and these, these infectious diseases go down before the vaccines come up. Um, and yet we're told this narrative. Right. And of course we're told this narrative. Yeah. The polio ones, the nutty or one. Cause when, when people are so concerned about polio and polio vaccines and we, we've cured polio, we, they're going to bring back polio if they stop the vaccines. When I tell them what percentage of polio do you think is asymptomatic? And that most people think like none, right? It's 95 to 99% of polio is asymptomatic. And then you find out through Suzanne Humphrey's work that they were spraying DDT. Yeah. You've equidously all over the country at the same time. Absolutely. And it gives you the same exact symptoms of paralytic polio. And then subsequently the actual first infections that started occurring in this country were occurring in rural areas where they spray DDT everywhere. Yeah. So one of, so there's, uh, if I can kind of throw another log in the fire on there. Yeah. Narrative. One of the cool things that I'm getting to see from my perch at the ACIP is people working at the cutting edge of modern genetic, uh, technology investigations about cause and effect and genomic effects. And one of the things you talk about this rare incidence of paralytic polio or, uh, myocarditis. Okay. Myocarditis is rare. Uh, with the vaccine. And yet it happens at a significant rate. It happens more in certain populations than other populations. This was heresy at first. And now they were forced to admit it and, and, uh, stay tuned, uh, later in February. Uh, um, there's a group that had a big grant to look at genetic links, uh, associated with risk factors for this. And strangely half way through their program during the Biden administration, all their funding got caught. But they still made a lot of progress and they kind of limped along with volunteer stuff. Modern, I mentioned the genome costs, uh, 300 bucks a genome. These guys have gone through and they've identified seven genes that represent, uh, um, high risk factors for myocarditis after vaccination. Myocarditis after vaccination, by the way, was a major side effect associated with the smallpox vaccines for one of them. Uh, it's, it's been associated with vaccines for quite a while. We just kind of haven't heard about it and it's particularly bad with these. But they're, we, it, it, one of the, you know, trying to continue my theme of it's not all dark. Uh, one of the things that's coming out is that if we commit to it and do the research like, uh, Team Kennedy is committed to doing, um, we may well be able to detect those people that the character at genetic characteristics of those people that might have been at higher risk for, say, paralytic polio, or myocarditis. So that we can have genetic tests and you can have that test and determine whether you actually have that risk factor. It looks like because of the dynamics of clinical research and epidemiology in infectious disease that, um, this kind of application of genetic diagnostic technology may give us whole new insights into those small populations that, that, that had those, uh, rare events. Um, you know, we know the big picture in, in COVID and the COVID vaccination post vaccination syndromes of the high risk individuals with obesity and elderly and basically people with a high inflammatory set point. Uh, but now we're getting down into some of the nuances and I think that that's, you know, I talked about some of the dark sides of biotechnology, but there's some real, uh, you know, bright sides that, um, uh, um, offer hope, uh, and, and, uh, we'll, what will happen is that kind of starts to roll out is that, um, manufacturers and, and academic surrogates and others are kind of not going to be able to continue to hide behind these narratives that they have promoted now for decades. Because, uh, the true truth is going to come out. It is going to come out. Um, is it going to come out during this administration? No, to do long-term follow-up studies, it's going to take a decade. That's, that's the unfortunate truth and then we're going to have a lot of grief around that. How come you haven't already filmed the blank? Right. Um, but, uh, it's going to happen. And, uh, that is another big plus of, of what's going on right now, uh, kind of behind the scenes at HHS. Hopefully they get a chance to still do it, uh, after the midterm and they don't get hog-tied. But, um, I'm, I'm optimistic that we're, these narratives that have been promoted these false narratives, we're going to be able to break them through doing actual science, uh, for a lot to do it. Uh, and, and, uh, this new technology, uh, is, uh, particularly with sequence analysis. Um, and identification of, of risk correlates. The intersection between sequence analysis and epidemiology is going to really open up, uh, new understandings about what's going on in human disease. I'm absolutely convinced. What we do about it is that's a whole another kella fish. I mean, we can do the science until the cows come home. The public policy part is wicked hard. Yeah. But at least there's some positive developments. Yeah. That's, that's what I want to say is, is bright light at the end. There is all this dark stuff. Yeah. And, and we have to, we have to allow ourselves to see it. It's, you see it and you get the reaction like you did. I don't want to see that. It's too much. It's too overwhelming. It's too scary. But we look away at our own risk. And, um, and, and, and we have this tendency to say it's all dark. Uh, you know, that we have these, uh, individuals. I mentioned you've all Ferrari, uh, um, you know, believing that man is God now. We no longer need God. Uh, we have become God's. We have become as God. Does he actually say that? Yeah. Really? Well, but isn't he talking to us or metaphorically about our technological potential? I, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know how to, I don't know how to discern the meaning of a very demonized guy. He, he says a lot of dark stuff. And, uh, I think so, um, you, you probably read the book. Did you interview the author of, of, you know, the sapiens? Did you read the author of a dark aon? No. No, I remember that. So that's, so that's talking. This is talking more about kind of the silicon valley culture that's pushing transhumanism and how, how, um, integrally it's become, uh, involved in this space. I mean, what I, I don't have, I don't paul around with Elon and not to say he is or, or whomever you want to talk about in that space. That's, those, I'm, that's not my pay grade. Uh, but my understanding and, and I read these things, maybe they're all, maybe that's also, also propaganda. That a lot of these people, um, of, let's say the Bill Gates cast and the younger ones associated with that, uh, would, our advocates for a world in which they are able to upload their, um, avatar consciousness in a digital space and look forever. Uh, that's re-carswell, right? That's, I, sounds like you know more. You're the, you're the, uh, um, uh, UAP, uh, guy here, which by the way is another fascinating domain that I'm learning more about. It's bizarre. Um, that's a rabbit hole. You go down and like, oh, this isn't empty. This is not an empty rabbit hole. There's a lot of money behind this. And it seems like there's been a lot of black funding and business. Yeah. Business. A lot of business. Defense contractors involved. Yeah. I feel like there's some inventions that sort of emerged out of nowhere that supposedly are connected to back engineering programs. So I'm, I'm now, uh, I'm now of, of the belief that there exists a capability that transcends, uh, uh, uh, physics as we know it. Let's say I and Steinine physics, uh, and it's more aligned with, uh, Hawking's physics, uh, that, um, we can't, we don't comprehend right now. Uh, and it has to do with extremely high energy systems. And, uh, I, I, having, I mean, I've had some of these guys because I'm now known worldwide as a nutcase, I guess. And conspiracy theorist, I've had them on my farm. Uh, you know, staying in our, in our guest house and, and, um, shooting the bull. And me trying to understand their world and what they're seeing and what they've experienced and, and observed and the information. Um, and, uh, I'm, I'm of the, there's a lot of different models for what the hell's going on here. And maybe it's all us, right? That's one model. Uh, with, with secret technology. Yeah. That's one model for the, what do they call it, tic-tacs and, uh, I'm, I'm increasingly convinced by the logic that there is a physics beyond the physics that we know that is the physics of extremely high energy systems. And in high energy systems, a lot of the rules about motion and, uh, and, uh, transportation and matter. Uh, and the ability to cross between matter states that is repeatedly observed, uh, in reported by responsible people, uh, military folks that have, you know, strong disincentives for saying this stuff. And yet still they're saying that's what I saw. Okay. Transmute. And then go underwater. Water passes. And, and, and, and, ripple. Yeah. Um, so I, I, one of the models of that is that this has to do with, uh, having some extremely high energy source, uh, in a very small package. And, uh, is that possible? We're now moving into a new fusion world. Right? We're, we're talking about these microfusion reactors that are going to be powering our data centers all over the world, transforming the whole energy. Right? I mean, there's this logic and crossing over into the, the economics Bitcoin or kind of space. Uh, there's this logic that it all comes down to energy. Uh, energy is, is the one, uh, thing that, uh, fuels economic development and everything around us. And, uh, that, uh, I'm, I'm not a physicist, but I listen and learn. And, and it sounds to me like these, uh, micro reactors. And the technology that was involved strangely in this assassination. And I remember that bizarre assassination in, in Boston that happened. Um, there was two competing companies. Yeah. Okay. Um, there's something, yeah, there's something going on there that's, uh, really transformational. And if it matures, remember Trump is invested in this in a big way. Uh, that had to do with, uh, um, him kind of leveraging truth social in a strange way. Remember, uh, he, if, if we, if we emerge into a future within my lifetime, probably of these micro nukes, uh, as energy sources decentralized. First driven by the tech pros because they want to have their data centers. But then suddenly we have, as that matures and the patents come off, we have the ability to put, uh, power generation in very small packages wherever we want in the world. Suddenly the entire landscape of economic activity in the future of humanity is transformed like that. And that's just the beginning. So, if we push that technology, we may find ourselves in some space where we have the ability to produce extremely large amounts of energy in a very small package. And, and use that, you know, of course it'll be weaponized. Use that for a variety of things. Uh, but, um, I, I think the guys that are speculating about these phenomena being driven by the existence of the of, of, of almost point sources of unlimited energy functionally. Uh, may make sense out of things that otherwise are really hard to wrap your head around. Well, we're in for a very interesting future. One way or another. Yes. Yeah. And it, and it doesn't have to be dark and demonic. Hopefully not. Hopefully not. If we let these bastards have their way. What is this, Jamie? I think it's a small correction. That video I showed you apparently isn't real, not a real kind of... Dark and demonic hopefully not if we let these bastards have their way What is this jamic a small correction that video I showed you apparently isn't real not a real company? Made by a Berlin filmmaker in 2022 went viral. I found it in a New York post article that kind of said it was real Mmm, but but there are plans. Well, I was gonna say which is a little weird It says at the bottom. This is getting confused with a pregnancy robot In China 2025 This though apparently also is not real also The pregnancy robot is not real. Yeah, it was enough. They named a scientist that was working on it I'll real fine a real person Yeah, but but company work nonetheless none the less they are working on us that that will aren't I I we're gonna come out so so see if you can find the century or so good at googling or whatever you're doing See if you can find the images of this artificial womb and I believe it's a lamb You know, we've seen the lamb before I'm just saying that the the people thing the factory thing Yeah, well that was obviously a Transspendly yeah, it was an even a real company that we're doing it's synthetic images. I don't want to give off fake news Yeah, good. Well, God forbid. All right, we might get banned. Well Robert, thank you so much for being here. I really appreciate it and it was nice for you to come back and Under less hostile terms in the world. Well, wasn't hostile then. Yeah No, I think the I think your message was a lot more hostile and it's the way it was received You know, like you were received in a hostile way. I don't think this one's gonna be hostile I think pretty much everything that you said Most people are aware of now and then the other things that you're saying they're not not far-fetched at all And I think there's a lot more people that are more open to Receiving information like that now that ever before And some of it can be attributed to you. Oh, that's kind. I'm let's say to the community Yeah, sure and of which I am a vehicle have been at times A lot of the stuff that I shared with you back then was the consequence of a community that I was embedded in of others physicians and scientists many of whom were primary care practitioners and I was I was attending weekly meetings with these people and I had front-line knowledge of what they were seeing and experiencing and I had front-line knowledge of the Physicians that I was collaborating with at DITRA of what they were experiencing. I was never managing COVID patients except myself But I knew what others were experiencing and you gave me an opportunity To get to share their voice through me and I thank you for that It was it was a moment in time and I think we did good But by God they came at us. It was a while Thank you sir. Thank you very much. I really appreciate