just mentioned that last time you were here, you were like one of the opening acts. Now you're the headliner at the show you're doing down here. Yeah, man. You're on the come up, son. A lot of changes in two years, bro. Like, you had the last time I was not here two years ago, like in September, I was definitely just like the opening comedian. And I was even catching a hard time for that. Like Tyler said something up that they do Tyler. And now I'm fucking headlining and we just added a show because they're selling out. That's so sick. Well, I explained to you like I was telling Johnny last week when he was here. Like, I would shout out to Jimmy Mitchell. Johnny. Yeah, he's sick. Your style of comedy is so much different than a lot of people because to me at least when I watch you and I listen to talk to people, especially when you're roasting people, I feel like the main differences. A lot of other guys I can tell they're trying really, really hard. Like I can tell like they it's obvious that they worked hard on like the shit they're talking about and they're bitter or whatever. But you I feel like your it feels like you're not even trying. It feels like it just comes natural to you. Well, yeah, I mean, you know, not the two my own horn, but that's different. But swing that's different between somebody being good and somebody being great. You know what I'm saying? Like anybody who does something and it looks effortless. You know, that's like when you're like, oh, this guy is a natural and student somebody who's not really a natural comic and they're trying to really be a comedian. Like you can you know the difference in everything. Like somebody can practice real hard and be a great baseball player, but you can tell people who are born to play baseball. Yeah. There's a big difference. You know, yeah. And then being able to combine like the discipline and putting in like the hard work and the time into it as well as having that natural ability. That's really what sets people off. 10,000 hours. There's a $10,000. 10,000 hours. You got to know it. Oh, it's the fuck. It's a AC. Oh, okay. Yeah. We I dub it out. It's not super annoying. Is it? I just I mean, you can think right. Yeah. Yeah. Did it hit it. Yeah. I'm real sensitive to noises. I got to get the AC system replacing this thing. Fucking piece of shit. But yeah. Yeah. 10,000. Is that like the Malcolm Gladwell. Uh, thanks. I think we talked about it. Yeah. We're just real because like, uh, you can, I can film myself becoming like more of a natural stage and just becoming more, uh, just like a seventh sense instead of like actually going out and do comedy. So it's like I'm just going on stage and giving you my personality while I'm performing instead of, I mean, I still have a set that you know, I've written and prepared. You know, um, like, like you don't look at comedians in the early days. Like if you look at Dave Chappelle, like a lot of stuff you're doing your early days is real jokey. And then, uh, the more you do it and you become great. Uh, it becomes like more of you like nobody else can say it, but you like if you look at Dave Chappelle now. So like that's the growth. You know, some people don't like it, but it just is just is what comes natural. You mean you kind of like fall into like this own lane you've created. Like you kind of like like carved out a niche for yourself and like it's certain style. So you kind of like more like lean into that harder and harder. Yeah. What should find your voice? That's what, you know, you're here. You'll hear a lot of comedians talk about finding your voice on stage and that's what they mean. Like, you know, like, like I can go on stage and rent for 20 minutes and it's not prepared because I've found a voice. and I know what inflections I should say and what's going to be funny and what's not going to be funny. So I know how to say and why to say and where to say. Right. Yeah. You definitely know how to read the room. Yeah. Yeah. That's very important, man. Like like a lot of comedians like always ask me for advice and I'm like, bro, just just be funny. Like, you know, stop trying to like have a scientific formula to be funny. Like just be funny. Yeah. Just be you. Yeah. Just be you. Yeah. Just move to Austin. Yeah. I'm out there in Austin now. How long you been there? Since August, so I moved. Joe moved you down. Yeah. I'm a rogue. I'm going to get out of the best. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He had to get out of the best. We were down there, man. He's creating like a comedy utopia, man. I mean, then like Duncan moved down there too. You can show that on there. Tim Dylan, Tony. Tim Dylan. Yeah. So what's the scene like there now? Is it just like way bigger than it was before all that? Yeah. I'm sure that's the first time I ever went to Austin was shortly after I did your podcast, which was like December 2020. Yeah. And um, broken was there. They had did a couple of shows and I came down there to do some shows with Tony and then I would hit up other spots. And the scene just wasn't a scene. Like it was just people on stage, you know, writing some shit. I mean, people on. So yeah, saying some shit, they just wrote that day and it's like, Oh, bro. I'm like, it's like, it's not going to make me better. Yeah. I'm saying I'm like, if this is the fucking dummy down. Yeah. Cause I'm like, if this, cause in LA, bro, you, you might have to follow a killer. You might have to, you might have to follow. You got to be ready. You might have to follow a deal of on in LA. And you're like, oh shit, I'm praying my A game. But these motherfuckers here, you're like, what the fuck is this? You know what I'm saying? Right. Rogan started doing a residency and I do it a lot with him in every Tuesday. And what most every Tuesday and Wednesday and Wednesday. What does that mean? Residency? Were you just continuously do shows at the same place? Okay. Yeah. So he does a residency at this place called a Vulcan. And that's pretty much every Tuesday and Wednesday. And that's a great show to be on. Like he expects new material. He doesn't want to do the same thing over and over again. He really challenges comedians. That's why when he opens his clubs, it's going to be the best club in the nation. In my opinion, because I don't feel like any comedy club has ever opened a comedy club to focus on the comedian. Every comedy club has opened focus on how we're going to make money. Yeah. How are we going to maximize the process? So he's actually opening a comedy club where it's like comedian first. You know what I'm saying? I don't have to worry about the business side. I mean, you do, but not like you're not doing it just because you have to make some money. Yeah. It's kind of like his whole like hero. Bro, like Rogan, so dope, bro. Like I said, I've never seen a comedy club be built before. But he'll bring us all in. He'll be like, what do you think about this? What should we do? And it's like, damn, like I have input in one of probably that's going to be his story comedy club. It's yeah. I have input. What should you think about this club? What should you think about that? What you think about this many sees? What you think about having Drake right here? Like we should lower the ceiling so that the sound is like, wow, I like, I have input, you know what I'm saying? So it's like mind blowing. And you know, it's taken a while because he's like taking his time to fine tune everything so that we have the best lighting so that we have, you know, whatever, the best measurement. So that the sound stays in the room the best. So like we were there a few months ago, I believe it was maybe August. August, yeah, I had just freshly moved. So either August or September and Lucy Kay was in town and he told Rogan he's like, he's still is away to talk. Really? Yeah, he's like these still is like that. Yeah. And Rogan's like, well, what we got to do? I'll talk to him. They got to be. And so he lowered the ceilings man, like 70. No way. Just because you know, just more intimate, more intimate in the laughter. You know, you get a full, you put 250 people in a room. I think the one room host, 250, that was going to hold like one 75. But just put 250 people in a room that's built to whole sound and the ceilings are low. It's going to sound like an arena. Yes. Yes. That's good. He's doing that, bro. You know, damn well, he didn't do any of that when he set up that red podcast studio. He didn't talk to anybody. He might have talked to one guy. Yo, how should I do to this make it look like fucking a red hellscape that bro. That's him. Yeah, that was Joe's vision for sure. Yeah, that's that was him building what he wanted. Like bro, even when we were, you know, talking about designs, he's like, yeah, I want the bar to look like the bar from the shiny. Oh shit. So it's like, bro, you got money, you know what I'm saying? Yeah. You got money like that. And like he's real passionate about comedy, but more so he's more passionate about the comedian, you know what I'm saying? The experience being there. He takes care of all his friends. Like, you know what I'm saying? That's why I was easy for me to stick up for him with my father's trying to call him the racist. Yeah. And I was like, well, this is the racist. Give me more. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think I like racing bro. It's so crazy how a lot of the comedians will just fucking turn their backs on people when they get called out for being racist or saying some like anti-ju shit on the media or whatever. Yeah. But these comedians will never make it or if they make it, you know, they'll be soy boys, you know what I'm saying? So it's like, bro, your time's going to come. Like there's going to be a time when some shit about it's inevitable. If you're in the spotlight, some shit is going to come your way. It's you're going to have some this you're going to have some this grunnel bitch. You're going to have some old employee. You're going to have something where somebody tries to take from you because America's just a greedy place or somebody sees an opening and they try to, you know, slide into that opening and they can cook up whatever story. And it's like, well, like if a girl came out of the world, and she was like, I didn't really want to have sex with him, but we have sex. It's like, but I don't know. Like maybe I did talk you into it because that's what guys do. Yeah. Let's go get a drink and see how you feel. You know, like come on girl. Let me just stick it in a little bit. Yeah. Let me get 10 pumps. Every guy has done that. Yeah, no doubt. Every guy has coerced his way into a girl's vagina. Yeah, that's what men do. That's what animals do. Every guy has become a man. You bought, let me just eat it. Yeah. Yeah. Let me tell you, like every guy has done that. So, you know, if some girl were to say he coached me into having sex with him, it could be true. That's the game. Like every guy, you know, takes a bitch off for drinks and hopes that she gets loose and go home to fuck. Is that wrong? You know what I'm saying? Like I feel like it's a big difference in me taking you to drinks to get loose versus like popping something in your drink like Bill. Kyle. The crazy thing about that whole N-word thing with Joe that they tried to cancel them for it is I saw what I don't remember how long ago maybe it had been over a year ago before the whole thing happened with recently with him. Yeah, he was doing his stand up routine and he actually brought it up during his stand up routine. He's like, there's a video out there of me saying the N-word compilation a bunch of times and he was like, I forget what the joke was, but it was like even I went fuck. Yeah. Yeah. Even I thought I sounded, I thought I was racist for a second. Yeah, he like bro, he before it came out, you know what I'm saying? He told all of us. Yeah. Like I know your heart. Like even if you call the black person N-word I'd be like Joe you fucked up but I know your heart. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. I know your heart dog like and you know you helped me take care of my kids and you helped me establish myself in Austin. So what? I know this dude's heart is a great man. He's open his house to me and you know open his money to me, his pockets and opportunities to me. So it's like bro, like I know your heart and if you're advancing people of color, like I don't see any racist traits in your body. And it's like Patrice O'Neill said man, comedians are all trying to be funny. And Patrice said the birth of a funny joke and an unfunny joke come from the same place and you don't know if it's funny until you say it. And Rogan gets stoned, he gets high and I can see how the story of the planet apes and I felt like I was in a planet apes came about. You're trying to be funny. I've tried to be funny before and it came out racist and you just didn't say it like oh fuck. You know what I'm saying? That happens. Especially you know you're a podcast. We start, if we start drinking and passing a blender round and we start talking about Indians or Asians or whatever, something racist can come out because I'm not saying funny. Then he tries this thing and get being funny and might not come out. But people were not in that moment. They take stuff out of context and then they run with it. And you know it's just, oh the Rogan video. But whenever you're in a situation where you have to say I'm not racist, you fucked up and I clearly have fucked up. That's so good joke. You could tell they headed it to like there's some, there's some cuts. They cut it down to me for it. The media hated on Joe because of his whole stance on the color vaccine. Yeah. And because he has more influence than they do now. Yeah. And you know it's like now they owe him a big apology when these articles come out about, you know, the vaccine possibly causing myocarditis and fucking up girls periods and women that are 60 years old getting the vaccine and getting a period again after not having a period for 30 something years and then you know women becoming infertile like somebody owes him an apology. It should be a scene. Yeah. You're weary of a vaccine that wasn't really tested like that. I mean, don't, you don't got to go far. If you look at black people, you know what I'm saying with the people in the, the Tuskegee experiment, you know what I'm saying? Which one is that? Uh, isn't it the Tuskegee experiment where Tuskegee was that it where they were given black people? They're supposed to be giving them a vaccine and then they like injected them with small pox. What? You haven't heard about this. You ever find it? Tuskegee experiment. Yeah. The syphilis study. Yeah. Okay. In 1990, you're 1932, the US PHS working with a Tuskegee Institute began. I lost my place. Scored down. The beginning of study to record the natural history of syphilis. It was originally called Tuskegee study of untreated syphilis in the Negro male. Now referred to as the US PHS syphilis study at Tuskegee, the study initially involved 600 black men, 399 with syphilis, 201 did not have the disease, participants informed uh, consent and participants informed consent was not collected. Researchers told the men that they were being treated for bad blood, a local term used to describe several ailments, including syphilis and Nemia, and fatigue. Huh. So it says an exchange for taking part of the study. They received free medical exams, free meals and burial insurance. What? So it's like, yeah. So for black people to be wary of a fucking vaccine. Like, come on. The black people, the African American population, and specifically in like New York, I think we're having the most adverse medical side effects of that vaccine. I think then anybody. I mean, bro, I've had that shit a few times. So if you had a COVID. I have never had it. What? Never fucking had it. You got it once. You're a dirty boy. Bro, it's weird. I've got sick. Like I've gotten the same symptoms multiple times and I've tested myself and I always tested negative. Well, you've got it. Here's one thing. The one that was out last year, I took hella test, bro, because I was sick, because I've had like two or three times. And I took hella test last year and they all came back negative. But then I tested uh, positive like a week later for the antibodies. Strong, anybody's like I had just got over. No, shit. So I probably had it. I never took the antibodies. Right. Yeah. So I was at Rogan Studio actually. Oh, really? He has a tears of uncle out there. You know, shit. Yeah. You still do that? Was that? Is he still doing that test for everyone now? Probably not. That was last year. Yeah. Yeah. That could not have been cheap. But yeah, bro. There's so much fucking sketchy shit that's happened in the history of this country with vaccines and shit. Even in like Afghanistan, the CIA, there's a story that the CIA set up a like, uh, a sigh up vaccination camp for people. They were telling them, uh, they were telling the Afghanistan people that they were getting vaccines, but they were actually like shooting them up with some bullshit that was fucking them up somehow. God, damn. Forget what I forget what it was. You probably find out what exactly you ever seen the video. Okay. Yeah. CIA organized faked vaccination drive to get Osama bin Laden's family's DNA. How late it is. You ever seen. And I get it, bro. We, we were not started on morality in this country. No. So I get it. I get it. We're, we're fucked up nation. That's how we've acquired a lot of the stuff that we've acquired. We did some dirty shit. We did some sketchy shit this day. Number one, and to stay number one for as long as we stay number one, you do have to be fucked up. So I totally get it. Yeah. And along the way, I don't want me or minds being collateral damage. You know what I'm saying? You want what being collateral damage? I don't want me or minds. Me or my family brought collateral damage. So, you know, I'm glad that I do have the resources that I have and I can go to doctors that my richer friends use and be like, hey, should we do this? And they'll be like, well, you know what I'm saying? Like doctors who are not pushed by big or. I'll be honest. Right. That are not pushed by big form of companies. You're on them saying. Yeah. Hey, can you find a video on the fun thing about Afghanistan of the American soldiers trying to teach Afghanistan against jumping jacks. Have y'all ever seen that? No. Oh, this is why the situation that Kaboo happened, bro. These people are not coordinating like tightening on YouTube. American soldiers teach Afghanistan is they're trying to teach them jumping jack. Bro, so you think they can. So you think they can teach them how to shoot a rifle? Bro, and you wonder why I saw that so forth. Look, they can't. Oh, he's kicking the legs of the arms at the same time. Something so simple. This guy just can't get it. He just can't. Oh, my Lord. He went one leg. That is so fucked up. That guy's got it. He had a high note. That's the one person who trusts with a good. All right, we got one. Oh, no. How do you say these things? How do you say they are? They probably grew up using AR. They're probably in preschool shooting AR. Can't do a jumping jack. Can't do a jumping jack. Oh, my God. Bro, that's why they didn't want to put out a... That's why they didn't want to support a Kaboo, bro, because they're like, niggas, so did y'all pull back. I don't kind of back. Look at them fuck. Look at those all over. He's my fucking kid. Do a bear crawl. Oh, my God. You said the video that I'm trying to hold onto the plane that was taken off from the runway and they're falling off the fucking plane. I fucked up. I was laughing at those. That's crazy. They're the same guys who can't do a jumping jack. They think they can hold onto the fucking landing gear. You know what, bro? Like, I'm a proud American citizen. You know what I'm saying? So when I see people like Brittany Griner and all these other people who denounce America, and then you see a situation like that. And it's like, you should be glad that you're in a way. in a fucking country where you can even talk bad about the fucking government. And you were also sure we'd not apply. Bro, like guitar over there and all that shit where they have the soccer games right now. Well, people are mysteriously dying for saying bullshit. So it's like that one soccer player is from our ran. He's getting murdered executed. Beheaded. Yeah. When he goes back or whatever. Yeah. I didn't hear about that. So it's like bro. They lost and he said something. And they're like, when he goes back, he's getting fucked up. He's done. He's scared to go back. I mean, like, remember the Colombian soccer player who scored a goal in his own goal? No. Oh, you got to beheaded? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Not only are they not coming to get you, like you wouldn't even have been playing basketball. Yeah, man. So it's like when you see situations like that, it just makes me appreciate where I live. Like you might hate it or love it. Yeah. That is not too, there's not too many other fucking countries where you can become a self made millionaire. Right. My dad's family is from Cuba. And there's no way. Yeah. You better box play a hella baseball or be a great ass singer. Like bro, what's that doing? And Pweek. Pweek. You never heard of Pweek? The baseball player? No. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Bro, he was basically like awesome slave shit. Really? And Texas bought him from Cuba. And then that person in Texas sold him to the Dodgers. Bro, shit like bro, these other countries, though. So that's why it's like bro, you're proud. Like bro, go to North Korea where they show propaganda that they, they fucking take it over America. You know, they got a brainwash, they citizens constantly, you know what I'm saying? Just to give them hope to keep on living. So it's like, you should be happy you can say, boy, shit, you got free speech. Did she say negative shit about America before she went over there? Was it after she was already in rock before before? Yeah, she was kneeling pretty and doing all that. She volunteered to know I bet you she changed that shit now. I mean, you've been in a Russian prison, her fucking her, her locks froze off because it was so called. Yeah. So it's like you should really come back in new person and have a good job. Yeah, no doubt. Back to really shit on where the fuck you live that we traded the arms dealer for your gay ass. One of them here. The biggest most prolific arm dealer that's nicknamed, he was like this. Is your boot? Yeah. Yeah, the crate. Yeah, the, the something of death or something. The doctor of the dealer of death or something. Well, I know is, yeah, look up that guy. All I know is the merchant of death. The merchant of death. Oh, yeah. All I know is Nick Cage played him in Lord of War and that was a fucking sick movie. See, the thing, the thing, the thing about that guy too, I don't know if he wasn't, I don't think he was really that bad of a guy. I think he was just making money off. He was just like, what I'm learning opportunities to sell. That's what I'm saying. That's how you have to become rich over there. Yeah. Right. Like you, you, there's not working a nine to five and get rid of it. You can't really legally be rich over there. Right. Right. And, and kindness, country, dog, there's no, you got to do some of the legal shit. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? And if you supply arms and terrorists, then. Was it eventually charged, like you can see conspiracy to kill Americans. That's bullshit. That's some, I think that's some fucking American political thing they can use in excuse. I can, yeah, like you so guns to somebody. Somebody guns to a country that we didn't like. It's a conspiracy charge. Yeah. The conspiracy charges bullshit. I wonder what I kill him when he get back over there. He's already doing podcast, bro. He's already, he's already doing interviews over there. Like, yeah, he went out. Yeah, I wondered like how does Russia feel about him? Because I know he's been over there what? 20 years. Long time. Yeah. We've got some shit out of him. Yeah. I'm seeing, I ain't tortured. Yeah. Yeah, you know that fucking, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he wasn't just sitting in the cell for 20 years. They interviewed him. They interviewed him a couple of days ago. And one of the ladies in Russia was asking him like what do you think about America now compared to what you thought before? He goes before I got locked up there. You know, we would look at America like the shiny town on the hill. And now they have 36 different genders and the places go into hell. But like they don't have the Christian or the Catholic values that we have in Russia. They don't have, there's nothing binding Americans together. They're fucking more divided than ever. There's a million genders and nobody gets along. He was like, he has a... I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Yeah. Rogan talks. Leonardo have had conversations about how a lot of superpower places get fascinated with gender before they're demise. Like, he get fascinated with gender and then they end in like a hundred or two hundred years. Really? Like, shit gets so good and comfortable that they can't find problems. Like, we need problems to solve. But once shit becomes so good, like we look for more and more problems. We dig for problems. We need a sad to say we need a 9.12 the day after 9.11. When all that mattered was being an American citizen. You know what I'm saying? Being an American brother. I think I was in the fifth or sixth grade. Like, and I still remember the unity. You know what I'm saying? Like, bro, like I'm from deep south. Like, you know, from down here in raised Georgia. Yeah. It was raised in Georgia. And I remember, man, like having conversations with grown men about being a proud American. Like, I were wearing American t-shirt and then be like, oh yeah, we have these conversations that I felt like if that would have never happened, we wouldn't have had it. You know what I mean? And people were just proud. Like, people were putting flags in their car. Yeah, everywhere. You know what I'm saying? Like, dog, I feel like some shit like that. would make people see what was really real. And all that other shit ain't real, bro. Like, fuck your pronouns. Yeah, you're stupid. There's bigger problems. Yeah. What's that guy named Matt Walsh? Y'all follow who? No. It's either guy who did the documentary on, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. What's it called? Never. What's the fuck about a woman? Yeah, it's about, he interviews basically a bunch of people who got, like, gender reassignment surgery and like, we're credited at that. Yeah, bro. It's like, dog, you over here, you over here. And I get it. It's on both sides. Like, you got women that are fascinated with BBS. People in America are just culture voters. What's popular right now? I want to do what's popular. Yeah, I want to do what's popular. It's a drug. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. So it's like, I get it, man. Like, you know, like, you want to fall into that and be accepted. It's like there's a comedian, I ain't going to mention on their names. And LA and the dudes who started taking hormones. You know what I'm saying? It's kind of hormones. The women hormones. Oh, sure. And grew titties or a little bit in the facial hair went away. But the dude still got a dick and he still fucks women. And I'm like, you're fucking selfish. Yeah. You're not what you're trying to display yourself to be. You're just out here doing this because it's what's popular right now. And it's also like, it seems like it's the rich kids that are doing it too. It seems like it's the wealthy people or like the kids of celebrities. Yeah, that's what happens, man. You get bored. They think they're bad. It's like they think they're better than everyone. They're like, I'm not, I'm too good for male or female. I got to be something to do. Yeah. Like, Jayden, somebody want to cut his dick out, cut it out, still with my other father. Yeah. Cut it out. Yeah. I love my dick. Yeah, that's crazy. And Duane Wade's kid, you see the shit that came out about Duane Wade? Yeah, his mom is not with that shit. The kid's mom is right. Really? Yeah. That's not his mom. Oh, no. The mom, he got a different. The real mom, the real. I just feel like, like kids should be innocent, bro. And, you know, I don't want my kids. I got a two year old, eight year old. I don't want them knowing about heterosexual or homosexual sex after eight. Right. Yeah, it's not important. Yeah, you know, like, let these kids grow up. Let them be fucking kidding without trying to have them identify as something. When we were kids, we didn't like, bro, we would have took a barbie and played with it. It didn't mean that I wanted to be a girl. It was just, I was a kid. I don't know any fucking better. Right. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like, I just try to make my cousin's barbie's f***. Yeah. But one barbie on top of the other one. Yeah. Yeah, bro. It's crazy because like, I mean, it's just, it's incentivized by what? I mean, politics and money, mainly, right? Because now there's like all these hormone clinics that are all over the country that are charging all this money, making all this money, trying to promote it. Making all this money. And then what's the end goal though? So move the, if you move the base like towards it, it won't tip. Okay. Yeah. But what's the end goal? I don't think there is an end goal, bro. I don't think they've thought it through. Yeah. Because I've heard these fucking binary or whatever the f*** they are, people call women that give birth breeders and call them. And call them her that one. Chest feeders. C***. You know, I have heard that. I've been on 7-20 LA and Austin so I get it all. You know what I'm saying? Like LA, bro. That's like Austin's liberal, but it's not LA liberal. Like they're still conservatives that drive lifted. I'm down 7-20 LA and also so I get it all you know what I'm saying like LA bro. That's like Austin's liberal But it's not LA liberal like they're still conservatives that drive lifted They say they're liberal But it's like bro. You have not been to LA. You might have tried You might have the fucking drive lifted trucks and eat meat. Yeah. These motherfucking liberals in LA have their real deal Yeah, they don't want to work They want they're lazy, you know, I'm saying they all these offenders. What are you offended by? Everything right now that's why you suicidal in the press right now because your ass can't take a good verbal ass kick The people in LA like a majority of people in LA like the mystique of LA is show business, right? So people that live there that are entwined in show business They want to like follow they want to stay in line with what's acceptable in show business and I think the main That is being extremely liberal liberal and far left and being like socially conscious of everybody and That's just changing It's slowly changing and I think in the next five years Yeah, like and then also like I hate the reference for open, but he's one of the most knowledgeable people I know and he's like these people are just a small group Mm-hmm, you know, I travel America for a living and my comedy is pretty right, you know on the right side of the political Scale and it's a very small group of people, bro. It is like we look at LA in New York You know what I'm saying and that is a very small percentage of the population because there's a lot of Conservatives in southern California like the whole Orange County, you know what I'm saying. Yeah like San Diego San Diego Orange County in general like Riverside all that shit. Roll our art people who want to take guns and They're they're kind of like libertarians, but you have these few Fat vegans and LA would purple hair that don't want to work and talk about, you know, I'm saying systemic racism It's like bitch don't be offended for me. Yeah You're not oppressed. No bitch. Yeah, no fuck Why people have been great to me. Yeah. Yeah, I am not oppressed. I cannot name a single instance Where a white person has kept me from doing anything? I wanted to achieve if anything It's been a people that share the same skin complex as me They have robbed me put guns to me putting knives to me and taking my shit. I've never been robbed by a white person Sorry Sorry to disappoint Like well, what about this what about that they're all there's something? Yeah. Oh my god, man Sorry disappointed I've never been robbed by white person. Yeah, I am so sorry sweetheart Never I mean I've probably been robbed on the You know the fucking agent and management That's subtle that's subtle at least it's not Blake's not our property right. Yeah Yeah, for sure my life's not in danger, you know, bro. It's What isn't are they getting a new is it LA getting a new mayor Karen Bass Karen Bass. Yeah, I heard I heard I forget who I was listening to talk about it. Maybe it was Tim Dylan. He was talking about how they are Shuttling all the homeless people out of downtown LA just so they can make like her inauguration look good Like cuz they're doing like a big ceremony for Karen Bass to be the new mayor and there's I guess there's tons of homeless people in that area They're getting buses and they're moving them all out just so they can put them in hotels Wow How crazy is that our city? Oh my god. Oh, there it is with LA Swearing in the new mayor who's worked to move homeless in campus Well, let me tell you Our city has not been right Since mayor of the Oregon. So pardon this brief interruption But I want to take a minute to talk about this incredible subliment that I've been using for over a year now After it was recommended to me by a nutritional scientist Dr. Dominic Daggostino on this podcast I take Dom's advice when it comes to anything related to nutrition diet and longevity because as we get older These things become more and more important that is why I started using Versa Versa was a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold the potential to increase longevity I take cell being This one right here which contains nicotine amide mononucleotide or NMM based supplement paired with naturally derived micronized Trans-resveratrol and TMG these two chemicals are actually precursors to what's called nicotinamide Idonine Dino nucleotide which is commonly known as NAD and NAD is essentially the precursor to energy Cell repair and longevity if you've ever tried fasting or even intermittent fasting and you've gotten that feeling of Super high energy or mental clarity is because your body is activating these genes called certuins Which are actually longevity genes the downside is as we age NAD declines when I found out I could naturally increase my body's Activation of certuins and naturally activate my body's production of NAD. I was sold and it is so much more affordable than doing NAD IV drips head on over to vr.s Oh and use the coupon code Concrete at checkout to save 15% on your entire order. That's K. O N CR ETE at checkout and get 15% off your entire order or you can just go to vr.so slash K. O N CR ETE it's linked below back to the show Which one was that how long ago is that a criminal bro? He's about eight nine years ago I want to first me that like it was bro like homeless people were centralized to one area You know what I'm saying they used to they ice lid downtown But they were literally in the morning like six a.m Go out there with fucking water hoses and hose them down. You know what I'm saying like get the fuck up body To bitch like and that's what people don't understand bro. You're talking about LA County That's a place that that hose like 13 million people right some states don't have that population right you can't be this righteous soft You know get run over Mayor vr. Mirvira goes to was a gangster. There was a rumor about him taking guns to to his meetings And and you know he just got shit done. Well, like you kind of beat you kind of got to be a criminal dog You kind of you kind of got to have a criminal mind since like Gotham City Like came up a righteous motherfucking can't go to Gotham City and make it right. No, you got a you got to have police that You shake down they got to do some shit. Yeah, you got to kind of beat the criminal's ass a little bit so that they know like motherfucking these minds do this. Yeah, you're not gonna do this without repercussions like bro like they're like in LA right now That's why we got all those massive Deferings where it's like 20 people were breaking to need them still like 15,000. I have to shit because the minimum for a felony is like 1500 now so if 20 of us go we can get $20 or shit and nobody gets charged with a felony and we'll be out to go home for dinner That's fucking wild now You got to start you got to say you got to start that racially profiling that like you can't that's not a city Type it in on your computer, bro. How much on robbery in crimes have increased in LA over the past like two three years Yeah, it's crazy right I my apartment Look at this shit, bro That's not that's not that's not It's like a guy talking over it. I mean But all sisters. There you go one out of 48 See the shit brothers One out of 48 shoplifters get caught. He said when they're just fucking they're just filling up their bags of Walmart No regard What why why do you I mean the people that are in charge of LA and in California the people like the politicians they start they think they're doing the right thing it started a few years ago When we had this one city council and I can't remember I know I think she was a lesbian and It got to the point to where they could they had to stop touching homeless people's tents Because it was considered their property even if they set up on a fucking sidewalk, right? And then they had this place echo park where you know families go there's a lake You can walk around the lake and they had a lot of homeless people these homes who were doing like fucked up shit with kids and shit present Jacking off fucking smoking shooting up and all these fucking lives and vegetarians were like no you can't kick them out the part Bitch bring them to your house. Yeah, right. Yeah, yeah Kids over there like come on you don't have kids you don't desire to have fucking kids because you think for some reason that you were born a sexually So you don't even want to have kids, you know what I'm saying. Yeah, so it's like get the fuck out of here I take my kids to public parks to run around and I'm a licensed gun carrier in the state of California and I will kill a motherfucking if they do some bullshit I'm gonna protect my kids at all costs and I got money for a lawyer so it's like Most people at layer scared Most people at layer very terrifying and what's with the there's also like a push to not have kids With people like super love far left. I know like there was a lecture done at some university or whatever and one of the Forget where one of the big universities and like the professor was talking about Growing up and I'm like overpopulation on the planet and shit and she was like well You know some people it's okay to have kids, but it's it's probably the more responsible thing to not reproduce They're dumb. It's like a it's like a it's a weird thing that's happening with young people now They want to like prioritize their career and their money Before like I want to be rich but if I ever before I ever have kids like make sure my careers right What's the point again rich if you know that children leave it to what a dog leave your money to a dog Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, the fucking CEO of a homeless shelter walk around making a $38,000 a year salary mmm because your dumb ass donations bitch. Yeah, right the pastor flying in his own private jet But like you can see the argument though when you look at downtown LA and you see all the fucking prostitutes and crackheads That probably had no father they probably grew up in like a circle of poverty and drug abuse and fucking Who knows their uncle coming to accountability? That comes to accountability bro if if they really Like if they really force parents to be parents parents to be parents They dog like I come from fucked up circumstances And I'm kind of easily abandoned, you know, so I was raised by my grandparents and she could have easily abandoned me and I could have easily chosen to go left when I chose to go right because I Always knew even when we lived in the hood that I wanted better for myself, you know, I'm saying and Yes, it's up It's what do you see what are your parents? It's still in you and What do you see your parents doing? Did you know from a really young age that you were like? Destined you like wanted to do something more with your life and like yeah When I was like eight years old told my mom was gonna be like will smooth which I hate now because it's like this rock And actually I just had Chris rock I just had dinner with Chris rock like a month ago. No What was it yeah, what was that like in the comedy world like how did that rock? So that's all of everybody and stuff like I've seen Chris rock multiple times like when I used to be a door guy to comedy store before then Mm-hmm. Yeah, and this my first time being like an intimate setting like we were at this right They could so Rogan Chris Rock was an Austin performing at the Moody Center and Rogan rented a restaurant for us and Chris Rock was actually right here And Rogan was right there his writer was right here. It sound that was right there William Montgomery's right there and he has a crew of like 15 people so you're all in the Christmas Yeah, he got a big crew. Yeah, you know fucking arena act. Yeah, so I'm sitting next to Chris Rock From the time I meet him. He's not the Chris Rocking soon on stage You know I'm saying he's not this loud boasters person and he's just so small and so fragile Older guy and you know will Smith what six three six four. Yeah, it's a big guy You know you can obviously tell you still physically active Winks and dust stuff and Chris's small, you know skinny fingers and it's like I Felt so bad for it, and I'm like how could will Smith do that slap this guy and it made and I grew up a very Big fan of Fresh Prince summer summertime with him and Jackie Jeff And I'm like how could will Smith slap I would feel like such a bitch ass motherfucker Slapping someone like Chris Rock Like how did he do this right bro like will Smith you have a sketch or Yeah, sketch sketch and one of the episodes of Fresh Prince where you want to be a stand-up comedian So you get jokes this man did not The joke was not that bad right and I think he did it to a person he knew he can get away with it Definitely. I don't think he would have slapped you hard. No. Yeah, it's weird bro. It's a I wonder if Chris Rock did the same thing he Chris Rock did the right thing excuse me. He did the right thing Mm-hmm like on a setting like that the Oscars like bro like me What would you say to the first of all will Smith when it came on stage with me because like bro like But I'm you know like I was born in the hood The only one I became a teenager we lived in the suburbs, but I had like those hood like you know when I'd be on dates and shit Gressed me like why are you so paranoid? I'd be like girl. You gotta watch us around And you know so it's like I got those instincts still and I Look at body language and like if you walk in towards me, like hello what you doing bro, you know Up in the what you doing. Yeah, why you walking towards me like that? You like I said to joke about your wife Like I'm already know like this dude ain't coming up here to shake my style Yeah, push you all like what you doing bro. Yeah kick you kick you like I'm a figure like we've been tussling He walked up there kind of like he didn't walk up there very hostile looking he kind of walked up casual and then he had to turn the other way And then he just came out of it don't he crit. Yeah, but what you do walking up will Smith was coming up here Yeah, like no, I will smoke out of here. I just said it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well. We did it Jada used to date something like two-poc or something Yeah, she dated two-poc Yeah, cuz they did that movie together There's there's a letter ship back there. Can you put that up? There's a letter that willow wrote two poc saying two pop Can you come back my mom misses you? Why see if you can put that up? Willow's letter to two-poc Well, but what's the headline? Yeah, find a better home and get a drink real quick So it's like if if will Smith has to live in his image or two pop Then it can be a very fucked up. Do you think it was like he looked at Jada? She gave him that look and he was like fuck I got it. Do you think it was like a look? Absolutely. Yeah, right? Yeah, she gave Yeah, this sparkling was not just regular You want sparkle. I don't think I have any sparkle in school. I think she gave him that look Yeah, she's getting really good. Yeah Everybody who dates women know that the woman has a certain like a letter dear two-poc I know you are alive someplace. I think that my mommy really misses you Can you please come back? Can you come back so many so mommy and me can be happy? I wish you were here. I love I really do love Willow Willow. So how much does this woman talk about Tupac where you're right where you're daughter knows something like that and that's at a young age That's you can see that letter you bro You think two pucks to alive Could be his auntie down in Cuba Wasn't his mom like a black panther? His mom was a black panther and she was involved in some conspiracy where there was like they were all there was like a What did they do that they shot up a grocery store or something? I can't remember and there was like a there was a fucking so There was a guy that was in the black panthers. I Think it was a white guy I could be wrong, but he was working with wild he was working with them for years And he basically convinced them all to like plot some sort of scheme to Either rob or shoot up a grocery store or like a retail store and That guy who convinced them all to do it because they went on trial for it that guy ended up being like a CIA agent or FBI agent Yeah, I mean There's some good interviews. I can see you bro. You watch Vlad TV No, you should watch those I've seen him. It's hard to walk for other weird. There's just like Just only watch the ones where he gets like don't watch the entertainers watch the people you don't really know like he has this guy called He's a big fan of loud TV. Yeah, I can't watch it since a long time My James, you know, they're not my James interview. Yeah, that sounds really familiar. So my James just to be should make security and Yeah, two-pike basically was at the after-cool Daspian who ended up around game bangers. Yeah, she'd never have had that persona Yeah, he went to like arts dance school in New York. That's what him and Jada Yeah, yeah, there was interviews of him when he was like in high school where he was like talking about stuff and like talking Culture and he like sounded really smart and articulate. I mean you could hear it. He was different Oh for sure and then he was a backup dancer for digital underground Humpty-hum Do the honty huh are you begging to conspiracies or do you not pay attention to I like I just like different approaches to stuff So it's like let me hear your opinion on this. Mm-hmm, you know, I like different approaches to suit what's your favorite conspiracy theory The one I made me laugh Oh, yeah, favorite one that made me laugh was that COVID was made by 5G How did that one go? Yeah, tell me more I think right? Oh bro. It was black folks They're like 5G makes COVID they put in the bodies 5G towels and that's why we got COVID right now and the towers are somehow like Spring COVID So what the for what the 4G make yeah, if I do make what the 4G make Don't talk I'd be mad at my people though. I'd be like what the fuck are you saying? Like Kanye Yeah, how do you feel about Kanye right now? Kanye's wow as a person that you know You know all of us probably battle mental health issues. I can recognize a manic episode Yeah Definitely you could see the difference between some of his interviews when he's like normal I don't want to use the word normal, but it's just Regular and then it's like sometimes he's just going on go look at his Rogan interview. Yeah, then go look at his drink champion Yeah, his row interview. I really liked Actually, and I saw that clip with Rogan when he was like you got our approach Kanye like Lex did that guy likes I don't know if you guys saw that interview. I watched that one and it was like Lex in play no games No, and he was like you can't just call him Jews He's like you want to call him out. You got to call him by their full name calm by their name and they kind of you could tell he was like stumped He was like all right, but if I do it will you help me? He doesn't the problem with Kanye and I used to have a friend who's working Kanye and Kanye only likes yes man around him So it's like any stupid and I'm a big Kanye fan. I still wear shoes, you know Yeah, and that's like Any stupid idea he comes up with you have these yes man that's supported you don't have anybody to challenge you You don't have anybody to be like hey motherfucker. Yeah, what the fuck are you doing? You're about to lose your legacy He needs a real person by his side Yeah, and Everybody needs that and that's my family You know what I'm saying or the girls at that day like I date real women I date women that are so far away from entertainment Yeah, you know, I don't want you to even know who the fuck I am. Yeah You don't watch you too good. Yeah, I never understood how some some people like to have like girlfriends or wives that are in the same business Is that therein or do the same shit that therein? I'm like the complete opposite I could never stand being around somebody like myself But yeah, brother, uh, did you watch a Ari's special to you the Jew special? That shit was so fucking funny I was talking about Kanye and he was like well we are annoying Yeah, he is fucking hilarious man Whatever he comes to Tampa. I hope you up. Why are we coming? Yeah, yeah, bro. I'd love to spot guy That's my guy so you on his podcast. Yeah, yeah I was like podcast. It just released this week. Oh really? Is that where's he live? He lives in Austin too? He lives in New York. Oh in New York. I don't think I'll ever move by New York No, yeah, I don't think he will no Oh since I've been on this podcast guess what I started working with who Louis CK. Oh, yeah, I know shit What's that like? It's like going to Harvard for comedy. Yeah, just listen to him talk And then when he critiques your jokes, you should really listen. Yeah, there's a picture somewhere on my Instagram my Twitter I don't know if you want to pull it up. Yes, yeah. Yeah, oh my Instagram is a picture of me in Lucy K but bro It was dope. Yeah, I'm sorry. I mean he might come I want my own tour now, but He could possibly call me back to work. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, all the way down I think when I was on your podcast I had like 30,000 followers. I gained like 50,000 to you. That's crazy man. So cool Yeah, keep going down Show more posts from maybe this You have a you and I feel like Go with you and Chris Rock. Oh, yeah, that's what I had to know and that's my boy Tony right kill Tony Microphone That's me a frame here. You're no frame here. No, you'll see fighter You gotta be logged in Anyways, oh you gotta be logged in. Oh, it's all my it's on my Twitter. I was saying I was gonna say like you and I feel funny David Lucas you and I was talking about like that Natural like talent to be funny where you just didn't seem like you're trying that hard. I feel like Tony has that same thing Tony's a beast bro. He's just like he goes up there. He seems like he is like Like low energy. He's just like we saw him. Yeah. I was just on with the improv That was funny. It's just the way he talks and just like that were relaxed like I know that's that Shane Shane super funny type in the type in David Lucas, the Lucy K is a problem. He's coming to Tampa soon Everything really Louie no Shane. Oh, I could probably hook that up. There it is. There you go How crazy is it that he's Mexican? Yeah, really? Yeah He told me he told me his story, but I don't want to miss quoted He's a great guy. That's cool. Yeah, it's got to be amazing and working with him. Yeah, man. It's It's amazing. It was amazing. You know, we have each other's numbers. We're on a first name basis I did hella shows with him. He's critiqued my comedy. He thinks I'm a genius. I don't like what the fuck bro. How you smoked this before? Yeah I'm a little tips. Yeah Let me get with whoa That's like cocaine. They can share love. I love We have to hoard that that's community community That's it burns oh, you got to get closer to that baby Right yeah, damn you can get too legally. Oh, that's the old Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, oh, yeah, when you busted out when you're gonna fresh one first one you can smell it Before you peel the wrap that should don't make your eyes. I got leave. I have water You see the video stuff all saved lives right there, man. Oh It will oh my god But I think about long drive sometimes you're falling asleep. You take a whiff of that. You're back. You're on the road again Oh, yeah, absolutely. Yeah, it burns truckers It's like some shitty cocaine. You do some really shitty cocaine and burns really bad. It's like the same Yeah, yeah That's that power My life yeah, I was water It's got no Man weren't you so going back to your childhood you were how early was it that you started like performing doing comedy like how you I'm wearing by 1617 really in Georgia Yeah, that's really awesome talent shows at the high school so performing that porch allows us like by the age 15 16 I know either my future was in a fail or In a time really you play football too. Yeah. Yeah. What do you pull up position? Did you play? Japan's a taco. Yeah, I want to Run somebody over yeah, I'm still pretty strong Yeah You know what's crazy how I'm going to go to UCF. I wasn't really I would have went really yeah I applied to go to UCF. I didn't get in Offered it to you. I actually tried and failed football. No, no, you should play this. I wanted to go to school there They had like the best film school like one of the best film schools in the country So don't do you see a lady? Yeah, yeah, that meant you see off like the two biggest. Yeah, you should have like funk prizes for a couple of those daughter Yeah, I had the dude from the better the guy the dude who you know, ever heard of the Blair Witch Project The guy who made that he wrote me a letter recommendation even to get in there because he's like one of their most successful alumni I see they still didn't let me in yeah, but that's not that's not like You know, it wasn't Spielberg that that's not like a Blair Witch Project No, but if you look at money-wise like they made the most they were the most profitable right and it was innovative They were the first people they were like not necessarily a little V style like the the the film like the cinematography wasn't anything special right? It was all fucking the actors with shitty camera But the idea of found footage and making it the marketing behind it was the first time I remember that Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's the first movie. It was the first movie where you would go to the Theater thinking it was real shit could have been real. Yeah You didn't people didn't know it was fake. Yeah, it cost them 35 grand to make the whole thing What does that say oh it's a 249 million globally and that was years ago. It was a dad damn. That's like that's like profit What is that guy do now? Oh I think he he works for some company in Europe now He's made a bunch of like horror flicks after that. They never really hit like the Blair Witch Yeah, but they've had like multiple Blair witches were those in yeah No, so no, so what they did after the first one they sold it they sold the franchise to Lionsgate They bought it they bought like the right stuff Blair Witch and then day ended up like fucking greedy fucker. Why don't you just retire? Why are you still working? You make a lick like a two a quarter of a billion dollar lick off a 35 grand 35 grand Crazy that they were still in college when they made it. I mean, bro. We could legit Right now film a movie on our iPhone. Yeah, that's a way better quality We could film movie on our iPhone. Yes, have it. You know professionally edited Yeah, I mean are you sure she was just podcast on I saw that I saw that so I mean that's crazy, bro That's a lot of work. We would have to you know Aim it towards the titty bopters. Yeah, T-D-Bopters to high schools But we can make a lot of money What do you think of it? What do you think it is about like the whole podcast You know, it's seen by most high schools. But we can make a lot of it. What do you think it is about like the whole podcast thing blowing up that like it seems like I don't know if we talked about it before, but it seems like the whole like comedy community and the podcast and community are super in twine and like all of the like everyone in the comedy scene they all have podcasts and they all go into their podcast. How does the podcast shit help comedy? Well, I mean, bro, podcasts for a comedian is kind of like having a business card. Hmm. Hmm. People fall in love with your voice. If I love with your essence, if I love who you are, they don't they could know more. They can almost care less about your jokes. So they just want to hear you talk even if you're rambling. That's why ASMR is popular. If I love these kind of sounds, you have to. And then I mean, it's so profitable, bro. You do YouTube. You know how much? Right, bro. Yeah. No, I know, but still I'm like, I'm telling my YouTube into a six figure in your business before, uh, before it got so big though, like every it started with comedians. I feel like didn't it didn't it just start with like true comedians? Well, I mean, I guess before they made money. If anybody, I can say the podcast, King, I say it's broken and red band. You know, back when they were doing podcasts before it was even popular. Mm hmm. I'm saying, I don't feel like, what the fuck is this? But does it help you when you do podcasts, even though like you probably don't plan out podcast, you probably just kind of like talk shit, but does it help you with your comedy? And like, does it help you with your thinking process and your creative process? When you do podcasts like, oh shit, we were talking about something good. Maybe, you know, something we talked about during that podcast, I can expand on that. I mean, comedians could just talk. Yeah. We could talk. What you do. We could talk for a long time. So, uh, I mean, you're, you know, a new fan is a new fan. One new person who can buy a merger by tickets. I love you. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? You, I might reach, you know, every podcast is a new audience, especially, especially if you want to podcast, it's not a comedy podcast. Yeah. Because now I get to see real life people who might not watch comedy. Right. And not. Like, oh, I got to go see this guy at a comedy show. Right. So, uh, yeah, I love doing podcasts. You know, I like to talk. And I definitely like podcast one. It's not comedians because I don't want to be funny. Okay. I got to, I got to match so fucking funny. You know, I don't want to do this. Yeah. So, uh, yes, funny. I really liked your podcast with Duncan. That was funny as shit. Yeah. We found that a while ago. Yeah. I listened to it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We found that it was good. He's an interesting dude. He's an interesting motherfucker. Duncan's out. It was fucking my girl. He was talking about, he got contacted by like DARPA for doing some, some fucking conspiracy podcast. He said after he did a podcast with Joe talking about conspiracy theories. Whatever DARPA is like, I forget what it stands for, but they're like, basically the CIA. Like the defense. Look up what DARPA means. I can't remember it, but I don't remember. He's a, he's a Buddhist too, right? I think it's a, it advanced research projects. Changes. Yeah. They, they reached out to him after he did a podcast talking about conspiracy theories. You talked, I thought you talked about that in your podcast, maybe. He said it like briefly. But I was saying that podcast was so. Yeah. Yeah. I've had so much other information come my head. And then I remember it, but it was so long ago. That was like, yeah. That was before your podcast. Yeah. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. I think so. Yeah. When did you become Buddhist? Oh, that's more of a mindset, bro. It's just like, you know, if you think about the future, you're anxious. If you think about the paths, you're depressed. So it's like living the now, I got Buddha pattern on my hand. Turn around me. Like just to live in the now, you know what I'm saying? So for me, it's more of a mindset, spirituality. I treat you how I want to be treated. And just have respect for all living things. What got you interested in it? How did you discover it? Um, so there was a point in my life where I was not sure about spirituality and not sure about what was what. And you know, like I feel like I look at God every time I look in a mirror, I feel like I'm an expression of God. And Buddhism just kind of align with my values at that time of my life. You know what I'm saying? So it's like, I like this. And it's like, okay, it's metaphor. It's metaphorically speaking. Like when Buddha was born everywhere, he stepped low to flowers, blowing. And it's like, okay, do I believe that kind of like, you know, Jesus stuff. You know, so it's like, it aligned with me. Yeah, Buddha is, I think Buddhism is the one religion where they actually don't believe in like a deity or a God, which I think is interesting. I mean, where I feel like our religions are saying, like it's based on morality. It's based on faith. And you know, a lot of people, you know, collecting some of myself Republican, I can say whatever they're going to be. Like, who are your Republican, conservative? Well, you don't believe in Jesus. It's like I do believe in Jesus. I respect the story. You know what I'm saying? A lot of, a lot of religious deities have the same story. You know, there's Krishna. It's like 65 different versions of Jesus. Krishna, sir, I was very, I'm a girl. You know, if you do do research and it's like, can we discredit all those? How can we discredit anybody who's living off of the same thing you're living off of? Which is faith. Yeah. So it's like, I can't down this man because he believes on what he believes in. Yeah, as long as he's not trying to push it on other people. That's my whole thing. I'm not trying to convert you. Right. You know, it's not like Scientology. I believe in God. I believe in Jesus. I believe in my homies. I believe in all of it. So it's like that's just my level. The weird thing about the like part of Ari especially talks about like Judaism, Jews, they only believe in one version of the story, like the original version of the Bible. Yeah. But there's like 65 different versions of Christianity like Southern Baptist Baptist fucking. Episcopal. Yeah. There's so many different fucking weird versions of it. Yeah. Yeah. I try not to think too much of that. I just try to stay funny. Yeah. Think about being funny and not really wrap my mind in that too much because we don't know. We just don't know. And how I feel about it is one mountaintop. How did you get there? You're a choice. You made shows a heart of where you might choose easier way. But we all gonna get there. Yeah. Have you ever heard of, I was this podcast, I was listening to you too. I've talked about it before, but there's this thing called like the IDG podcast. It's like the super not super, but pretty like right wing podcast where this girl, I think she's a comedian, but she also does fitness and she was talking about horseshoe theory with Baptists and she compares Baptists to bootlegers. So you know how like in some some towns where you can't serve alcohol, you can't sell alcohol on Sundays in Texas. There's towns in Texas that you can't serve alcohol. Okay. You can't buy a horror leaper on Sunday in Texas. Connecticut was like that too. You really? You can buy like beer and wine, which came in. In all of Texas? Well, in Austin, it might be all. Wow, I didn't fucking know that. I remember moving to Connecticut and I went to buy a beer on like a Sunday or liquor or something. They were like, you can't buy it today. And I was like, what? That's coming from Florida. Crazy. Goodbye until 3 a.m. I was important in brewing like I'm in relationship to liquor stores now like at nine. I'm like, bitch crack is legal here. How the fuck can you sell me? I can't. So fucking bottle of tequila. That's insane. Yeah, but that's weird. That is still still a thing though. Like, and she was anyways, back to what I was talking about, the horseshoe theory. If you look at the Baptists and the bootlegger, like the idea of horseshoe theory is that there's two ends of a continuum like too far like left and right wing like the farthest version of left compared to the farthest version of right. And instead of it being just like a continuum that goes forever, it's more of like a horseshoe that bends and the two extremes are closer together like a horseshoe is. And she compared a Baptist to a bootlegger like what does alcohol being banned on Sunday? How does that benefit a bootlegger? Because you can't buy it on Sunday so they can stock up on all the booze and they can sell it for a profit on Sunday. Yeah, I know people in Texas who sell alcohol really marked up on Sunday. And then she goes, so now look at a Baptist. They don't want alcohol to be sold on Sundays for moral reasons for religious reasons. So she compares, she goes, now look at extreme leftists and the KKK. What do they both want? They both want segregation because she was comparing, there was like a school in Colorado. It's a great bro. You got to find, look up like the, if you just type in horseshoe theory, IDG podcast, she explains it great. There's a school in Colorado who had play nights on their playground. It was children of color only play night. See, that's and it's segregation. And they were like, and they interviewed the elementary school about it. Like why did you guys do this? We're like, we wanted to be inclusive to you know, the families of color. And we wanted to know white children to be there because we wanted it to be like the parents of color so they could interact better and be more open with each other. That some shit they just did. And I was reading the article about some college where can I give a note? Yeah, yeah. Where they're doing like the premier, the new Black Panther. Like no white kids were invited. What the fuck? Yeah, it's a weird idea, right? It's like I can see what they're trying to do. But it don't really make sense at all at all. Yeah, Texas. But you heard what I was saying about that college where they like had the premier Black Panther and they didn't want any white kids there? No, stupid shit. I never heard about that. What college was that? I'm probably some college with not a lot of money. But it's like brother like once more, fucking understand that we all humans. That's it. Can you find a skeletal remain and know if they were Black or white? A skeleton? I mean, not the kind of skeletal remain and know if they were Black or white or Mexican outside of size. Yeah, I don't think so. Probably not. So I'm saying that. Don't fucking Yeah, I'm going to find this video. It's fucking it's worth it. The fuck do it matter for? I look at you as a human. Yeah. I didn't let it day. Like racism came for racism came from. You two fucking like shadow banditers. I'm because I can't fucking find it. Riley. But racism came from a competition of resources. Yeah, just some sort of position of power over somebody. You ever seen a Pacalotto? Yeah. I saw that in a movie theater when I was a kid, right? Well, I'll never forget that. That movie was, I remember watching that movie in the movie theater. I didn't know what it was about even. I went with this girl. It was crazy. What a what a meaning deep meaningful movie issue. People of their same color came and did their shit to them. Yeah. That dude's fucking. Is your biggest enemy really somebody with a different skin complexion? I don't think so. Yeah. Especially in the black community. Who's likely? And it's just like statistically who's likely to injure existence as a black person? Another black person who's likely to rob you who's likely to steal from like and that's why I just don't get caught up in that shit. Yeah. Find just Google. Uh, sorry, I'm like on a different wavelength right now. Google that, uh, school in Colorado. Maybe with sick school in Colorado that had like, uh, play night for children of color only. Bro, I remember hearing this. I wouldn't even take my door today and I hate Colorado. You hate Colorado? I was a two bro. Oh, yeah. I'm getting fucks me out. I got altitude sickness. Me too, bro. Really? What about the people that did take your kids or that night? What like, what type of people are? Look at that. Are they Denver Elementary School Space and Backlash for planning a family's of color playground? Read the fucking sign. How crazy you put that. These are the, these are the same. What guy put those letters up there on their side. These are the, these are the same people that would take their kids to a drag branch. A drag branch. You didn't see that? I remember that. Yeah. Yeah. He knows. Yeah. He got a drag branch. They brought like drag queens to the school for the kids or some shit. Oh, my God. Yeah. That's fucking insane. I would not show up to fucking school with that man. My daughter loves all people of color. Both of my daughters people of all colors. Where are you got your daughters? L.A. Yeah. Activist pimps, mom's blast school board for promoting family friendly Halloween dress. Yeah, bro. I think that I just think the pendulum's going to swing on this wacky shit, man. I think it's just going to swing back and kind of get normal. You saw that fucking non-binary person that works for Biden. Yes. Still in case my God, bro. That was so fucking, that person is a very weird looking person. That's all for the first said it was an accident. Then he was on. Then did it again. Yeah. Yeah. Then did it again. So they're just firing. There is, firing people because they're like non-binary or because they were dressed. His fucking, the black lady, the, the Haitian that works for him is what it lays me in. I, is she? I don't know. And she is. She gets ate up at the White House chorus, mom. I saw this old clip of Joe Biden when he was a lot younger in politics too, like totally against gay marriage. Oh, yeah. He changed up his whole team. He switched like totally switched. He said some fucked up shit about the war on drugs too. He said some fucked up shit about black people's like totally. Right. Well, his daughter's about black guys. Yeah. Maybe it was in front of Congress, but he like full on said the n word in front of Congress, like decades ago. They just change it up, bro. Well, it's changed. They were, but they don't change the essence. No. Yeah. It's all for the money. Yeah. It's it. Yeah. Whatever the flavor of the fucking year is, they just go along with it. If we do it right in America, we real like Trump in 2024. You think that's the right thing to do? Really? And then elect the Santos, 2020. You really think it'll be good if they like Trump again? Really? Why? Because bro, he ain't, you don't think he's kind of fucking, he don't go fuck about either side. He really doesn't. He really does. Yeah. Yeah. He'll shake shit out. He'll at the least he shakes it up. Yeah. He makes you figure shit out. Elise is different. How much you got going on now? How much unity was there in the trans president? Unity was better than right now. I feel the reward had vision under the other side. But you had two strong sides. Now it just seems like, yeah, Trump, nobody even respects. And there might have been more unity like you had with the right and the left might have each been unified together, but there was definitely now you just got you just got a pawn dirty pawn to nothing. Now everybody hates Biden. Yeah. I mean, nobody nobody defends Biden. Back on Trump's president. You don't have anti Trump's in Trump's right exactly right. I'm cool with that. You don't like money, you know. Yeah. How much is gas around this way? Four. How much was it two years ago? 250? Yeah. Two in change. Okay. Has, has, has your wages increased that much? No. I'll just be wondering. Plus the media, bro, the media was making so much money when Trump was president. There was kids that do not kids, but there was people like on YouTube independent journalists that were making their whole career off just talking shit about Trump. Like they were doing more numbers, more revenue than ever before because of Trump because he was just feeding them all that meat. This is a beast. Yeah. It is pretty wild. I go see a Trump one man show. Yeah. Yeah. 1200 and take it. Give it to me. All right. I've ever been to one of his rallies. No, uh, haven't been that extreme yet. I should all bro, Trump meets me. He'll put you on TV. Oh, yeah. 100%. I'd be the biggest black. Yes. You probably asked. Wow. You would. All I gotta do is go and make Trump drugs. Yeah. Bro, I'd be the biggest black comedian in the world. If once, once the Republican party gets a hold of me and find out they try and out that I look like this. And I'm a black Republican. Yeah. Oh, bro, I'm a millionaire. You know how Trump always got to be able to link you with just saying to someone for sure. Florida is where Wilk comes to die. Bro, I saw De Santo at a hockey game at the Tampa Lightning game. Yeah. Oh, yeah. We were in the sweet right next door. He was like, so with the biggest sweet was next door to us. He fucking walked in, bro. The ladies, the moms, like the fucking cougars that were in our sweet were climbing over the fucking window to get into meat De Santas. Dude, it's a man. People were fucking, there was like more of a fucking crowd than I could imagine Justin fucking Bieber would have. Like people clawing to get to him and get pictures with him. There was like, there was a line of fucking like 40 year old women going out the door and around the corner trying to get pictures with him. It was insane. And he's a governor. Like, it was like he was like a huge celebrity, bro. It was crazy. I would never have imagined that a fucking Florida governor would be like such a celebrity. Who's not going to before? Fuck in. What's his name? Was that where you're looking guys? Rick Scott. Super farm. He looked like Baltimore from Harry Potter. He was, yeah, he was basically a big show. He was got them in Florida was Rick Scott. He was what? The pill epidemic. The pain pills. Rick Scott took money from our campaign. Yeah. He took money. He was the reason Florida was pill epidemic. Central. Yeah. He took money from like big pharma. He took money from his company had the single biggest fine in history as pharmaceutical companies. Roast this guy, bro. Look at this guy. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that. Look at that. Yeah. He looks like a day walker. Straight up. Yeah. I'm a little too fake. He looks like someone you look at that. Look at them smiling. No, to the right of that right there. Yeah. It looks like someone I would not trust. I gotta go to your sober. So I can perform. I know we killed half the bottle. Yeah. I gotta get right. What time you perform? Seven where a Tampa improv? No, I'm a size. size. But it is. Yeah. He treats me well. I don't know, man. I don't know about the whole Trump thing. You doing one show or what? Seven and 10. I think so. Yeah. Hey, bro. I'm sober up. All right. Salt. Salt, which you mean? Back I had like Rick Flayer, baby. Oh. No, bro. The Santa's is that guy. I'm going to get me a place on Florida. Are you? Yeah. South. South in here. Like where? Like Miami for a lot or no? Yeah. That's all right. This guy will kind of. It's so much more expensive over there. It's crazy. You know, it's weird about here. Like different than here. Yeah. Miami's like a different fucking country. It's not. It's like, that's my, that's my breathing room. Yeah. It's a, I don't know. But it is a, it is a spot. To me, like Miami's like Vegas, the best two days that day you get there in the day you leave. I can't fucking stand me in Miami. That's South Beach, bro. Yeah. South Beach and like, brick-owned shit. That shit is like so fucking busy, fast-paced it is insanely packed with people, bro. It's insane. Yeah. I like South. But it's nice. Beautiful. Yeah. How often do you, if your kids living in LA, how often do you get to see your kids? Everyday on FaceTime. Everyday on FaceTime. But I got a light sign so much. Oh, really? Yeah. I still go with your baby mama. Yeah. A tight weather. Yeah. You just do what you're supposed to do. Yeah. I'll be there Monday actually. Cool. Hmm. I got there Monday. Friday Monday. See my babies? I know I had the youngest Whitney from Monday until January 5th. Nice. Dude, hot. That's cool. Yeah. That's dope. What do they think about everything you're doing? My year old loves it. I remember one day I went from school two months ago. I flew in the LA picked up from school. And she was like, Dad, one of my friends was sad. So I told him that him and his whole family could have tickets to your next show. I was like, babe, just melt your heart, right? No, it cost me some money. What burn all of my wallet, man. I like hell. No, that's cool. They recognize them though, man. They think like that is super cool. Yeah. It's rare. That's rare that I meet people. How old are you? I'm about to be 33. I'm 38. Yeah. I'm 35. And it's so rare that I meet people that are my age that have kids. I feel like you like kids. Yeah, I got two kids. I'm in. Oh, two, three and three months. Three and got, yeah. Once three years old, once three months old. Three months old will be kind. And the suit. Now brother, three months old is the best. The first kid was like up every three hours during the night for the first year and a half. This baby only wakes up once during the night. My wife just takes care of him. I didn't have to do shit for the new baby. That's it. Yeah, it's great. Yeah, I just deal with the toddler. It's like man on man defense. I just take the toddler and my wife takes the baby. The two year old was a beast. My year old was pretty simple. Both girls, right? Yeah. Yeah, I haven't had any girls. I feel like girls are, everyone says that girls are better because when you get old, the girls will take care of the dad. The guys will just take to start chasing pussy and they'll talk about that. Yeah, they're pushing a nurse on bro. Yeah, the girls won. My year old will take, right? You know, I know she'll take care of me for the family. Yeah, she's a real dad. He's girl. Yeah. That's dope. Two girls. You're lucky. You got girls. She kind of independent. I don't know. Should go fuck about me. Is it in it weird how they're so fucking different? Like right out of the oven. Yeah. This is like baked in. It's crazy. It's two different tolding personalities. So weird. And they're probably raised the same, right? They've grew up together. I don't know how it happens. Yeah, kids at weird. They like totally different shit. My two year old loves cheese at your old hates cheese. So weird bro. She like popcorn. My year old fuck with it. Did they watch your stand up? She watched some of my videos. That's you. What did she think? But did she like, she gets him right year old. She'll probably just then know community. You think? Yeah. She gets him so crazy. So she was like, five. So cool. Yeah. I don't know how. What? She just, she got that fucking little jeans. You got that funny jeans. She knows how to structure jokes right now. Like she tells me jokes all the time. All the time. Really? Yeah. That's so cool. All the fucking time. That's so cool. It takes me jokes. All right. Yeah. Funny. And then your roaster. Not really well. You don't rush your daughter. When you do like when you do any given show, how much of it ends up being just crowd work, like roasting people in the crowd. And then like, how much of it is like, how much how often does your set, your normal set, like go off the rails, you just start fucking with the crowd. So out of an hour, I'm probably doing like a 15, 20 minutes of crowd but you got to be careful crowd workers that can quickly go far left. What do you mean? Like people just get crazy. So I shot one shit out. So you got it. Really? Yeah. You ever had anyone like try to get violent? I'm a big dude. Yeah. Johnny Mitchell's a big dude too. He had a guy like pull him right off the fucking stage. He's kind of a skinny guy. Yeah. He's kind of a skinny. Yeah. He's terrified of that. Yeah. He told the guy, he's like, he's like, you've been fucking every whole having you guy didn't do anything. It's like, oh, you were you were a snitch. Then the guy jumped on stage and fucking grabbed it. I clipped one of the I don't know. Yeah. I had like 5 million views or something crazy like that. We'll see. You know, Johnny Mitchell's dope. It's been my boy for a long time. But yeah, that's it. Yeah. I would have picked that. The other thing I wanted to ask you, you mentioned it briefly last time you were on the podcast, but we didn't get to talk about it that much. What's that? You mentioned that your grandfather was Frank Lucas. Like great uncle. Oh, your great uncle was Frank. Yeah. Yeah. That's fucking crazy. So how did you first learn about that? Your mom just tell you that one day or like no, so Frank, my dad's from Cuba, Frank, Frank Lucas's brother adopted my daddy. So that's how he became. I mean, I frankly look at that. Frank Lucas brother. I'm a little drunk. Frank Lucas's brother adopted your dad. Okay. Oh shit. Yeah. Yeah. That's how I got the Lucas last night. Oh, that's fucking wild. I made him I made a Frank like two times. He died in the 2019 tungo to the funeral. I made him in Virginia. I'm still in touch with all my kid or feel my current. What did you dad say about growing up with him? I live my dad in your dad group with his brother. I live my dad not really. No, no, I'm going to talk about it too much. But I have a cousin. I will be shut out to Obi Lucas out in the California Hill call me like once every three months. He's an older guy. And see my cousin, I feel like 60s. Hill call me every few months. He but like David, daddy's nigga's Frank Lucas are people. I don't know. Frank. Mr. Malade. You know, he's probably telling a wild story. He don't know. They're like, no fucking way. He like, I'm gonna call somebody every every few months. How get a call from him. Like, David, tell these nigga's Frank Lucas are people. Yeah, yeah, that's how you know. There was a really extravagant background story to that. And he just needed that one confirmation to legitimate people don't speak before. Yeah. Yeah. I bought a column right now. Hold on. Yeah, watch. Oh man. That's great, bro. That's a cool tie though. So how long until that how long until the comedy club in Austin is ready? And you guys are like performing in there. So I think the data completion is mid March. And you know, training and everything. I wish I had a shows up in running March. I mean, how long? Damn, I'm drunk. Fuck. How much did it really kill half the bottle, bro? I guess that's a lot. That's a strong. Yeah, strong. And I have a H.C. buzzing. I had a H.C. buzzing. So completion should be mid February. Okay. And then we should have shows probably and it's called the mothership. We got to go. It's sick, bro. Come on out. Yeah, we got to go. There's a strip club in Tampa called 2001 and they have a flying saucer on top of it. And the flying saucer is like, what is it? Private room. The private rooms. Private lapped. Has a UFO in a room. It's off. It's a nice show club. Yeah. Yeah. It's one of the Tampa got some of the best. Tampa's like, hey, strip club. It's like strip club. The top of the world. Oh, yeah. Over Houston. I've been there by seeing videos. It looked, it looked different. Different. I don't know. I don't know. I'm in a row. Different women. I'm actually a absolutely strip club at Atlanta. I've never been to Magic City, but I've been to a really, I went to one really nice strip club in Atlanta. Shit was like a shopping mall. Tampa got a lot of white I have a new strip club in Atlanta. Magic City. I never been to Magic City, but I've been to a really, I went to one really nice strip club in Atlanta. Shit was like a shopping mall. Tampa got a lot of, Tampa got a lot of white and Spanish women. Okay. That's a lot of black. There's a lot of black. There's a food that Magic City is. Yeah. Is it good? Can you pull up a picture of Magic City wings? Does it good? They named him after a basketball player because remember he got to find the blue Williams. Oh, blue Williams. No, shit. Yeah. Because he got like $100 dollar fine to go get these wings. Yeah. So go get your chicken wings. Yeah. Oh, how funny is that? A couple years ago. Slap. Look at them. This. We got to say, oh, fuck that looks good. Oh, yeah. Hey, there's somebody eat around him. I'm hungry. That's my. Yeah, we can go right next to our. Yeah. Let's get this. I need some. The world. Brother's a strip club. What's it called? The penthouse club in Tampa. They got fire stakes. Good. They got good food, man. Really good food. I recommend the penthouse club or a I've never been inside of 2000 ones, but I heard the fucking flying saucer. There's no food there. I don't want to take two. That's the penthouse club. They got fire. Look, go scroll down. Look at their stakes. That state does the whole name. Don at prime. I want to care about the hose. I'd be in there. Bro's weird. Some of the at the penthouse club in like the dollhouse. Some of the like the bar girl, the girls that serve the drinks, the waitresses, they're like way finer than the strippers. Yeah. Yeah. They don't have daddy issues. Right. They're just in it for the money. I want to be half way naked. Yeah. They're probably still make the same amount of money. Sometimes more. You think they make more? Sometimes for how crazy is it that at the strip clubs in Tampa, these girls travel from like the East Coast to fucking work there. Those girls be like, I live in Orlando. I live in Fuck, Coco Beach. They drive two or three hours just to go strip at the store. If you can come make six out of grand a weekend, why not? Yeah. Let's just go just to show you how fucking content is for sure. They probably make him more. Yeah. They got Tom Brady over here now. Yeah. And you can actually control your income. Like who's going to say who say you counted all those ones? Yeah. You don't have to pay tax on all of it. Right. And from what I found out girls paid a dance at clubs. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. To dance. Yeah. They give like a percentage of their money, right? Well, they pay to dance for the night and then keep usually keep what they get. Splitted with the D's. I thought they just had to like do a revenue share. I don't know. I know over here, like locally that they pay to dance. Yeah. Most of the clubs that they pay to dance. Yeah. Joe, when Joe Redner was on here, I think he said that. Yeah. You go. You pay. You might pay a couple hundred bucks or 150 bucks a dance for the night and keep what you gave break off the DJ. The bartender. Fuck. That's why the door guy, whatever. All right. Let's look at some food, bro. Thanks for coming on, man. Of course. Shut out. Everybody where they can find more of your shit online. And David Lucas, comedy.com got the sort of coming up in 2023, baby. David Lucas, funny on this. You know, I don't know who it is. Your boy. Oh, yeah. Merry Christmas. Happy Hanukkah. Merry Christmas. Good night world. Happy Kwanza.