Hello world. Welcome to number 59 of the concrete podcast. Today's guest is a former US Navy senior chief, SEAL team operator and decorated war hero, Kristen Beck. Kristen proudly served in the United States as a Navy SEAL for over 20 years, serving on three different SEAL teams, including the United States Special Counterterrorism Unit, also known as SEAL Team 6. She was deployed 13 times, serving in Bosnia, Afghanistan and Iraq, including seven combat deployments, earning more than 50 ribbons and medals, including the Bronze Star with Valor and the Purple Heart. Following retirement from military service in 2011, senior chief Beck continued high-level clearance work at the Pentagon, working for the Secretary of Defense. While an active duty, Kristen respectfully remains silent regarding her gender identity, following the US military's don't ask, don't tell policy during her service. But since retirement has announced her decision to live openly and authentically as possible, releasing her memoir, titled Warrior Princess, and starring in CNN's documentary film Lady Valor, where she recounts becoming totally detached from fear due to living through the constant rocket and mortar strikes in Afghanistan and sometimes being more than willing to risk her own life to end the problems of having to face her gender identity issues. In this podcast, Kristen shares her lessons from getting through basic underwater demolition SEAL training at the top of her class to dealing with failure on the battlefield, specifically during a raid on Saddam Hussein's palace, and she specifically describes the courage it took to publicly display her true identity at the risk of not only losing the respect of her peers, but having to face a grueling amount of bigotry and hatred as a result. I really hope you enjoyed this podcast as much as I did. Please enjoy this conversation with Kristen Beck. So what's up? How have you been doing? It's so nice to finally be able to talk to you. Yeah, we've been trying to set this up after a while. Yeah, I've been wanting to get you on here for so long. I've been following you. It looks like you finally put a you've been building a new house. Is that what you've been doing? Well, I wasn't building a house. It was a I bought a new house and a garage basically had just raw two by fours. No installation. And there's no freaking electrical outlet in the whole garage. And so I wired a sub panel. I insulated old garage. I added like 10 outlets out of out countertop high so I can plug in hand tools and stuff. And then I drywalled it, painted it, and now it's all ready to rock and roll. So that's the way you know it's extraction. So for the people out there who may not be familiar with your story, could you give me like a brief synopsis of your background? Yeah, I mean, a real quick synopsis. I grew up on a farm, you know, doing horses and cattle and pigs. I was a football player, played rugby, played lacrosse. I did a lot of that stuff and I was pretty good at it. I graduated from high school. I went to Virginia military Institute. And then after I left college with a Bachelor of Science and political science, Bachelor of Arts and Political Science. I'm sorry. But then I didn't know what I wanted to do throughout my life. And right at that time period, Desert Shield and Desert Storm kind of Beric open. So it was 1990. And immediately when I saw that war starting, I said as an American, as a citizen, I'm going to join a military. And that's what I did. And I joined with a specific intent to be a Navy SEAL. So immediately after boot camp, I pretty much went to Navy SEAL training buds. And I graduated buds at the top of my class. I had my pick of SEAL team. And I picked SEAL team one. I was at SEAL team one for nine years. And then I went on to a couple of SEAL teams after that. And after 20 years of SEALs, I retired. And I was working for the government at Pentagon. And I was retired. I had retirement. And so I was kind of letting my hair grow a little longer than a buzzcut that you have normally for military. And then I started kind of looking back on life. And I found that I defended liberty. And I defended the pursuit of happiness. And I had neither. So I wasn't happy. And I just was not fulfilling what I would say would be, you know, my personal liberty, the individual liberty that we have in America, I think is our greatest asset. The fact that you can live your life, you know, as fully as you want. And you're not harming anybody else, you know, doing anything that affects anyone else, you know, in a negative way, you just want to live your own personal liberty. And so that's what I said I want to do. And at that point I said, hey, I'm transgender. And I've been hiding this in a afraid my entire life. And starting that day, I started living as Kristin. And I said, the heck was that I'm not going to put up with with my living and hiding and and being afraid all the time. And I defended liberty. So don't I have a chance to live some of myself. And that's what I I finally can't be conclusion. And I think every American should have the same opportunity to live the fullest life they can without fear, you know, without ridicule, you know, without being, you know, prejudiced or bigotry and and everything else that comes with the territory of being a minority or being someone who is, you know, disenfranchised from the system. And when I talk about the system, I talk about it's a system that's been set up around the world for eons and asked to do with class and the cast structure. And that cast structure is kind of what has affected us badly in so many ways because it's so hard to break. You know, if you're born in a lower class, you're born into a lower caste, it's so so difficult to to get a foot up in order to raise beyond, you know, your birthplace. And I was born into a lower middle class, you know, blue collar. We worked our lives. My family came from Sweden during a potato famines and everything else that were going on in Europe. So we were running away from famine and pestilence and and all of that. And came to America to try to to try to live a better life. And so for generations my family, we've never really gone past, you know, very much passed that, you know, lower middle class, blue collar existence. We just have an opportunity to raise above that. We're just not not that we're giving opportunity. There are opportunities out there. But it's very, very difficult to get above that. And the only way you can get above that class or caste system is through education and opportunity. And America offers great opportunity. Education, it's difficult. You know, you need money to get that education. You need money to go to Harvard. You need to open thought to go to Harvard. I wanted to go to Harvard, but I just never had the opportunity. It wasn't it wasn't available to me because of money. Or because of the high schools, I went to it. Didn't have the grades. I didn't have the drive. I didn't have the instructors from grade school through a high school. If you don't have that, you know, seize the day professor. And I love that that movie, you know, carpet, damn and all that. What was that movie called with Robin Williams, wasn't it? Seize the day. You know, go. It was like, yeah, I can't remember. Dead boats, dead boats, society. Oh, okay. Okay. Yeah. And I love that movie because it just shows the impact of one professor, of one instructor. And if you don't have that throughout your life, you know, you're missing and mentorship, you need a mentor. And a lot of people do not ever have a mentor or an instructor that motivates on beyond just two plus two is four, you know, two plus eight. No, it's five. Now I'm just, but I just, I mean, I'm not saying that I never had the opportunities. I've had great opportunities. But I do think if I would have had one of those professors, maybe in grade school, to just push me a little bit further to really understand what it's like to really buckle down and do the studies and then go a little bit beyond and get those grade point averages and get it up and figure out where you're at. And then you would have a better opportunity to attend a better college, you know, when you're, you know, at a college age. I just think that those opportunities aren't offered to a lot of people. You know, that makes it very few. Does that make any sense? Oh, totally. Totally. Chocked a lot about all kinds of different stuff. So no, I think it's, I think it's so fascinating. All the things that you've been able to accomplish in your life, hey, just being able to get through buds training, which is like one of the hardest things a human could possibly get through. The closest way I can relate to it is listening to, I listened to uh, David, David Goggins book about it, which was the actual meaning of his brutal details of trying to survive buds and failing so many times. Like so yeah. So when I first listened to David Goggins book, that was the first time I'd ever even learned anything about the details of what buds is like. And listening to that was like being shot up with pure adrenaline, just listening to what he had to deal with. And the fact that you got through that training on your first attempt, is that right? Yes. Can you describe to me with that? Can you paint a picture for me and for the audience of what that was like and how grueling that was for you to get through it? And not only that, but what was like the deep down burning desire for you to get through that training initially? Well, let me first cover that I made it through the first time. And I would, I will not say that's a feed. It's a great thing. It's like whatever that, because the thing is getting through buds your first time, second time, third time, however many times it takes you, it's a matter of luck. It's a matter of timing. It's a matter of where you are in your life. Because you figure that you're going through something that's six months long. Every day is a workout. Every day is a mental challenge. Every day is is you being just exhausted and just made it to the next day. Now, if you're on an officer course and somebody officer course, obstacles are up 50 60 feet high. If you do anything to slide this mistake when you're 60 feet off the ground and you fall, you're not going to make through buds. If you're on an obstacle, even if it's 10 or 15 feet tall, 10 or 15 foot fall could potentially break a leg and arm. It could kill you if you falling, you know, fall badly. Do you know what I'm saying? Yeah, so every day in buds, you're flipping a coin out of lucky. You're flipping a coin, you know, where is my mental preparation, where's all that? So that's the thing is for people who try to go through buds and they try to one time and they fail for whatever reason. You know, I'm just like, dude, you just had a bad day. You got unlucky. You fell off that. You got hurt here. You got that. Something happened. So, but if then a mental challenge comes into the mentality of just perseverance and never quitting. So they made it. They missed it the first time. They should have gone the second time. They probably would have made it in a great seal. They didn't try again. So there's where they failed. So I would say that you just didn't persist enough. You didn't keep going. You didn't drive hard. If you didn't do that. So there's a lot of equations that you could say and you could make stuff up. You could say this or that or that and none of it's true. It's all made up. It's all equations that who's best prepared to make it through buds. I don't know. There's they would have never thought I would have made it through because I was like a mediocre athlete and high school in college. It wasn't great. I was fast. I was I would run, you know, 15 miles and do well because I was just gutted out. I had that drive that just would never ever stop. I'd run with a brick and leg. Goggins talks about that constantly that he's running with so huge, you know, blisters on his feet that he's bleeding through his sneakers. You know, what kind of mental attitude do you have to run a 50 mile course in your feet or bleeding? That's David Goggins. That's almost every seal I've ever met. But it's not something you have normally or is it something that everyone has? Because when you think about it, we are animals. We're part of the animal kingdom just really high up on the totem pole. Not the top because I think sharks are pretty high when it comes to water. If you're a big bear, gurus, it's pretty high up on the totem pole for land creatures. And the dinosaurs, they are freaking badass. But they're gone. Why are the dinosaurs gone? Those things were badass. They'd crush anything on earth. T-Rex, come on man. How come we don't have T-Rex is anymore. Those things were tough. And that's the top of the food chain. Now if we think we're on the top of the food chain, we're killing ourselves. We're, we don't know what we're talking about. So I don't know, man, what makes it make somebody get through bugs the first time, second time, third time. But I do know that I think we all have the capability to really dig into that primitive state that we have in human beings. And it goes into that Amagavi land god, the crocodile brain. Yeah. It's on happy Gilmore to make fun of it. The crocodile, why is it so angry? I do love Logata. Yeah, that's it, man. That's it. So, you know, but, but the thing is, is if you can tap into the crocodile brain, the obduer, oblogata, if you can tap into that type of survival on the real instinct we have is human beings, then you're into something. That's how you make this a seal. You're not relying on the higher learning that I'm going to run for 20 miles and a feet are going to bleed out. If you're thinking about your higher learning, your high on metric capacity, you're not going to make it. Because then you're going to start over thinking that, you know, I'm going to pot your hurt myself. I'm going to hurt myself badly. And I'm going to have this injury for rest of my life. Oh, man, make your alligator brain talk. Yeah. My alligator brain is telling me, keep going. Wow. So that's I don't just know equation. Who knows who makes it through I don't know. You're going to have the guy who's the freaking person. They call a nerd. His entire life. He's amazing. I'm computers and nobody ever saw him running my own this entire life. And that guy ends up being a top guy. And you know that women have been able to go to buds since 2015, the doors have been open. And I think there's only been one woman who has gotten through it to a certain point where she passed some of the entrance qualifications. Because that's the thing about buds is there's not going to be a change if you're black or white, if you're Asian, if you're Latino, because it's not going to be a change if you mail a female. This is the test. This is a qualification. If you pass that call right on, man, doors open. Come on. If you pass that call on your female, come on. Let's do it. Now, if you make it after you get through that door, that's all up to you. And it's a lot tougher than the entrance exam. And it's about pull ups too. The end of the bill is to do 30 pull ups when you got like 50 pounds and a rucksack on your back. So put it back back down with 50 pounds and then go do 30 pull ups. That's a test. If you can't pass that test, you're never going to be a seal. And you know why? It's not because we're saying that you have to do pull ups. You have to be this strong. We don't want Arnold's horse nigger. We don't want the toughest guy in the world. But to do 30 pull ups with 50 pounds, that means you can climb a caving ladder, which is a ladder about this wide and it's got metal rungs and metal rungs are like pencils. But you got to be able to climb up that thing 50 feet. You got to shift in a middle of the ocean on six foot waves, carry in 50 pounds. So can you get up 50 feet on a ladder made of pencils that's this wide in six foot seas with a boat slamming around and a climate of a ship? And once you get up there, you got to be in top physical condition because once you get up there, the battle starts. So the test is 30 pull ups with 50 pound backpack on your back. If you can't do that, mail a female black or white Latino Asian, you know, European, you're like me, you're a sweet, your middle name is Thor. My middle name is Thor. So if no matter who you are, what your name is, whatever you got, how much you weigh, how tall you are, it doesn't matter. Can you do 30 pull up with 50 pound back? I got. If you can't, don't even try. Don't, you're not going to be a seal. That's the test. And that's why it doesn't matter. So if you have someone out there who's a female who passes that first entrance, she's got to be able to do those pull ups. If she can't do those pull ups, she'll never be a seal. It's because that's the mission. It's not because we're trying to discriminate. It's not because we're trying to do mail, gender conforming, testing that only a man can do because they can do pull ups because we have better upper body strikes. So there's more upper body strength. Yeah, it helps. And there's a lot of women out there who can do a ton of pull ups. But how many of them want to be a seal? So the numbers are going to probably always be really low. And so the door is open. Since 2015, only one female has ever even passed the first test, which is only like eight pull ups, I think. So one did eight pull ups. It's the seals, man. We can't change the qualifications. You got a climate ladder. You got to get on top of that ship and six foot seas with 50 pounds and then do a mission. And that mission might take you six or eight hours. So you can't climb up there and be totally done and exhausted and go, oh my God. I just did 30 pull ups with 50 pounds and I'm beat. I can't do anything else. I'm done. Oh, man. Now it starts. Now you got eight hours of work. That's why it takes six months. Take six months to become a seal. That's why. Because that says one test. I can tell you another 20 tests. But here's a secret for you. You want to hear a secret? I do. Yes, please. So I have a reality show that I've written up and it has day to day all the executable tasks and training and challenges to test 30 women. So we start out day one with 30 women. And we have leaderboards and leaderboards to be clicking off and how much they are because every test, every swim, every run, we do pull ups, you do on sit ups, you do push ups, you're going to be paddling boats, be climbing stuff. You're going to be picking locks and breaking in. No, never I don't know. I'm just kidding. But you'll be doing, you'll be doing something really funky, really tough testing. And then there'll be disqualifications. People will be quitting one way because it's not easy. But 30 women will start and only one will finish. And the one female finishes should get like $100,000 in a pocket and should be qualified as go to seal team training. You'd make it. Would you want to watch a TV show like that? Definitely would want to watch a TV like that. You should some of the tests are really, really cool too. It's like mind boggling. You'll be like, oh my god. But it's not going to be easy. It's not like one of those ones. We have to eat a whole bunch of stuff and then you throw up. It's not one of those ones where people are getting hurt. There's nothing in here that's unsafe. I think the insurance to cover up for insurance accounts, I get thousand bucks. Because everything is like super scripted and like from stuff that's like tested. It's not dangerous. It's just like you just have to think and put your mind into it. And then also get that you know, I'll do all been glad. You have to show me how to pronounce that word. Alligator brain, the crocodile brain. But you have to really dig in. It's going to be tough. And that's going to be a reality show. I don't watch reality shows because I don't like the backstabbing. I don't like how they always turn into his team and team this and all the gifts that because it's not real. And so this is going to be like the real like ranger school, seal team training. This will be like if you're in force, we can't go into force recon. It's going to be teamwork and leadership and team building and helping each other out and getting through each day. It's going to be a tough. It's going to be tough. And you're going to see it's going to be I think this is going to be the reality show that a lot of people that normally don't like reality. We're going to watch this and go, you know what? It's unlike everything I've ever seen. And it actually looks real because it's going to be real. You mentioned the team building and like the camaraderie. How much of that? What did you learn from being in the seals? And can you go a little bit deeper into that part of it? Okay. Well, here's maybe one of the differences between being a man or woman growing up in America when it starts in grade school. So in grade school, all the boys are playing baseball or they're playing football, even at a very young age. And so they're starting to understand teamwork or starting to understand what position they are and how that position fits into the bigger team. It fits into the machine like you're a cog or a hero and you're the quarterback you're doing that and that. But hey, there's alignment without the good alignment. The quarterback never gets thrown. And then all the women are like they're doing a lot of individual sports. They're not doing quite as many of the team sports. Now it's changed a lot in the last 10 or 15 years. But when I was growing up, if you were, you're the female in grade school, even and going all the way up into the high school, he could be a cheerleader and that has to do with, you know, how pretty you are or how you can kick your foot. And it's all individual against the rest of them. To be the best. If you want to be in a play and you want to be an actress, you're up on stage, going for that lead part. So it's you individually competing against everyone else. And so that's going to be the backstabbing. That's going to be all the other stuff. Who's going to win it? You're going to be that figure skater who breaks someone's leg because she wanted to be number one. And it's all aimed at for all the females for it. For the most part, it's individual skills pitted against all of your supposed teammates. Does that make sense? Yeah. We're in most where in most men's sports, it's actually a team where if you're failing as an individual, you're failing the team. So you try harder to be better to make the team better to win the whole team to play your role to help the whole team work better as a machine. And so automatically men are going to learn much better on leadership at an earlier age and team building and teamwork at an earlier age, which I think is totally unfair. Is that it make it a little bit of sense? Oh, absolutely. Yeah, it definitely does. I mean, that's just what I've seen from my point of view. Now when I went into the seals, because I was on a football team, because I was on the lacrosse team, because I've done all these different sports and I've played a lot of different positions. Within these sports, I understand what it's like to be the team captain. The quarterback also know what it means to be the lineman, a guard or on defense or offense. I know how to work all those different things. Now there are a lot. There's women's soccer. There's, you know, a lot of other women's sports that, but there's not enough and it didn't. It's not as prevalent as not pushed as hard as the men's sports. So it's not as many opportunities for women to be in these sports with a really learned team work and they really learned that. I know I'm going to get a lot of women who are in soccer and are amazing at a professional soccer. They yell at me. But if you really think about it, the breadth of sports for women to compete and to build that type of teamwork is about half or less than that of men. You know, if you really think about it, honestly, yeah, it really is. And I think you're right. It is changing quite a bit, like as far as soccer and the W the W NBA. It's changing, but I would love to see more women's sports, more opportunities for women to gain that true teamwork and leadership at a grade school level, which I just don't think they have to have to have opportunities because at grade school is when you learn it. You know, when you're in like first, second, through fifth or sixth grade, that's when you start learning the teamwork and they don't have the women out there doing that as much as the boys would. Yeah. No, I totally see we were coming from coming from. And I see that could be like a really cool concept for some sort of programming for a show or whatever you have planned to kind of develop and portray those those skills and those assets that people can build similar to the seals. So in season one, it'll be aimed at seals and special forces, rangers and marine force, recon season two, it's going to be going to a junior high level and show at a younger level. And then season three is like, if I told you, all of it, I can't really tell you everything, but there's a lot of mixing matters, a lot of like age difference and how it changes over the years. And then also finally, it's going to be women only for the first one, Dan, it'll be a little bit of work co-ed going into some of the other other areas. Then you see some of the differences between conditioning between strengths and weaknesses and everything else because everybody has strengthened weaknesses. And so you learn how to utilize teamwork to make that person's strength, add to the team. And if somebody's weaker and something, there's stronger than something else and how do you balance that and how do you work that out. And so there'll be some other episodes and like much greater team building exercises. One of my most, I want to kind of, I want to take a step, a step, like a lateral step real quick from what we're talking about. When you, you are in the trenches of brutal combat running through caves in Afghanistan or jumping out of helicopters and you have, yeah, like all the same guys did that stuff. And you have your night vision goggles on in the middle of the night. And you're running through a blast, someone who blasted a hole in a wall. You said that you felt like you and your fellow seals were just souls next to each other fighting against other souls. And you, you felt disconnected from your bodies. Can you, can you explain to me a little bit more what that means? When you describe that in words, when you, when you really get into it and you're just doing that, when you're in a mitt of it, when you're in a mitt of like, let's say this is like a football team to say it's the soccer team. Let's say it's anything else. When you're in the middle of that crucial, that last, you have 10 seconds left and it's a tie game. And in that last play start, and it's only in the last for six or seven seconds or 10 or 15 seconds, whatever it might be that 15 seconds, make that entire episode last for about an hour, where you start time start to something where you don't know where you are and whatever's going. And you don't, you don't see people anymore. You just see movement, you see things happening. You see the world expanding in front of you kind of in slow motion, but critical. Does that make a little bit of sense? It just, it's a blur. It's like everything you just, you just go on instinct and you're just going to go on and you don't really. So if I looked over at David Goggins, who was in one of my platoons, he was a, he was a new guy when I was chief, I think. Oh, really? Yes, I put him through a lot of training. I'm in his book in a few different places. I think whenever he talks about the chief, a lot of times he's talking about me in that book. Oh, wow. I was the one, I was the one in Goggins book that we have lockers. We have these huge lockers. We put all your equipment. And I basically locked all the lockers up and I made them live out of bag. So they have a bag of all their stuff in front of this giant locker where they could spread out and organize. They cleaned everything up and they were living out of like two bags. I didn't let them have a locker. I said, no, you're a new guy. You don't deserve a locker. You haven't earned it. And they go, what do you mean? That's just messed up, chief. What do you, it's just like cruel and unusual punishment. You're such an asshole. Can I say asshole? Oh, so are you. They did. They called me an asshole. It was like, I was an asshole. And I told them I said, no, just leave out of the bag. And when you guys have earned the privilege to use that cage and the cage was like six feet by six feet. Had hooks all over and racks and you hang everything up. You can wash stuff down and spread it out. You clean. You can sleep in your cage. There are big cages. You can sleep in them with hammocks, which people do all the time. Because we work so late sometimes. You want to catch an hour or two hours of sleep. You do it in your cage. You put your hammock up and sleep. There are big cages where you spread out, your nice and basically I made them live out of two bag packs. You were like, it's like, dude, you cannot have anything else. What you need is in those bag packs. We're going to live out of them. And they did that for a while. I can't remember how long it was a few weeks. Sucked because every revolution we had to go on, they had to refack them up and have them ready. Now it's back. You know, let's go. We have 10 minutes. Get everything ready. Let's go. All the old guys walking their big lockers and put everything and put it together. And it was easy because you had everything spread out. You could see it all. So after Let's go we have 10 minutes get everything ready to go. Oh, and all the old guys walking her big lockers and put everything and put it together And it was easy because yeah everything spread out you could see it all So after three weeks I'd live in an hour back for David Goggins I said all right put everything in the lockers if you want to and organize your stuff and get us spread out to each guy to do They're like all right right on. I Am like two days later. They're all spread out. It's all good as today We have 10 minutes pack up get everything ready go and get in the truck and load out We have to do a recon mission and we're in the water get your fans get your stuff It's gonna be really cold and we got to get an airplane to fly out and do a mission We're like all right, so all those new guys David Goggins include them They were like do if everything's a bag and they were in a truck waiting in like three minutes and All the old guys are going what I need wait when he fans and where am I freaking fans? I got to do that I got to get that and the older guys took three four times longer You know why? Because I made those guys live out of the bags for three weeks They're organizing exactly what they needed to have it all the extra stuff They had a totally organized and ready to rock and roll in a second notice all those guys did But they walked into lockers who had two duped a couple bags and walked out They're sitting in a truck waiting for everybody else Where was that where were you guys during this there was a two five? That was when I was in 15 five, but basically what happens is we get lazy We get disorganized. We have the stuff. We have too much stuff. I have three sets of fans So I have to go with which set of fans what's a mission? What's that all the new guys? They had one set of fans a one mass hit everything set to get everything there everything they needed Specifically how cold it's gonna be worth submission and what's that can be they knew exactly what to get poo poo poop They're done We had to get on a submarine with a hey, we only enough room for one bag Everybody pack out one bag to live on a submarine for a week and a half To do these three missions and a new guys are like zip zip zip David Goggins Everybody's ready to sit on truck waiting for all the old guys because we had too much stuff here to disorganized We didn't know what the brain. We were like yeah, I mean it didn't take forever They did it in like two minutes. It took us like 10 minutes. It took us longer because we had too much stuff It was a little spread out it was like yeah So just get used to having everything in a couple bags be organized be ready to rock and roll. That's life Life is like that when you start to think about people living in a tiny house or somebody downsizing or somebody living in a freaking three or 4,000 foot mansion You say hey man, you're gonna be isolated out there. You're gonna do this. You have to go camping for a week pack up You have 10 minutes The person that lives in a 3,000 foot mansion has 15 pairs of boots and just stuff all over Well, we got a person that lives in a freaking tiny house. It's you know 200 square feet and it has only what he needs It's a whole different way to live Yeah, I think it speaks a lot to practicing discipline What was your question? I can't remember what my question Oh, I think no, it doesn't matter. I think we were eventually Well originally what I was trying to get at was the analogy of you guys being souls next to each other when you were out there fighting and Was it kind of like like a flow state where you just disconnected from your body and you were just so tuned into that moment that Everything was a big example that I just talked about was me making all the new guys live out of the bags I said hey your new guys live out of the bags learn how to do it Did it matter if you're a black or white if you're Asian Latino if you're European to sand if whatever you were Did it matter? No, you're a freaking new guy all of you live out of the bags learn it equally when they get to a level Okay, here's your lockers all at same time If somebody wasn't getting it quick enough Then the other guys would help man. We'd all get up to that level And so no matter who you are what you are as a seal after two or three platoons and after doing all these deployments after run to turn emissions all that all that Attribute of you as a person kind of follow way because you're all operating at such a high level for so long You don't think about you know, yeah, David Goggins is a black dude, you know, Kristen, but I come to You know white. I'm gonna. I am a female now. It's like it doesn't none of that matters because we work so hard at such a high level You don't think about that stuff. It doesn't count anymore What counts is well? You've been doing for the team and how long you've been doing it and what's your position at a team? You're the quarterback on alignment. We all work hard at the same level So we all get up to that level doesn't matter if I was a Christian Muslim if I was a Buddhist if I was whatever None that matters that matters what you are in the team You're the quarterback you're alignment. I don't care about any other stuff. Oh You're a female who cares man just you're part of the team and now you're the you're the linebacker Go be a linebacker and if you're not a good linebacker you're gonna get fired If you can't do them 30 pull-up. Sorry We'll give you another shot, but you failed again. You're off the team Because we can't have you there because you're gonna get everybody else killed So that's what it was like souls. That's what I was trying to get out. Okay, was that all the attributes of you as a person You don't see any that anymore the stuff that you see it's day to day in America The prejudice against somebody for being black or for being female or being Latino Happens a lot nowadays for being Asia Asian so if you're from Asia You're from Southeast Asia. You're from wherever you're from you see prejudice every day Yeah, but when you're in combat none of that stuff counts right And especially from the time that that you served what what year did you retire? every tired in 2011 2011 from the time that yeah from that time when you were serving especially till now I mean obviously the 60s there was a huge movement going on but between then and now things have changed culturally as far as like social justice warriors and You know the way people react to different things online and the division of politics has changed so Just get into social justice for one second. Okay. Yeah, let's do it. So social justice You know, what does that actually mean and it wasn't even something that people worried about back in the 1950s Heck yeah, and that's why we had so many movements. We had so much stuff going on But I want to relate to something else in a second But then think about politicians and every young about term limits and you're saying that we need to have term Those because these politicians have been in office for so long and they're totally out of touch with the people They do that and that and so we already have term limits It's called your vote every two years a term member for Congress person It's already exists Now because it has a good congressman or because everybody loves them in the off-road form Does that mean that we as a people that don't live in his congressional district? We need to say well the rest of the country doesn't agree with your congressional district And we want to go against what they voted for and he should be able to serve past 10 years Now we already have term limits every two years for that guy now if all the people on a district are voting for the guy Then that's what they that's what they did and the same thing with social justice. Do you think we have social justice? I Think we have social justice just like we have term limits for congress people we vote We go out when you act we make stuff happen But the problem is is like this social justice isn't uniformly distributed? It's there Do you know what I mean? And now is it is it the right thing for us to? systematically or artificially flatten the entire earth to make social justice equal in Antarctica as it is equal in South America or Chile or Argentina or Russia or China or the United States or Canada Should we flatten all the justice out across the entire spectrum of the world against all those spectrums of Cultural upbringing against all the spectrums of religion religious freedom Vegetary against you name it would that be fair right well if I grew up in America and I grew up in let's say Taiwan because Taiwan is a great example because you know it's right there and you have China Hong Kong and it's a little difference between Hong Kong and mainland China Which people don't consider now is everything that goes on in mainland China and Hong Kong should it be equal? Well, no because because Hong Kong has had a very very different socialization and everything going on Hong Kong then mainland China for about you know last hundreds of years You know what I mean? So social justice flattened between mainland China and Hong Kong wouldn't be fair if it was equalized Now if you took the same things in mainland China applied in a Hong Kong and tried to apply them here in America And the United States Would it be all the same social justice if we get artificially change it because we say all social justice is equal across the entire world What is not? Because you have so many different factors and so many things Yes, the same thing as term limits for America when we start trying to artificially force Congressional district Do not have a certain Congress person because they've been in it for 30 or 40 years No, I don't like some of them Jersey Congress person has been in there for like freaking 40 years I can't stand a guy because I think you forgot about his ditch his district. He's from And he goes and all those big huge things and forgets about his district constantly And I really think he should start looking at the district more because water wants about him in but he's doing a lot of really great things At a national scale But come on, dude Clean up that river and take care of that and take care of people in your district Now do we need to force a term limit on a guy? No, it needs to bring attention to the fact that he's forgetting about the people in his district And maybe he had them vote a little differently But if he gets voted in again, then rock on man. You get voted again So you made it past that term limit called voting Right So there's a lot of things you can think about different ways And when he comes to social justice I think it's social justice making it equal across Certain spectrums of society certain spectrums of religion certain spectrums of Environmental conditions You know, it's it's different. It's different in New York City than it is where I live in upstate New York I live like six hours in New York City in New York State Now if you get a DUI in New York City and I take away your driver's license for six months They're like yeah, whatever big deal. I don't care because they have buses on every block They have subways. They have oopers. They have a thousand oopers that they're freaking back and calm But if you live wide deal at a town of 200 And the closest the closest Walmart is a 40 minute drive The closest grocery store is like what we have one dollar store right there and it's a good dollar store Thanks a lot, but that's 20 minutes away So if I have no driver's license And if I drove it took me 20 minutes to drive the closest place for me to buy toilet paper, which is a big hype now on covid But if you drive 20 minutes to get a roll of toilet paper if I have no license How long does it take me to walk? And you took away my license for six months It's so different between New York City that I have a thousand uber drivers. I have taxis everywhere I have subway and I have buses. I have transportation. You know, I have a million ways to travel But if I'm out here where I'm living If I have no driver's license, I have to walk everywhere or I got to call up with my friends constantly. It's not fair Yeah, it's definitely not a level playing field when it comes to The differences between the states we live in in different countries and New York state New York state is the worst Because New York City is a hub of metropolitan everything But if you drive an hour out of New York City You're you're you're you're different And you're applying all the laws governor komo applies all the laws that make great sense in New York City But it totally like it ampers and it's punishing To everyone that lives an hour outside of New York City. It's a punishment. It's it's it's like what's that cruel and unusual punishment for you to make me do the New York City Do you I laws when I'm here south of Buffalo on five hours from six hours from New York City doesn't make sense It's cruel and unusual punishment Social justice somebody should be standing up for me The ACLU they're taking away my civil rights my civil liberties Because I can't drive so I can't work. I can't even get a rural toilet paper Without walking for four hours to four hour walk to go get a toilet paper That's cool, you're a punishment And you're gonna do those same laws. Why doesn't the ACLU pick up that case? You can't apply The urban laws for the DUI taking away my driver's license and I know somebody who said her driver's license Taking away for two years And it's hampered work. It's like failing it loses his house loses everything is he can't drive Yeah, the system is definitely not set up for you to win Now you can win in the city, but outside of the city the same laws. They just don't work Right, and they have to consider that So I can't they make the laws like a per capita basis So if you live in an area where per capita or how many people live in that area If I had lived in a town of 200 and the closest city away from me is a town of 900 That's a city It's huge. It's a tropicalus And they only have 900 people They have to drive two and a half hours away to get to a city of 10,000 or more And you're gonna buy New York City laws to me? Dude, come on Rural and unusual punishment. Why doesn't the lawyer pick up that case? That's a class action lawsuit against the state of New York Because you love New York City and making food, coo money off New York City The alligator it's all about money, right? It's crazy alligator county Has across the entire state Per capita percentage of DUI is the highest in the Allegheny County Per capita is crazy Because we're all losing our job and you get another one You don't know what to do. You're all drinking The highest unemployment rate is Allegheny County So the highest DUI the highest unemployment The highest taxes all on one county It's a county where there's no city that's more bigger than freaking a thousand people The biggest city in your entire county is like this The metropolis of a thousand people that live in a freaking 20 mile square It's like if you studied it if New York somebody would take a look at this If you compared at one county to like Queens or Kings or the Bronx or Brooklyn Dude, there are billions of people in one county The Bronx compared to Allegheny County Millions of people living in one square mile compared to we have freaking thousand square miles with you know 40,000 people total But we have the most DUI's most unemployment and the highest freaking taxes Out of all of New York state They're punishing us. That's cruel and unusual punishment to live in this county How close is this the same county? Just a moment of free and you think things are equal The cards are stacked up for everyone in Allegheny County to fail The cards are stacked up to make us all get the UIs and unemployed and sitting on and then we start driving because I had to drive Then get pulled over again. We heard drives. I was suspended. Do you have one to UI? Well now you can't have a driver to license for five years So made it even worse. So now I'm unemployed with no license for five years. No buses no uber No nothing. How do I get around? I got a hike 20 miles to get a roll of toilet paper God, what do you expect from us? You're gonna put us on welfare. You're gonna put us on food stamps. You're gonna make us in the freaking Steven drug in drinking DUI unemployed because there's nothing for us to do And we can't get out you can't dig yourself out of that whole one to get so deep No totally Allegheny County should be a study and New York states ability to punish a whole population of people That's what they did Governor Como I Love New York City hates Allegheny County. He hates us and we're the highest test county in New York state How far is that county from where you were raised? It's the same county same exact county. So you're you said you're 15 minutes. Yeah 15 What's drive really fast? Yeah Yeah, if you drive normal speed limit. It's about so eight to 23 minutes So another subject same county How how would you say that you're upbringing and your childhood Directed your the rest of your life How much of your childhood had an effect on your decision to eventually join the Navy SEALs and Do was it 15 combat deployments or 14 combat deployments or 13 deployments? I was it 13 13 you're saying that you're saying that's not a lot now. Oh, I would I should have done more I don't feel like I did enough Really? Yeah, how many people do you know that have done that many combat deployments? A lot. Oh, okay Three four three four. I don't know but it's I don't know. I don't I mean I never tried to count Okay, it's not it's not a number that you count or like look at But I still don't think I did enough. I'd still I was still wish I could do some more But I grew up I grew up in rural. It was very rural very self-sufficient We had farm animals So you always had to get water feed and take care of them Always like doing crops or taking care of down to throwing hay bales in grade school offstone hay bales So you've learned how to be like Seems like you were always very very hands-on rugged individualism my guy I wrote a hands-on It was like my guy ever I'm a guy for the shit out of it so I was in I was going to Lowe's The other day So I was going to Lowe's the other day and they made this new rule for New York City It doesn't it shouldn't apply that but it's New York Statewide rule that governor come up with at this date and time Everyone in public has to have a mask on Because basically if you live in New York City you're living on top of another thousand people If you walk into any 7-11 in New York City, there's gonna be a hundred people in that store Now if you walk into 7-11 where I live there's one person in there every 20 minutes So your social distance in where I live is natural You know what I mean? So I'm walking into the Lowe's And there's somebody standing guard and I got big signs in there that New York State law everyone must have One of those masks on in order to enter any store. It's a New York Statewide law Yeah, it makes sense in New York City, but out here in the entire Lowe's there was only like four people So it's not very hard to keep 20 feet away from every person in the freaking store Geez, and so I don't know. I didn't know this is going on So I walk in there and I'm a mask on and it don't want to let me come in That's all I'm like, well Damn, I don't drop a half hour drive No, it's more than that. It's 40 minute drive to go from Lowe's all the way back home To go back to Lowe's To buy the electrical outlet that I need to get everything wired out So it's freaking nuts. So I'm sitting in my truck and I got to get this for you here. I'm gonna go get the thing Okay, can you edit this real quick? Because I want to tell you what I did. Yeah. Yeah. It's good Okay, so I'm sitting in my freaking truck and I'm like I don't want to drive 40 minutes All the way back home to drive all the way back here another 40 minutes. It's like days almost over So I remember the drill instructor. It was an army dude That was was he Australia. I'm gonna ask your hand, but basically You know if you got a shit just take off your sock and take her a business Right. I'm like huh, so do you know? If you got a shit in the internship, you know, take off your second So I took my sock off Okay, all right And I caught it and I basically made it into a mask so basically you cut it Dinner's your mask Right you do that right then in there Yeah, right in my truck. So I just took the knife out But basically what you do is and here's a really good one. Here's a wool sock Yeah, so this one this one. I'm gonna show you how to do it really quick. So basically Okay, all you're doing is cutting here And this is the thing is people are paying money for all these masks Yeah, paying all this money and it's freaking stupid, man. Just Take off one of your socks Okay, we'll get a pair of socks because everybody always has those odd socks There was them tube socks Well, why do you always have like left socks? So cut so cut the toe off one side Okay, the other I cut the tube off. See on up with a heel right there. Oh, wow And and then you cut two more stripes Then you cut Along the one side right here You cut three quarters away up. Don't cut all the way through it But you see I just made a strap. Yeah, there's a strap now Make a strap on the other side And to make a strap on the other side And the thing is now your coffee filters Because you want to throw this into washing wash because this is catching this is gonna be the dirty part right Right, but but now you still have a sock there, right? See the sock. Yep. Still a through still a tube in there Right, you put coffee filters and stuff in there because I don't make it even catch more Because the coffee filters are great if your coffee filters are catch down to like 10 microns and even smaller So you go through cloth then the coffee filter can double them up So it's catching like a lot of stuff And you put all that between and it's soft to get that and you put that up in your ears And you got a mask that's amazing You still hear me good. Yeah, I can hear you So you just put it up in your ears You know, so he's a good hoot loops Right That is amazing. You really are like my giver So boom, can you have coffee filter in here And you have a mask on So with that So I walk back into the lures and I'm like yeah, yeah, whatever. I got a mask now modify And they let it slide It's a mask Right, it works. No, it's probably a better mask than they didn't give you they didn't give you any shit and say that's that's a sock That doesn't count they didn't say nothing Like that sock because it looks for fashion. I mean, look at it. No, it doesn't get designer mask Here's your ear loops and then you have the layers in here So don't forget the coffee filter in the middle is probably the most important part So you want to have you want to still want to have you know the tube part of the sock Where my arm is right now that's that Okay, but coffee coffee filters two or three coffee filters whatever you want You can make it bigger or smaller like I could have made that a little bit bigger So I mean you can make it really wide to really wraps you can make it really a lot wide and then wrap these Back You know if you made it bigger yeah, so there's different ways you can do it Depending if you want on your ears you want to go around it back If it goes all the way out of the back Then all you got to do is just hook these together. You can tie them So there's a few different ways you can do it, but basically use a sock Because it's super soft use the material and there's your mask Don't forget to put the filters in between To really filter out all the bad stuff. Okay. Got it. Yeah, that's amazing. Thank you And this takes no sewing skills You don't have to buy it because you have a whole bunch of left hand socks You know because you always lose the right one So in a dryer you know they always lose the one side See my problem is I don't have any tube socks. I have like the little short ankle socks No, I mean you need it what you can do with a sleeve too. Do you have long sleeve shirts? I do have long sleeve shirts. So with a long sleeve shirt out of your one sleeve especially if it's sweatshirt is even better Okay, if you have one long sleeve sweatshirt Cut the one sleeve you can make three masks out of one sleeve of a shirt Oh shit, you're right. And it's the same thing and all you have to do is use a pair of scissors And just cut cut it into your big tube and then cut the little strappy part in Okay, you have as many masks as you want to sit in your house with no sewing skills With no effort. Just don't forget to put the coffee filters in between Okay, the coffee filters are key key part of this You can also do the Clorox wipes the hand wipes Take the Clorox hand wipes and dry it out but it had to be dry You can use the dryer things for that but the best one is the Clorox hand wipes Totally dry amounts. There's no fluid. There's no in in there And then you can put that in between. That okay Okay, Sam Yeah, it's amazing. There's a few things you can use and if you multi-filter I'm using better. So if you use a coffee filter and a dryer out Clorox bleach Okay, have the have your sock then the coffee filter then the dryer Clorox then the outside of the sock So then you're basically have four layers and you can always switch out the inside and get a fresh one whenever you need Well, you want to you want to throw those away Right exactly when you're done for does a way and wash the sock After every visit I know it's people who are wearing a socks or wearing masks not socks the people who are wearing masks when they're driving their cars Frickin idiot throw alone Drive in the cars that are alone. They put your mask on at home They get in their car. They've already put our hands all over you're going into the freaking supermarket And they're walking around or getting people coughing you get stuff under your collecting stuff on your mask Then you wear it again in your car And you go home and then you find take it off in your car You're fixing the nose thing your hands are all over it You put your keys in your car. You get keys in your house You walk it in your house You take the mask off all the germs and all the stuff is in the mask Yeah, no, yeah, that makes no sense As soon as you get done take the darn mask off put it securely into a plastic bag Then you're going to throw away when you get on close it all up wash your hands Then put your keys out of your pocket put them in your car and drive But your mask and all the stuff you collected is all in a contained plastic bag or in a bag Then now you throw in your dryer wash machine to clean off all the dirty Yeah, yeah, you gotta be you gotta you gotta have some brain cells To be able to realize that you're not supposed to bring that dirty shit back to your house Don't let your house don't bring the freaking car when you're alone in your car alone. You're good You're you Daminate yourself take your frickin mask off. What do you think about Some of the people that are talking about how coronavirus is a biological biological warfare weapon that was released from a lab in Wuhan Do you have you been following up on any of that? What are your thoughts on? I think if a country had intentions or a country had Like a another country that was like playing economic games or economic war Economic warfare is Taxations as tariffs. You cannot make warfare or a number of things They can do to adjust an economy to make another economy suffer That's economic warfare if a if a barrel of of oil Fause blow $1 a barrel is it a dollar a barrel? No, it's $10 barrel if a barrel of oil falls below $10 a barrel in America Then there's no way for Russia to get the oil from The inland areas in Siberia and everything else they have to basically drill Take the oil out of the ground put it in a barrel and transport it someplace to a ocean facility To put it on a ship to transfer it from the ship to all the way to America It costs them between 12 and $17 a barrel to get it out of the ground and break it to America So every time a barrel of oil per barrel falls below $10 a barrel Russia loses money for every barrel Economic warfare. Yeah, no, thanks So think about that so think about other tariffs or other regulations or other things we set in place There would be a debt or amount to a country's economy outside of the United States Let's say it's Canada. Let's say it's Mexico. Let's say it's China. Let's say it's Russia Let's say it's Switzerland. Let's say it's Sweden that devolvers We do something with the car manufacturers that we Benefit forward but not vulva Is that economic warfare? So if country had the ability with some biologic with anything else to be able to put something out that would actually affect the economy of another nation and At a economy of the other nation. I did this to them else to be able to put something out that would actually affect the economy of another nation and that economy of the other nation that did this to them at did tariffs or did that or did that and now there's a biological there's a flu like symptom that causes decimates another country's economy is that further economic war or is that biological war and know it is and it is especially when you think about China manufacturers a lot of vaccines that we use in the US and with all of them almost all of them and if we're going to need a surplus of vaccine if they develop this vaccine and they're developed and they're manufacturing it up China we're going to need vaccines from China we're going to need syringes from China and the wilden the millions people are here. Well why is it that in December before we really knew about any virus we sent 10 billion dollars worth of pharmaceutical stuff to China from America to China. I think it was like 10 billion it was like it was a huge amount of money worth of pharmaceutical aid syringes all the tubing all this all that and antibiotics and everything else we sent a millions or billions of something worth of firms in December of this year and then we found out about the virus in January and we were like oh damn we just sent everything we had all of our surpluses we already sent it all to China and now we have none how did that happen I didn't hear about that and there's also a clause within the agreements and the tariff and everything else that if there's a clause written in there when we signed a deal between China and America there's a clause within the deal we signed with the tariffs and everything else trying to even play in field there's one single clause that said any event of a act of God the entire deal is negated. That's spooky and that happened in like a month before the virus. Jesus or was it two weeks it was two weeks we signed the deal two weeks before the virus announced but didn't China know about this virus three months before yeah it was recognized I think they were here. So they had three months of warning they bought up all the stuff in December they signed the deal in January two weeks later we find out that there's a there's an act of God clause in this amazing deal we've said that negates the entire deal and we already sent all of our pharmaceuticals and all the stuff we needed to China isn't our little weird stuff going on. No it's it's completely completely filthy. This is not conspiracy this is not conspiracy or spooky this is actually black and white materials that you can look at this was actually done in December this is actually a deal of sign this is the act of God clause which is lose pandemic it included flood tornado pandemic pandemic was actually cited as an act of God and this is a pandemic so the entire deal is negated. See I can't even wrap my mind. It's kind of odd. No it's totally odd. Is that warfare or is that just an act of God it somehow just happened? I don't know. That's a good that's a good question. It's a really good question. Is there is there email traffic that would prove one way or the other? Yes there is. Are there government cable grants traffic and things that would prove one way or the the other? Yes there is. Are there letters or are there doctors? Some of the doctors are still alive. Most of them have been killed already. Who were there at the ground zero when pandemic started? A customer dead though. That's kind of odd when you say. No I'm not a conspiracy person. I want to see it black and white. I want to see the proof and there is proof out there to prove this one way or the other. So I don't want to say one way or the other. This is not act of a war but it could be. I can't prove it one way or the other. I'd like to know one way or the other. So let's see the data. Yeah it's to me it's to me it's just scary. I'm not really a big conspiracy person either but when you hear stuff like that it just you can't help but just look deeper into it and try to figure out what happened and where shit's going wrong. Well if you want to think about the future of warfare you should be investing in you know ships and bombs and the big stuff from nuclear bombs and all the other stuff the stockpiles of everything we had to blow stuff from the destroy. That's not the future of warfare. The future of warfare is cyber and that's why making a space command. The first thing we do what we made a space command? Why would you made a cyber command at the same level and joint chiefs of staff because that's where it's all out to want electronics is all about that. Then after a cyber command should have been like an NBC command. Should have been nuclear binocular chemical and all the other stuff command. After cyber space would be third after cyber and after NBC RE or NBC burn chemical radiological biological all that. So with a seaburn command is if I was a nation I wanted to take over let's say let's say New York City wanted your New York state wanted to take over New York City because New York state is just so sick of New York City. So if we just drop a couple of nuclear bombs in New York City and flatten it we destroyed all the infrastructure we destroyed all of the power plants all the dams all the water everything else and nobody's going to live within 100 square miles of where all those bombs are out right. But what if we that a biological virus into the city and it's it's half line for the biological that we released into the had a half life of like let's say two months and it killed off 80% of population you would depopulate entire city and then the city would be clean in two months that you can move in and take over. Not a building fell not a bomb not a nothing just to just got rid of all the people. How how good would that warfare be for a nation I wanted to take over in our nation. You would have to worry about anything infrastructure you just go in there and clean up a little bit get rid of all that and within two months you can move in. Yeah. Look at the cost savings it would be in warfare not to take a building down with a bomb but just to get rid of all the people on it. Yeah it really does seem to go. I mean guns and bombs are. It's a path. It's a path. All you have now is going to be cyber warfare and biological and chemical warfare. It's all this left. What and then all you need is delivery systems and delivery systems is all by drone. So all you need is some drone pilots. If you're given with Xbox then you're a drone pilot you can deliver the bottle out to come whatever you want from you see that you can just sit there and play the game. Okay. Drop and you only need to drop them. You just crash your UAV and the targets file you want. Have your message those new drones those DJI like phantom drones that have the cameras on them have your messed around with those once you can buy it like Walmart. Well I started flying drones in 1999 some of the first drones that were ever years of militarized. I was one of the first person to do a call for fire with mortise tracks out of drone. So I had my little drone I was flying around I was doing call for fire hitting mortise. So yeah I we it was basically trailblazing drone technology in the late 90s early 2000s before 9-11. And when you launched your how did you launch that drone? We did our hand launch you throw them in the air. We did catapult launches. We also would take them off and run ways too. So I have flown drones you know the big ones the dual props single prop the turbo prop the big ones the small ones the micro drones are real little ones and the real big ones. And we did explosives on the drones we did cameras we did chemical biological testing devices on the drones. So we could fly them through an area and it was contaminated we were purposely crash it out in the ocean. If it showed back it was not contaminated we could bring it back and land it because basically you crash something the ocean you clean it up no matter what it is. So you don't want to bring it back and it has stuff on it. So you just crash it purposely because it's got it fainted. It had stuff on it don't bring it back. What were you what SEAL team were you on when you were involved in the raid of Saddam's policy? Can you talk about that? I was on a SEAL team and we raided a lot of palaces as we were going through there and we stayed in this hangar and it was all shot if it was bullet ridden hangar that was it was pretty cool little hangar. And we also stayed in a place called the VVIP lounge for the Baghdad airport. So I will say those two things a shot of hangar and a VVIP lounge is the places I went out of. That's about all I would say. And if you know those areas and you know who I was working with. But I know the part of your book where you're talking about you guys were going down a river near the palace and you had to fly it shot the lot rob. I crashed to UAV and I ran a river and I really I still have nightmares about crashing UAVs that caused problems. I screwed up and I still have like really big problems with that screw up. Like when I made mistakes I don't I say hey I messed up. I crashed at UAV and I and I and I caused lives. I caused us not to have the intel we needed. And I don't know how many people I could have saved if I didn't crashed at one UAV. So it haunts me. It haunts you but I think it speaks volumes that you're able to own up to it because honestly I mean people that are able to fail and live with it and talk about it and share it with people. That is what enables you to succeed is to be able to fail and fail and fail and fail and be okay. You're going to miss you're going to miss a dozen shots but you're still going to lots of game winning shots. And I think that's book volumes that really stuck with me in your book. Why didn't we all share it? And this is here's an example of somebody thought if I did if I messed up I don't admit it and I've definitely had my my share of screw-ups and sometimes it takes a long time to realize how bad you're screwing up and then when you finally realize it and then you're like well it's kind of too late now where you're still on it and I would still do on stuff because I get so upset and I've stood and I've messed up and then I stood on it and I finally realized and I was like well it's too late now I wish I could go back in time and fix that. I would immediately say I screwed up and you know this is what I want to do to make up for my screw up and let's get back into business. Let's fix it and let's drive on and let's get better. I wish I could have done that earlier you know it would have been better. Here's an example of somebody who screwed up and never owned up to it and it caused someone here it is. If you're a Navy captain on an aircraft carrier you're the captain you're the skipper there's an Admiral of Blove above you who's running a carrier battle group but running that ship the day-to-day running in every person on ship 4,000 people who are working that ship that 06 that captain he's the guy he's in charge. Now let's say you had a young seamen this young kid he's 19 years old and he's away from home he's new in a Navy he's really it's tough and his kid is having you know some issues and he's not getting along with a lot of people he's doing whatever he's a happy kid. Man a kid I have a video of the kid from a day before the incident where he's like he's mopping a hallway and he's dancing around his dancing music he's just a 19-year-old kid. The captain here is that this kid has some suicide ideation says he's really he's really upset. The captain calls a captain's call for the whole division and has like 500 people lined up in a hangar decks and he starts making fun of the kid in front of everybody by name to the entire 500 people stand in there. It makes fun of the kid because the kid is weak because the kid is thinking about committing suicide he's just faking it doesn't know any captain the leader of that ship is making fun of this kid by name in front of 500 of his peers. Then the kid attempts suicide on the ship and didn't happen the captain further makes fun of him and puts him in a brig and then the kid gets sent to the brig and hang himself with the shoelaces in a brig and is dead now. Do you think that captain was punished or captain admitted that hey you know it was in front of 500 people and made fun of the kid I didn't really understand where is it I'm not a psychiatrist I don't know did the captain say anything that no that captain got promoted to admiral and that kid is dead we killed himself and as an organization if you can see that do you see the bottom of that mug? Hicks strong, Hicks strong yeah so look up the hashtag and hashtag hashtag Hicks strong and look up the Hicks strong dot org I think it is we'll tell you the whole story as you tell you about the mother and a father who makes these mugs they're called hug mugs because the mother and father of that young seam and you know Hicks who just breaks my heart so Mike and Jolie are the parents and they're at my house and they gave me this mug because they asked all the sailors on the ship who were friends with their son before they killed himself they said well could we have done and all the kids were like the parents is that you couldn't have done anything it was a captain really killed your son in front everybody and like everything was going on they talked about it all they said well is there anything that if you had you know what would you want and a lot of sailors said we just if just sometimes just give a hug man give support and she said and I said you guys drink coffee all the time but what if I made a hug mug what if we made a hug mug and it says a hug mug on the handle that you have this big mug you drinking coffee out of this made custom made for me she made this one for me with this big sunflower on it and the other side is this courageous to remind me every day that we're all courageous so every morning I drink coffee it's Jolie Hicks a wonderful lady she gives me a hug every morning I drink coffee because I have a mug I'm going to drink a hug mug I'm going to drink I'm going to get a hug right now that's beautiful now I'll give each other a hug carrying enough not really cool in front of 500 of your peers not getting promoted from Captain Admiral what happened in navy the navy you're really cool and like makes fun of a 19 year old kid an hands-up commit suicide you're going to make fun of somebody because they're in a bad spot that's not right that's not the navy I'm from own up to your mistakes make them happen make a change and fix them that captain should have been freaking court martial by the Admiral and thrown out of the navy somebody should look all this up Hicks strong Mike and Jolie Hicks turn my friends to mom and dad who lost her son lost a wonderful lost last year kid and I just say to everybody out there just everybody makes mistakes everybody does stuff but if that captain immediately as soon as he did that in front of all those people I found out the kids started having some issues should have gone down there with his division officer everybody else and then said something to kid personally with his officers and the chiefs and said you know what son I made of a steak I didn't know how can we make this right and then in front of of all 500 people to people he said it all to shoot a made-up point says you know what I made a mistake the other day and here's a young cman and we're going to make sure there's a take care of we're going to fix this and I was wrong and I will I will take my punishment whatever it is I'm going to lose my ship I will lose that I'm going to get I am in trouble because I made fun of that kid in front of everybody I did the wrong thing then we'd have you know he'd be here still mm-hmm I would imagine that that sort of behavior happens a lot in the military especially like the Marines and the Eagles we're tough with you all each other right look up at 2 a.m. it's more than a thousand push-ups what you do that you suck you're weak I hate that attitude may not cure out time you wake up in the morning and how many push-ups you can do even David Goggins the guys are freaking monster but you know comes down to it not everybody has the ability to do a thousand pull-ups what if you can do 100 man rock on if that's what you can do I'm proud of you I'm never going to make fun of you because you can do a thousand you can do a hundred you can only do 10 it's your capabilities to strengthen weakness you're still on a team you just might not be the quarterback you might not be the lineman hey how about a defensive end let's try it there there's a spot for you on a team but those people that just like they they do that macho make it fun ridicule do you you're gonna ridicule me to make me better no man that doesn't make me better how about a bug how about a bug man it speaks volumes coming from someone like you because you a dominating and alpha personality that you were and the stuff that you win through is it's beyond masculine and macho like okay but wait hold on you're saying alpha and macho define alpha when I'm talking about alpha and macho obviously there are two different things but when I say alpha I'm referring to a trait to where you're someone who is a dominating force and someone who is looked up to by many different people who are obviously going in the same direction and they look up to that person and that person is a strong example for them we can so when you talk about domination talking about alpha we're talking about like lions you talk about the animal kingdom you're talking about strength it's a problem thing and we talk about alpha and macho is it sometimes has nothing to do with like how many push ups you can do right you work up at 3 a.m. and did a hundred push ups I don't care dude right once the last time you helped somebody when was the last time you did something good for somebody once the last time you actually had compassion and said hey man I was walking fast as person man I saw that they're sleeping in their car and I was like dude I'm in a hurry but you know what not going to win in their car and then to put the window down and they're scared because they think they're gonna be they're gonna get beat up for something bad it's gonna happen and all you do is just just slip into $20 bill I think what I'm getting at I like alpha compassion is there a way to be alpha compassion is that the Dalai Lama is that Gandhi yeah I think what I'm trying to get at I think the point I'm trying to explore is the fact that you've been through the the peak of what someone would think of alphor macho that's who I mean it's who you are it's it's a life that you lived right I want to be an alpha to be alpha Gandhi's alphor passion to make it the same equal playing field that if you're if you're that dude if you're David Goggins who freaking love the guy he's awesome he's amazing and he is an alpha like competitive and like just he's a monster he's also like his mentality he's just like he goes yeah but he should be at the same level as far as alpha measurement as I have a friend of mine Mary who's just this amazing spiritual leader but she she weighs like 90 pounds and she could probably do 10 push-ups but shouldn't they be equals because there's one of the alpha domination of one whole thing and it's one thing and you want to look at them the same but nobody will ever look at them the same no you have a you're an attack show you have a very unique perspective and I think that you're able to look at it that way do you think that a lot of people with that mentality that think that that's how you need to be or people raising their kids saying you need to be a man you need to be tough you need to play football do you think that comes from insecurity that that may not be there maybe I'm insecure or I'm not confident that I am mainly so I need to really project this image maybe I mean that's 100% possible it's probably totally true but the thing is when we're thinking about that you got to be tough well I want to say you got to be tough when they're sitting there with their book and they're reading the chapter to do report on this is finish the chapter they only read halfway through it and they want to go outside and play no no you got to be mentally tough you got to be tough just keep reading well you didn't read it that's read it again that's toughness that's like an intellectual toughness you know the extra reading assignments during the summertime that you just want to play and have fun but you need to get through these 10 books during the summer every summer read 10 books every summer if you're in school get your list you're going to read those because you're mentally tough you're like macho what's an intellectual machoism don't just measure it by how much you can run and jump and do push-ups and follow-ups we need to start measuring a mental toughness and the same levels we do how many push-ups you can do or they you want a UFC cage and beat the crap out of somebody you can win a UFC cage and beat the crap out of somebody yeah you're really tough but look at you know Alan Turing that guy's way tougher than a UFC fighter I've ever known in my life UFC UFC UFC Alan Turing was the toughest man alive who was that? Antaly and everything else he's a guy invented the computers and in 1940s during World War 10 oh okay he helped me he killed himself because he ridiculed his killed himself because he got set up and he made the fail he was set up for failure the guy invented modern day computing you got a real story why do you kill me? He was made to take drugs to chemically castrate him because he thought it was a deviant he invented all modern day computing okay from one person Alan Turing wasn't an alien it was a man did you know that's what Nikolai Tesla did? Yeah he was also a big part of that so he's also one of them Tesla was a huge part of that but when you start thinking about computing in 1s and 0s 1s and 0s and the way the whole thing happens it really came to fruition under Alan Turing that was when he started doing the switches and basically the transistors the NPTs and NPNs and TMs the whole thing when it switches because of a because of a electrical change in a circuit it switches here switches there right on or up that was basically Turing it was pre-transistor transistors that's interesting all computing is based on 1s and 0s right right that was a Turing machine it was a magic machine real quick going back Tesla didn't do that no no yeah he was way different but i believe Tesla he intentionally castrated himself so he could accomplish his goals and what he was trying to do in his life and that he thought were more important than the sexuality was that to diminish the animal instinct of sexuality yeah exactly because then he was a distraction yeah yeah yeah we were talking about mental toughness in your documentary you're comparing what it took for you to run through caves screaming with an assault rifle versus what it was like to tell your friends and your fellow comrades when you felt like you were woman like coming out like explain the difference in the courage it took to do that versus the courage it took to be in combat let me put it this way so this has been me my whole life i've just never been able to express it but in my mind in my soul this is me so we got created me you might not believe that but i know because it's how i felt my life and it came from when i was like before i even had thought so it's not something that was invented or as environmental or in the else this is the life i was given by god and this is how this is life life is very diverse in so many ways that people don't even know yet like we barely understand the DNA chain and you know chromosomes and we barely scratching the surface of who we are as human beings so we're gonna define and say no it's only one or the other that's that's naive there's like a thousand levels between all of that between male and female there's a thousand million combinations so who can say it's only back or white is this or that it's male or female it's not so just there's gray just there's a lot of gray between all that and i knew that at a fair young age because i was i am you were dealing with it so so here's how i tell you to compare to hair even scuba diving all the time i grew up scuba diving so anyone else that you're scuba diving is gonna totally get this so imagine you're living your entire life underwater with a scuba bottlen and a regular in your mouth so when you're scuba diving and you're thinking about your breathing you have to always think about how you're breathing you always think about where the regulator is a regular comes out i'm in trouble gotta get back in you always think about the level of air in your tank you're thinking about your death you're thinking about all of it at all times your survival is critical upon everything with the apparatus to breathe that's transgender so my entire life when i was born until February 28th 2012 i was underwater on breathing apparatus totally afraid for my life at every second for every word i said every action everything i did on February 28th of 2012 i said to heck with it and i came above water i dropped my scuba tank i dropped it all off and i started living and not working about anything that's how it is to come out because now i don't need to worry about anything because i'm above water now i'm not worried about how i breathe how i add what i say how what i wear i'm not worried about anything anymore like i was underwater that's what it feels like that's a beautiful analogy that's how you should think about it so for anyone everyone that yourself you're not transgender i don't know but you're living your life you've always been above water so for you to look at me and i find it come out of the water and i go holy cow this is so amazing you look at me and go well what are you talking about because you've never knew it life you never knew it was light to be underwater you never had to worry about every word every action how you dressed what you did you never had to worry about your survival depending on your life and now that you're above water now you start getting ridiculed because now you're above water and i go no it feels better for me and then you're gonna point them in and go we have a look weird you're not doing it right you know look right like everybody else i say how do you know what it's like to live underwater how do i know what it's like to live above water my whole life i don't see you have to think about it totally differently and can't you respect the fact that now i'm living and i feel better can you say well i don't know what it's like to live underwater and you're happier now at fear so yeah right on man good job good job you're not to worry about every second of your life yeah congratulations man welcome to liberty you know yeah i can't people why can't people just say hey congratulations you're living a half year more full life now why can't you just do that to me and said you gotta try to beat me up in the street you got a laugh at me get a point at me saying you're you're a dude we're on a dress you look ugly you're the earliest thing i've ever seen you should kill yourself while you're doing that does people don't do that you're a man or a woman you're born a man you can't be a woman now who is it to you to judge that you've never lived underwater well as god says you're god defined something based on two thousand year old book that you can't wear cotton fibers with wool fibers or i should stone you right now it's ridiculous how they judge me it's based on stuff that doesn't make any sense now there are so many things that you can cut out of Leviticus to make our way of life in modern times impossible by what you eat by what you wear but what you say but what you do by all of it you couldn't live a life in modern society based on Leviticus two thousand year old scriptures well no the word's not really what god man well then how can you share your pick and tell me what god man well you god do you really know what was going on are you the creator when who you to judge what type of people give you that sort of feedback do you do you get that sort of feedback with fellow veteran let's told i was told i should kill myself just a week ago based on something i had a veteran right i want to stuff on a twitter post i have that god kinds of stuff and i was like i did but yeah no i did what you're talking about well you don't know me i know you i was in your platoon you said that now as i said you don't i was That call kinds of stuff and I was like, all right, but yeah, no, I do your time out. Well, you don't know me I know you I was in your platoon you said that now as I said you don't I was covering up and I was underwater Just trying to be normal in your eyes Has it yeah, probably said a lot of stupid stuff because I was just trying to carve up and survive in your world Has it I'm finally comfortable now and you're gonna give me crap right my Twitter handle my Facebook handle my Instagram handle my Gmail everything is the same valor for us valor for us V a the number four V a R for us Is my did it all social media that's my social media I get death threats. I get a me. I get all kinds of stuff I've been beating up two months ago. I got freaking attack two months ago on a bar three months months ago now before the isolation of govid I had someone attacking a bar Where they try to beat me out did they know who you were? No, they just saw dude in the dress. You're ugly. You shouldn't even be living and I was gone do it to see me alone Man, and I knew that they started to talk to me and yeah, they they were on the floor pretty quickly Yeah, I would imagine the new who you were they wouldn't have fucked with you now, but it just doesn't make sense Don't you let me alone? Yeah, it's that it really is that for me and people are me Speaking of Twitter. Did you didn't you respond to Donald Trump when he tweeted something about transgender? People not being should not be in the military So president president Trump tweeted out that transgender people should not be in the military in any capacity You want to get rid of us that's about 15,000 people in uniform today in uniform So you basically are transgender. So basically you wanted to kick out 15,000 people who nobody would even know or some of them know But they're doing a great job And the problem was when he tweeted that the army was underman by like 28% The Marine Corps underman by like 15% the Air Force was like 5% I think they were doing pretty good But that but the recruitment numbers to go to boot camp and join the military or all significantly under underman So for us the capability to fight a war on two firms If you had a European war and something going on in Asia and then going on We can't do it because we are so underman because nobody wants to join because it's a shit place to go Yeah, and you want to kick out an additional 15,000 people who are right now serving doing a good job Because of your prejudices doesn't make any sense. So that's why I told my today look I serve 20 years I did a good job. I served with honor You never knew and it didn't matter to you and who cares you're gonna kick me out That's bullshit. Let's talk face to face. Let's talk about this Did you get any response? No, no, but about about Six or seven months later. I met him face to face. Sugar's hand and I taught him And as I said serve Served my country for 20 years. I did a good job There's a lot of people just like me that want to serve and we want to serve with honor And he said to me as he was shaking my hand Thank you for your service chief How do you know us chief? You knew you were. Yeah. They'll make you how did that make you feel Well, he just said thank you for your service chief and I said you're welcome sir Just a lot of us will want to join. I'm not going to stop serving I served it this day. I served in different capacity I served by speaking to you. Yeah, maybe dropping a couple of nugget to truth and having to people think a little bit Yeah, have your mental toughness You intellectual toughness your spiritual toughness Tell you what being a Muslim America right now. You gotta be spiritually tough But nobody cares but that toughness they're gonna cure how many pushups you can do I welcome a three o'clock in the morning did a thousand pushups. Who cares man? I know a guy who's a Sikh Like a Sikh elder the guys amazing. You know who Sikhs are They're they're like religious like like spiritual leaders man or tough And he's a good friend of mine So I don't care how many pushups you can do at three o'clock in the morning I care about my really good Sikh. I'm odd I know another one. I'm in push and he was a seal and he's freaking mentally tough He's way tougher than doing a thousand pushups at 3 a.m. All you've I have a really good Muslim friend who's a Marine Marine Corps and that guy's mentally tough Way tougher than a thousand pushups at 3 o'clock in the morning I don't care how many pushups you knew at 3 o'clock in the morning Why don't you try being a Muslim Marine for a day? They guys way tougher than you So spiritual toughness mental toughness intellectual toughness Freaking tough toughness not what you do you wake up in the morning and do pushups. I don't care That's weak. That's a weakest person I've ever said Because if all you can do is do a thousand pushups at 3 o'clock in the morning Then you load the yellow and thumb up your chest about it I do a thousand pushups at 3 a.m Dude, that's one of the weakest people I've ever met Because you got a yellow about it. You got to tell everybody in the whole world how do you pushups you do? I don't care Do a thousand pushups. Don't tell anybody about it That's tough. I don't care if you yell on I don't care if you woke up at 3 a.m. Wake up at 3 a.m. and do whatever you got to do Why do you got to tell anybody about it? The weakest person is one that does stuff in y'alls and screams and thumbster chest They brag about it and every turn they brag Those are the weakest people The two people do all the stuff and nobody ever knew they did it I give somebody a homeless man. I'll give him a $20 bill I'm not going to tell anybody or take a picture or do anything And I'll do that a hundred times in a month Well, shit, I just said it. Yeah I just definitely get it There's gonna be some people in the comments and you just told all of us That's okay. There's so much stuff that happens Just you don't need to tell anybody about it. Just do it man. That's tough. That's real toughness You know who knows that you did that? You knew who knows you did it and who accounts You you just you no one else Not even a creator Your creator doesn't care if you gave Somebody who needed to mount somehow People tried to use bragging and saying they've done great things as Acts to prop up something that's not there And you can get more followers Yeah, so I don't have followers because I don't I try not to Save very much stuff about myself I I read a lot of stuff on all my social media when I did something incorrect I did something without thinking I did something that was callous or or You know in compassion. I didn't I didn't know what I was doing Then I was like darn it. I did that wrong Then I go back and I try to fix it and I try to make it better and I try to do something good Where I failed so every time I fail I try to do better I try to do something Those are the things I post So I don't have followers because I'm never out there saying hey I just did a 23 mile run in an hour and 20 minutes I just did this or I did that. I woke up at 3 a.m. Did thousand push-ups I don't write any that stuff. I write about stuff where I screwed it up and then I try to do better So who's gonna follow me? If I don't have followers I'm not gonna ever have fame. I think I use the followers I try to defame myself and I try to make it a lesson I try to give you some help by saying what I did wrong or what I felt bad about this or I wish I would have done that better I try to do lessons with everything I do You know what I mean? Yeah, it's important though because you do I think I think you do have followers but speaking to Talking about the things that you do wrong and the things that you mess up I think that's important for people to learn that and learn that it's important to fail. It's important to myself Like we're in a sock on my face. Yeah, yeah, the story messed up Because I just I went into a store without a face mask and so I went and I said hey You got a shit take your sock off. Hey, I did that. I didn't wait myself. I made a mask But I mean it's this I just do stuff and I just try to make it hey, I learned something And I want you to know how to do this so maybe you can do it I learned it from somebody else and then I made a couple of improvements here in there and they're like hey, man My buddy Danny did something with a sock before me And then I said hey, what if you do it like this do like that? It's something and then hey, man, this so an all knowledge is like barred and approved done that or done that And then I gave a lot of credit to my friend Danny You know at better days who came up with the first idea And it was like man, it's a great idea and I want more people to know about it And so now and you can even change it so that you put your chin Where the foot is there's another way to do it or the heels it'll it'll cuff in Improve it someone out there improve what I did and make it better because man All of life is about improvements when the caveman were here and they were you know fighting a t-rexes They did a lot of stuff and we've improved on it Nothing's new no everything's been sad. You just had a different What do you think is the biggest point of pain in Fellow veterans like yourself who have been in combat as much as you have and and how do you try to help them with What you've experienced with trying to let out bottled up emotions or bottled up feelings and get them off your shoulder like maybe that's one example But what do you see is the biggest Point of pain or stress within people like yourself who've dealt with what you've dealt with When you print this way if you go to the Veterans Administration and you see the number of people Registered and using the VA the VA hospital and doctors and prescriptions and all the other stuff And you look at a total number of veterans in the United States To percentage of people that use the VA is like 20% of veterans So the other 80% are like hell no I'm not going to the VA You know why? I probably won't go to the VA Surely because I'm just I'm angry Because I went to the VA and I was like, hey man, I'm in a really tough spot right now I'm having some problems and I just need help and I think I need help for about six months or a year And I need to caregiver I need somebody around to help me do some scheduling because I have traumatic brain injury And I did some other stuff happen and I just I need some help for a little while I need this thing called a caregiver program Well, they'll actually pay me a little bit of extra money So I can pay a caregiver to come in and work with me for two or three hours a day To make sure my scheduling is good. I'm on time. I'll take my medications. I'm doing it. I'm doing that They're just like it's like a checkup And I went to the VA and I asked when I said, hey, man, I'm going to really tough spot right now And you have this caregiver program that you're going to give me like 400 bucks a month or 800 bucks a month So I could pay somebody to come in like a qualified person that understands scheduling and pharmaceuticals and prescriptions All the stuff I'm doing because I'm going to tough spot right now So I could actually pay them to come in and be with me for an hour or two hours every two or three days or whatever Come in once a week. I just go through my schedule go through everything going on and make sure everything's good You know make sure I'm eating health. I'm not just eating macaron cheese every day for a month straight Which I did and it caused me to have this really bad cholesterol was off the charts I was going McDonald's eating mac and cheese because I was just in that real bad funk Was in a bad place So I go to the VA and I go to this place I had this caregiver program I say, hey, I want to apply for this caregiver program And they asked me to all these questions and and then let's see all and I I answered the questions like a seal and I wasn't I didn't win there to live in and I have a little nip And I go in there and I just like and I tell them yeah, okay, I mean, I'm doing okay I guess and I'm doing that in an out time I didn't go in there and cry I didn't go in there I went there Unshoured for a week, which I did go for but we can have it and take a shower Which because I was in a I wasn't a fuck and I couldn't get out And this is the stuff that happens when you have you know PTSD and traumatic Ran injury stuff doesn't always connect And so you go for a week and a half without showering you didn't go out of the house I wasn't and like you want to be self-sulted isolate what did the to myself a lot And so I'm telling this caregiver program and ain't deny me And I actually went in and asked him for help Yeah, because I knew it was enough funk and had stuff going on and I needed some help and I want to get out of the funk I'm gonna I want to like give me six months of this person to come in once a week and help me out That's what I was asking for and I said I want somebody for six months or a year to come in for one or two days a week For like two hours and just check everything out and do that and do that Make sure I'm not in that fuck that nothing's going on funky. They're not doing that or that And I said no That's unbelievable. It would have cost him total for a year would have cost him What? $4,000 $5,000 total And you're talking about a VA that only serves 20% of the veteran population And they're the biggest health care and I have millions and millions of millions of dollars And they won't give me $4,000 over a year Because I asked them for help. They deny me So do you think I I give it crap about the VA anymore? I think they suck They basically said no Yeah, that seems to me unfair next time I fall in one of those depression holes and if anybody's ever had depression Or anxiety or TBI or PTSD or anything Survivors guilt and remorse and all the other stuff that I have wrapped up in stuff and it goes in waves And I hit one of the waves and now I'm in a hole And if I get nobody around checking me nobody around I'm all alone to sit in here and when I start getting out hole I can't climb out of hole. It gets whole gets deeper. It gets worse now. I'm in the darkness Now I don't shower. I know we can have goes by and I'm in a real deep hole Real hard to get out of it and all I have is somebody saying well Just just buck off and may not you should wake up at 3 am do a thousand bunch of you suck you to be as pussy ever met You got that and got somebody and going what dude, I don't and I got everything coming down on me I'm going man. I just I just don't know what's wrong. I mean, I can't I look at myself and I go man I don't know what's wrong. I don't know what's wrong with me man And all I asked a VA was I just I know him in his spot I want somebody to help me with the tools somebody who's educated in some therapy and some other stuff that when they start seeing me getting a little bit of a hole Before I start digging deep on it get worse before I said stewing on it They go hey man. You just hey try this out. Hey, here's some tools. Hey, here's some yoga. Why don't you try this practice out? Why don't you do that? I'm gonna go man. That's a really good idea. I'm gonna try that They don't just tell me I'm a freaking wimp and I got a man out for I got to do that I had a VA says no, we don't believe because you're coming here and you look pretty happy Because you're seeing me on the day. I went to the VA. It's not the day after we can have a no shower and a big hole You're not gonna ever see me when I'm in my hole But when I got out of the hole and I said hey look I've been in a hole like this year It happened five times This year and I see it. I see a pattern. I see some stuff going on How long is it last for? Shoot one time it was like a month and a half Oh my god. So I finally get out of the hole and I'm talking to the VA and I get out of the hole by myself Because I start reading something right see something on social media because I'm on social media. I'm on on my Instagram I'm on my Instagram and somebody on Instagram says something they go hey You know, I've been there, you know, and this is what and they tell me just enough in one sentence on my Instagram I see it it pops up I say hey, I just followed you back because you follow me and I PMed you what are you talking about? So personal message. It's now we're talking we're talking behind the scenes now I don't go what would you mean by that and I'm in a hole man. I'm deep Then they say what what I mean by that is this and that gave me some really good advice As someone who's been there and I go holy cow. That's a really good idea now. I'm out of the hole a little bit And I said what about this and this now I'm a little bit bit And so I got out of the hole because I had a whole bunch of my followers Who are on Instagram? My own Twitter who are some Facebook followers, but mostly Instagram really helps because I can see stuff and I see their pictures I see what that and a picture is a thousand words So I see them all happy and I go and I said man, you're look really happy for your hair You know, it's like mine. I'm all like I'm kind of ready I don't really look that good and you're like thinking about this You think about that and I look at the picture that I see what they wrote and I go to him That's kind of like me because the picture says a lot what they say says a lot so Instagram was really good for me Mm-hmm, but then on the same Instagram. I had a guy who was a Navy SEAL who I served with who started totally given me crap They made me cool worse totally like I was like man Why would they say that they knew I am they gave me a little secret little snippet That I know he was in my platoon. I know opportunity. Yes. I know who he is Because he gave me enough information that I'm able to figure out who was But they gave me a lot of crap. I didn't deserve Then he didn't even deeper. He started sticking to knife. He didn't even worse I was going man. How do you know where I am in life? Right. How do you know what's going on in my life? And now you stick a knife in as a friend Do you know where I am with a shotgun in my mouth getting ready to pull the trigger He could have been to want to pull the trigger through an Instagram post by giving me all that crap by the hate But a bigotry you don't know where I'm in life. I would do that somebody Dude just be nice man give a help man. How about a hug mug? It's blind hate you don't have to really help somebody You don't know where they are So Instagram is good because I see pictures. I see stuff going on and I see that I know what that guy the Navy SEAL who I know it was Has a hidden name Has hidden pictures. You'll never figure out who he is by name by picture. He's anonymous So he's an anonymous little wimpy dude hide behind a keyboard Given shit to somebody keyboard warrior Little the most weak weak mind weak person a weaketh person on earth is that person Because he has no strength or integrity or honor You're gonna do that to somebody behind a hidden more by keyboard warrior. You're gonna try to make somebody kill himself Because you're so weak the weakest person I've ever met is that person. Well notice in a category of very very weak Weak mind weak intellectual weak spiritual because you don't even have a spiritual awakening where you can see this or see that or understand Humanities diverse. We have a lot of stuff going on come on man. How weak are you? Yeah, I've come to realize that the people that leave those toxic hateful comments on social media They they it's coming from a place of self-hate They literally they have the lives they're living. They're so unhappy and they're just projecting that and trying to make themselves feel better It's like a it's just it's toxic and it's a cesspool if you're if you're in that hole When you're in a deep hole You want to do anything to try to get out of that hole And that's alternative therapies So that's my nonprofit is called mindful valor Because valor isn't thumb-chasting valor isn't how when you push up sir How tough you are or do you have ck just valor? Mindful valor is one mindfulness mindful valor is but intellectual integrity and honor and strength mindful valor is a spiritual strength mindful valor.org Is my nonprofit Okay, so I get money to pursue alternative therapies to try to find alternative therapy in any way Dude if you live in Washington state and marijuana's legal and if you smoke a joint and you're good And you're able to cope or do whatever you got to do then you can pursue other things Man, that's good therapy If you're living in New York like I do and you start doing yoga and something you can do And it works for you. Me and that's therapy. It works for you. Then get out of that hole If you do like I have like a booter right there and I have a aroma therapy stuff going on I have my hemolane saw black which I heat up and I burn and I have this I have stuff I have like a hundred different alternative therapies that I pursued Have you ever loved until you go on only some places? I'm ever legal in other places But the thing is is like who we to judge the legality of a God-grown plant that might help out a lot of people Then man you should be able to do that man. The law is related in that. It's like and this is the air full 2020 air full 20 man come on air full fourth in 2020 man. That's like the creator told me to go smoke some herb Yeah, on you know this week was it Monday this week man. I think the whole world should have been stoned Well, the worst of all you Yeah, yeah Air full fourth 2020 everyone should smoke it out That was God-given right on a God-given day that said everybody gets down Yeah, but there's laws man. Well, who are your laws? Man your laws of man or laws of the crater But it's for your true laws that remain man lost and we've pied as some flight of others and what's up with the law What's up with a lot that only applies to some people not others? I don't like those kind of laws if you have a law that applies to black and not white If you have a lot of applies to female my male if you have a lot of applies to Someone who has this or that or that or that you're making up laws that apply to being gay or straight That's not a law man. That's a that's a big iterate way to persecute one person over another No laws are illegal Those laws are illegal by the laws of man and laws of God If they applied to one or not the other One of my favorite comedians quotes is the worst drugs for you are the ones that aren't taxed Have you ever Have you ever experimented with MD anything like MDMA for PTSD? Hug mug. I've experienced Now hugs are great. I love hugs when it comes to all that I have not yet Tried that I'm trying to do more study and to some of that before I would even do it myself I don't know enough about it, but I do know other people have done it. I'm trying to get more information from them Okay, yeah, I've heard a lot about it. I've heard a lot of really good things about it A lot of things. Yeah, I've also had good things about shock therapy You know like 1940s 1940s and 50s when they stick to big things on there And they said like 400 volts through your brain Yeah, in the old days in the old days. They did it was kind of like a punishment It was kind of that it was it was it was it was a views It was it was like criminal freaking torture But there's been there's been some advances in some studies because we've learned so much That I know I know someone who did that the other day And I had had great great results Shock therapy shock therapy man the old-fashioned like like Frankenstein shock therapy. Holy shit. That sounds brutal The advances is not brutal. Oh, it's actually it's therapeutic That's the thing is like if things are done wrong It can be very very harmful But if you do things I mean even water board it man. I mean you water board somebody and it's like good It's good for you. You know, you know, you know, you only water board them right way. You kind of not just kidding No, it's total torture You did do that part of your training right? Yeah, it hurts. It's painful. Don't ever get water. What is really painful? But the thing is like there's a lot of things that that if you do it the wrong way You can definitely harm people and those ways to do things that can be helpful beneficial We just need to figure out through science and through experimentation and through To be able to do something and and have a repeatable solution of repeatable outcomes to the procedure that are beneficial beneficial to 90 people and 10 people really hurts We have to figure out what's going on and and we have to fix it went to find out because you harm in 10 out of 10 out of 100 That's it's not really it's not good We have to figure out what drugs because a lot of drugs that are out there on the market that are legal But it also harms a pretty big part of the population if they're used incorrectly Or you have to use correctly But just for that person it would have a chemical imbalance or chemical side effect. It's just extremely harmful So I think that read the the rigor and science needs to keep its legitimacy at Through equal equality in that way. I don't know if that makes any sense But I think we get harsh on some things and easy on others because it's more money in somebody's pocket Yeah, for sure pharmaceutical companies are huge they make a lot of money But some of their stuff they use has never really been tested and it still has some side effects We still see it happen Yeah, I mean a huge problem obviously with places like the VA is they don't they focus a lot on physical and Treating you with pharmaceuticals and they want to just you know pill you up, but they don't really there's not enough focus on Mental health and mental treatment and that's what affects the suicide rate Here's a problem of the VA is the VA is huge. It's the biggest medical group in the world probably So they have a lot of money. It's the biggest money. It's the biggest one single spending item any entire budget So you have all those millions of dollars. You know how they split them up? You have a physical air went so you have a broken bone. We got to put a cast in there We're gonna set it or you have mental something going on you can send you just like hydro So you can do this and do that right? So there's two huge huge pots of money. I'd always a competition between the pots of money Okay, you have a Set it easy you have to get an operation to do the operation to do this You have to go see the psychiatrist do that But the psychiatry is it like small compared They want to see the problem and medical doctors and psychologists so they're all competing competing funds right For a huge out of money. It's a wrong way to look at it So you got to look at the funds with the the funds should also be split up to a third bucket of money And that third bucket of money should be about twice of what the mental illness mental Counseling and all that so whatever their budget is multiplied by two and take that multiplication of two How would of the physical budget so the physical budget goes down by this much? This one comes in here You know what that bottom one is called it's twice this it's called wholeness Hmm, it's the whole person. It's a whole person therapy. It's the whole well-being So it's called whole body well-being that we'd go overall And so that has to do with after you have a broken bone or whatever you have to go into physical therapy Physical therapy is part of whole all-being because that'll be yoga that'll be massaging that'll be a hot tub therapy Hot there every room with therapy. It's only other therapies And as I like lifestyle lifestyle. Yeah, it's a proper diet We want nutrition should be in the whole person therapy So after you're fixed with a surgery with that and that and that you're you're you're done the medical doctor Fixia he did surgery on you he did brain surgery foot surgery bone surgery intestinal gastrointestinal all the other things are part of this big Physical budget budgeting then you have the whole being which is a physical therapy and everything after you get to surgery Plus for the mental well-being you have the psychology and lay on the couch and do all that That doesn't cover the yoga and doing Group therapy or do a roma therapy or do MEM D D MDMA or do marijuana or do that the whole person therapy is Drum circles is is doing a lot of stuff Because that does in between matter it all contributes back and forth between that's all in our woven. Yeah And it's also spiritual. Hey, dude If you have your yoga dude and it's also a prayer guy the drum guy does all that I'm a ordained minister And if you give me a budget because somebody's got an operated on there like in a coma for three weeks and they got operated on head And that they had to go to psychiatrist you're missing a whole another part of that I could have him talking to me for you know an hour a week and I'll fix everything in between that Psychologist is never gonna talk about and then a medical doctor is never gonna know about And I bring it all together in the middle. I'm talking about nutrition I talk about intellectual stimulation of that and that and get you fired up. I'm talking about. Hey, man Let's just go sit on top into some room with every little bit and let's have a talk What was the last book you ran let's talk about that book? What did that book mean to you and where does it go? So it's my psychology and it's not setting a bone I'm doing everything in between that makes you a whole person. Yeah They don't have a nutrition new treatment is huge. It's huge You're faster bigger than mental and physical. Yeah nutrition. I mean you are you literally you are They don't have a question. New treatment is huge. It's huge. New treatment is bigger than mental and physical. Yeah. New treatment, you are literally you are what you eat. In mindful valor, I can do all of that. I'm going to talk about your nutrition. I'm going to talk about your spirituality, intellectualality. I'm talking about your sexuality. Because your sexual well-being is also part of your whole being. And what do you have to, man? What's going on? How can you do that? What was that? What's going on today? You know, what's going on with your marriage? You have a boyfriend or girlfriend who's gone there. Let's talk about that for a little bit. So that kind of counseling is not psychology one or one, Freudian science. And it's not medical doctor anything else. This is a whole different spectrum of healing. Yeah. Well being of you as a whole person. Maintenance. You're not going to talk about sexuality with a mental doctor or even most psychologists. Because there's going to talk about the Freudian crap and opid, I had all that. Brilliant, I had a spiritual. I want to go and talk to my priest about freaking my last day. No, man, that's that's mindful valor, man. That's my, that's my room. The VA doesn't fund that. Nobody funds that. That's why I have to have a nonprofit to get money to bring somebody in the same man. This has been a backyard. Hey, there's no steer over there. I have deer in my backyard right now from my back window. They're just grazing 15 yards away from me. And I find a lot of peace with that. I find peace with that. Do you find peace with that? This is talking about the deer in my backyard for an hour. That's wholeness, man. That's whole body healing. That's amazing. That's amazing. I love that. That's what I do. That's really the main. And if you have any stimulation, you can have a COVID-T in your hug mug. A hug mug. And we can heal. That's how the hug mug. We need to start funding that kind of stuff. This should be twice of the psychology budget and taken from the physical, because what we do in physical therapy and whole body healing. What do you have to deal with physically now? A lot. Really. I know you broke your back. You broke your back. I remember your Taliban birthday present. Yeah. I had a share of injuries. I had my rearst in my hands. I'll be sitting there in my handle to start aching. I don't have like holding onto something. And my thumb has so many issues. My thumb will stop working. And I get these twitches. And I just drop whatever I have. So if I have something fragile, I have something, you'll see me drop stuff. And I'm just like, I just couldn't hold it. It's just my hand didn't work. So that's both my hands are arthritis and the eggs. I have a lot there. And my elbow, I blew that elbow. That's what sticks way out. I hit here so hard. It broke my ulna. It's a radius and ulna. I shoved up through my elbow. And so it sticks out still through the elbow. How did you do that? I pushed it up through. It was a really big fall to happen in a country we shot on name. But it was like, it was a, it was a, it was a hurt. I just taved it with rigors tape and put it back in place. And then I had like another one where tore my shoulder out and did that. And my knees and did that. I broke that ankle somewhere else. I broke an every finger in my hand, this rib. I fell through a roof in another country. And it hit air and it broke one of my ribs. And I climbed back up to the roof as my feet would dangle through the roof. So I'm going, so that's another funny story. The cow. It was a, it was a funny, but my body, I'm a burkin at one, one would crack my body. I'm a burkin, burkin from ribs and stuff. And you were falling off of a ship at that when you broke your back. That was a ship fact. It didn't break it like a, like a, like a crack. It wasn't like that. It was, it was, it was, it was, um, a fracture. That little fracture. Yeah. It was a partial fractures. Part of a fracture. So it's a partial fractures and cracked everything out. But didn't totally, in a burque, one of the, um, decrysioning the, um, what do you call them? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I have, yes. So I have black discs and I have gray discs and I white discs. The white ones that are healthy with a fluid is so good. The gray ones that are fluid is kind of disrupted. It's starting to get no older. If the, if the disc is black and actually you can see it, if the disc is black, I mean, it's basically all the fluid in there that gives it cushioning has all turned solid kind of. So it's just, it's, it's just, it's like more bone between bone. Uh, so I basically made a couple of black discs and I fashioned a bunch of bones. So I still able to operate. I can still move around, but it's just really painful. So because I was laying on the bottom of the boat, I'm watching the guys were kicking me. As they're going past to get on a ladder, they were like, back get up. Let's go man. It kicked me on the way. Yeah. And so I'm laying her getting kicked and I'm like, damn. All right. And so I got up and I jumped a ladder and I was like, dude, stop kicking me. I'm going to get up. So I got up. And I was like, I don't hurt. I don't know whether it hurts. I don't know. But I, but I climbed the ladder with like 40 or 50 pounds. I had a rock sack on with it. You know, saws and stuff. All my ammunition and guns. So basically it's like doing 30 pull ups with 40 pound 50 pounds in your back with the Birken bones. So you're not able to use your feet when you're doing that. Yeah. Use your feet in your hands. Oh, okay. Okay. But basically using your feet in your hands with all the weight on and getting up the ladder. Good. But it's a lot of arms to climb fast. Use a lot of arms because if you use all feet, you're not as fast. So basically you're skipping up with just doing pull ups. So you're just skipping up really fast. You only hook and basically just a little bit of your heel on the ladder. So your heel is barely catching. Then you're just doing pull ups and your heels are going to, so it's real quick. You need up a ladder fast. If you do it right. Wow. It's been amazing hearing your story and the perspectives that you're able to give from your experiences. What is the message that you want to communicate to people, whether it be young people who maybe want to join the military or anyone in the world? What what do you want your legacy to say about you? And how do you want to help other people? I mean, that's it's a huge question. I mean, everybody has a legacy. But most people's legacy is our forgotten one or two generations after they pass away. So what what's what's anyone's legacy can be? Is it going to be written down? Is it just like this? A little podcast that's in video. Is this forever? Is podcast. It's in bits and zeros. It's ones and zeros bits and bytes. So this podcast is forever. The documentary film Lady Valor, which is about part of my life is forever. As part of my legacy, part of my legacy is mindful valor foundation. The nonprofit that I started. That's part of my legacy. I mean, that's what you have to consider is that it's just like going up the ladder. So every run of that ladder is part of your legacy. But is it the same or is it building and you learn? So every time I make a mistake, I say, Hey, I own it. This is what I want to do better. And that's a run up. It's the stabs of the ship. I wrote a book called the book of stabs. So if you think about a robot, every part of that robot, those little, the runners long, there's a stabs. And more stabs you have the higher up the gunnels, the higher up the sides of those boat coe, so you can handle more and more harsh weather. So more stabs you have the higher up the boat goes. You can handle bigger and bigger seas. The stab is also the run over ladder. So if you're a kid, you're in grade school, you're building up a stab to play good with others. That's your first stab. It's play well. Then you get another stab. Your ladder gets more and more runs, more and more stabs. So I have this thing called the book of stabs. And stab number one is this. Staff two is this. Staff three. And he's one of these are lessons that I've learned in life. And it goes up to like staff 200 or all these little things that I've learned, all these lessons I've picked up. And these stabs put together, make a pretty sturdy little boat that I can handle the harshness of the world's oceans. I can handle the harshness of the intellectual ocean of the spiritual ocean of the like the tough ocean. So all you're doing is building stabs of toughness, doing pull up some pushups and waking up early in the morning. Your boat is pretty weak in other waters. You might be strong in the eerie Lake Erie, but when you try to go to the Pacific, you're not going to be very strong because you never did a mental stabs. You only did one set of stabs. So your stabs that you have and you build up your strength. Should be a combination of mental stabs of toughness, stabs of way-lift and stabs of nutritional stabs, of spiritual stabs, of, you know, camaraderie stabs of colleagues stabs. Your stabs are so assorted and so diverse. Do you can survive in oceans in any ocean in a lake, in a pond, on a stream, on a river? You can't just make a stab that serves the oceans. What are you going to do when you go in a river? So the book of stabs is a combination of lessons, it's a combination of pearls of wisdom that I've learned over the years, the hard way through stories and things that I know because I learned it. So I'm going to give you a little story. This is how it happened. This is when I learned. So the book of stabs is one of those kinds of books. So that's what we talked a lot about toughness. And I talk about the SEAL team training. You can get through SEAL team training. If you're pretty mentally tough and you have a lot of physical strength, with some luck, you can get through. But there's other things you probably couldn't handle because you have no, like the intellectual or spiritual or you have no compassion and stabs. To walk past something to see, you know what, that person really needs a hand. The captain at a ship, he had no compassion. He saw somebody in needed it. That person was in a hole and having a really tough time. And that captain did nothing more but dig the hole deeper and stuck that person deeper in a hole and that person committed suicide. I would say that captain's one of the weakest people I've ever met in my life. His shift would never survive in the waters that I've navigated. He calls somebody to kill themselves. Now, when you think about your life and what your leg is going to be, oh, you know, UFC fighter who's freaking was super tough in a ring. And I won't name him, but you probably know the person. He's very notorious. He's a tough guy, man. He's notorious. And that guy is probably the biggest a hole in the world. He has zero compassion. He was zero intellectual. He has zero spiritual or very little of all the above. But the guy has a winner and UFC ring, but a loser with everything else. His legacy is one fold. His legacy is so single dimension. It's pretty weak. All my legacy to be across all that. Doesn't he be super deep and wondering anything else, but I want it to be pretty broad. I wanted somebody to listen to me and to go damn. And to that show of spiritual, pretty strong made a few buds. Also, think about stuff. Also, admit to make mistakes. Also, try to be better and all that stuff. Wow. Okay. I get it. There's a guy who, um, fighter and a kid is really fun to listen to. Yeah. So listen to fighter and kid podcast. Yeah, that's a great podcast. I implore you. There's also a mess in his name around. He did zombie cage fighter series. He's from Washington state. Why am I messing his name off? Man, I'm sorry. Well, I can't see if it can be open right now. Look up zombie cage fighter. That's okay. Oh, Nathan quarry rock quarry. Nathan name rock quarry. Nathan rock quarry. Oh, okay. So here's that's part of my traumatic brain injury. Ask memory issues sometimes. But I swear, man, look up Nathan rock quarry. Rock quarry. He, he is the coolest guy. And this guy's UFC fighting champion. He's awesome. He's tough. But the guy has a spiritual toughness that guys in intellectual toughness is compassionate. And he has his feeling. The guy is amazing. If I get to grow up and I can be like one person, I would be like the rock man. Rock quarry. The guy is the coolest guy. Man, look him up. Okay. I'm on your show. I really like this guy, man. And I swear, he's also want to say anything. He's legacy. You have a legacy of man of compassion, of intellectual giant. And he was a UFC fighting tough guy. You don't want to mess with the guy. Well, but is it coolest guy, man? And that's what I want my legacy to be. Just like Nathan rock quarry. You know, that's how we need to look at it. If your legacy is one dimensional, then it's not very much. You know, and that's what I talk about. The book is to have it's a book that I'm writing it. It's not published yet. But it's just stabs, man. Build your stabs up. Have a lot of stabs and stabs are twofold. Everyone to look at it. If you have a tall ladder, you can climb up to higher and higher levels of consciousness, higher and higher levels of vibration. More stabs is more rungs. Staff is a rung on the ladder. Have you want to look at it? You can look at it. But it's cool because stabs mean two things. You know what I mean? Yeah. So I just climb high, man. Do big stuff or the stabs for your boat. So you can sail on many, many harsh waters. You know, so I love that. That's beautiful. That's beautiful. And I definitely look forward to reading that book. Is that a cool way to leave our show? That is a very cool way to leave our show, Kristen. Thank you so much for doing this. I've learned so very much from you. I'm so grateful for you doing this. And for everyone in the country. If you want to follow me, follow me on Instagram. It's valor for us. Because valor's not for me. And valor has no gender. Valor has no color. Valor has nothing. Valor is, is doesn't care. Valors for us. Valors for all of us. So valor for us on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, all of it. You can find me. I'll link that all below as well. Cool. Thank you. Thanks, Kristen. Namaste.