Do you know James Carville? Yes. So he got stuck at a rose one time when we worked together in New Orleans and had to take a leak and it was on sea span. On the table, which I have seen, he's sitting there and he's shuffling in a seat. All of a sudden he takes this water picture off the table and sort of six, we get the water bottle. So what what is that thing moving on your lapel on your pocket? That's the debt. That's my anxiety generator. So it's actually making me really anxious. Is that is that real time? Yes. So it's synced to treasury. It gets the debt to the penny once a day and then it looks at what the debt was a year ago and it comes up with a rolling average debt per second and it interpolates on weekends and holidays when the when the treasury is not paying attention. I am. So I think you're the only one who wants to know. Yes. And I want my colleagues to know and it's great to wear this thing in an elevator with like Adam Schiff and he's gotten nowhere to look. I once caught a female congresswoman staring at it and had to tell her my eyes were up here. She asked me why I didn't make a belt buckle out of it. Did you say what was because I like no, I can't. Oh, it's funny. That's very impressive. So what's the message of it? The message is this is urgent. You know, it's it's hard to comprehend 14 digits of debt. But when you see the last five digits are moving so fast, you can't, you know, perceive them with your eyes, then you kind of understand. Whoa, we are a problem here. I mean, it's a hundred thousand dollars a second roughly. So imagine we had this catapult and we were launching cyber trucks once a second into the ocean. That's how much debt we're taking on continuously. Now there is some good news. I noticed last month it went down and I'm like, is my debt clock broken? Why is it going down? And then I realized, oh, it's April 15th. Everybody's paying their taxes. So the good news is we balanced it for a month. The bad news is April 15th is the only reason that happened. And now the debt's going back up again. So maybe it when it gets so big, it becomes something that you have to ignore. It's almost like if you fall off the wagon from drinking, you binge. If you fall off your nearest diet, you just eat the pizza and a great den in Jerry's. Like, why do you care? You know, you sort of go crazy. And it feels like we're there. I am trying to make people feel very uncomfortable. I wear this on the floor of the house. Yeah. And people literally they'll press the button that says, yeah, you're an A. I've argued we should relabel the voting button spend and don't spend. Yeah. The red and green, if you got that foreign can't read, I say it's like stop and go, but I've seen people press the spend button then turn around, look at my debt badge, and ask that it just go up. But I want them to realize their consequences to what they're doing because they have been, I think, as you said, just ignoring it, putting it off to the top. But it almost feels like, you know, it's so big that why even deal with it. That's where we are. We're kind of, I think a lot of lawmakers are apathetic. They're like, well, we can't fix it. We're not going to fix it. We might as well indulge in it and I'll see what I can get. Well, exactly. Yeah. So where does it end? Right now we're able to finance it because we're the world's reserve currency. And when we print more money, which we're doing all the time, the Fed is doing that, we're actually taxing the world. Everybody in the world who holds dollars gets like a 3% transaction fee. I say we're kind of like the credit card at the gas station that gets 3% because you're using that credit card. Well, we get 3% from inflation we cause because the world is using our currency. And we can do that as long as they use our currency. But I think it's going to end at some point, they're going to quit using our dollars' reserve currency. I mean, I watched your interview with Putin. And one of the things, you know, whether Haiti or not, one of the things he said that is true is when we sanctioned him, before we sanctioned Russia, 70% of their transactions were in US dollars. And after the sanctions, it's less than 20% of their transactions are in US dollars. So what we're doing with all these sanctions, ironically, we're shooting ourselves in the foot. Every time we sanction a country and say you can't use our currency to have a transaction, we're taking away our ability to charge them 3% for that transaction because when we print 3% more dollars, we're just taking that money. And we're also sending a really clear signal, which is the dollars not safe for you. Right. That's the reserve currency because it's a safe haven because it's a stable country. It's the most stable country in the world and we're not going to weaponize the dollar because that would be shooting ourselves. But suddenly we are. And they'll tolerate like 3% because if we're not backed by dollars, we're backed by aircraft carriers right now. So they'll tolerate that 3%. But one of the things we recently did in Congress, we passed something called the repo act where we said we're just going to seize all of Russia's sovereign assets in the United States. Well, it turns out a lot of that is treasury debt that they've agreed to buy so that they can hold dollars. And here's here's the problem with that. When people see that we've seized their money, that they gave us an exchange for these treasury notes, then other countries want to buy our debt. It's already happening. And the price of a long-term bond that the treasury puts out will go, it's already gone above 4%. It's like over 4.5%. And they don't want to buy them anymore because, you know, we probably wouldn't seize Great Britain's assets. But I could see a seizing China's assets. Why would I mean that seems like theft. It just like take a country's assets when it belongs to the people of the country, right? It's such as Putin. It is theft. Like it's immoral. But even if you're okay with the immorality or immorality of it, it's short-sighted because eventually it'll catch up with us. So do any of the dumbos you work with understand that? Did you say wait a second if we do this? First of all, it's wrong. And if we're going to be a beacon of light and order injustice in the world, we should abide by those principles. But even if you don't care about the, even if, as you said, you're a immoral, like it's self-defeating to do this. Do they understand that? Some of them understand it, but it doesn't matter. They'll still vote for something like the repo act anyway because it's popular. And with whom? With voters, they think, yeah, take Russia's money. Like, you know, let's take, yeah, that'd be great. Let's take their money and use it in a war against them. It kind of feels good. But the problem is it's not moral in the long run and it won't work in the long run even if you were okay with it. Why are we in a war with Russia? I've never figured that out. Why Russia? It almost seems like they picked it off. I'm meant like why would it be a war with Russia? Now what's interesting is we were in Afghanistan and I was tracking this. I talked to the special inspector general, John Sopckeau, about twice a year about the money that was being wasted in Afghanistan. It was about $50 billion a year. And it was glad to see us get out of Afghanistan. But kind of like feathering the clutch and shifting gears, we just went from second gear to third gear because as soon as we quit spending $50 billion a year in Afghanistan, we started spending more than $50 billion a year in Ukraine. There's a military industrial complex. They call it the defense industrial base now in the United States. They say we have to, they're hungry and we've got to keep them fed and since we don't have any of our own wars and we don't have a reason to deplete our stocks and our bombs and weapons that we have. We'll engage in these other things to keep them healthy and thriving. In fact, the Biden administration even made that argument in a letter to Congress for why we should do this supplemental foreign aid to Israel to Ukraine to Taiwan. They made the argument that the defense industrial base needs to be strong and so we need to spend this money and they gave a list of all the states in the United States that would benefit from this spending and that's why they said we should do it. But if you're, I mean, look, everyone who lives here wants to be proud of the country, I always have been and I'm proud of its people still. But if your main export is death, you know, that, I mean, why? It doesn't work in the long run. I mean, there is a low back wrong. We're engendering a lot of ill will look 10 years ago, even more recently than that. The only way we could get to the space station was on a Russian rocket. And we, you know, we had a collaboration with them. We were able to get to space that way. And now we don't. I mean, it's, and the bad thing that's, you know, like in the Middle East, Israel's creating tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands of people who are going to hate the United States and, you know, they're going to hate Israel also. But because we're giving Israel the weapons to do what they're doing, we're creating a lot of people who hate us in this country. But we're told that it's essential to our national security to do that. Do you believe that? No, I don't see that. I mean, one of the reasons, like I said, the Biden letter said, well, we need to keep our industrial based strong. So let's fund all these weapons and send them over. But I don't see how it's strengthening our country. In fact, we're getting weaker by doing it. So you've been, um, I think the loan Republican to dissent from a lot of these votes. Can you, like how many votes have there been on just question and where have you voted on them? Oh, I've tried to keep track. There were something like 18 votes on Ukraine. And I voted against everyone of them since like 2014 when we started, you know, saber rattling. We do these non-binding resolutions, whereas, you know, Russia's evil, you know, whereas we support democracy. Now, even then, we knew that Ukraine was just corrupt as hell. But, you know, I, the most corrupt country in Europe by far. Yeah. So I started, you know, there's been 16 or 20 votes on Ukraine. I've been against all of those. Just in the last seven months, there have been probably 30 votes on Israel in the Middle East 30 30. There were somebody many votes on the US border during that time. Oh, maybe, maybe four show votes that, you know, where we know they're going nowhere in the Senate. Um, look, we haven't named 30 votes offices. It last month we voted like 15 or 16 times on issues related to Israel. And, you know, I've been hit because I voted no on all of them. Why do you, because you hate Israel or those are another reasons? No, because I'm against sending our money overseas. I'm against starting another proxy war. I'm against sanctions because it's going to weaken the dollar. I'm for free speech, like all of these resolutions run a foul of those things. And that's why I can't vote for them. Tell us what the free speech part of it. So recently they brought a bill to Congress. And this was actually a binding bill, not a non-binding resolution. Right. This was going to have the effect of law and people would get, you know, prosecuted if they engaged in anti-Semitism on campuses. And the problem with this bill is they use some international definition of anti-Semitism on a website somewhere. My first question is, why don't you just put the definition in the bill? Why are you pointing to somebody's URL in a piece of legislation? You are the Congress, right? Right. We are the laws. We should be. Instead, we're referencing a website. This not even, uh, hosted in the United States. And so, but, so I went to this website and it's got a, you know, fairly short definition, but it's also got examples of things that would be considered anti-Semitism. And some of these are actually passages in the New Testament, if you will, would be banned by this international definition of anti-Semitism. For instance, saying that, uh, Jews killed Jesus, which is, you know, in the Bible, he was, he was not welcome on his own people, okay? And so that would be anti-Semitism. And if you engaged in that on campus or just offered that as a thought, let's say in a classroom, you would be anti-Semitic and you would run afoul of the Department of Education and some federal laws. And, you know, there were other examples in there that were hard to believe, for instance, comparing the policies of Israel to, to the Nazi regime would be anti-Semitic. But the question is, what if there, what if their policies ever became the same? Is this a static definition? Or what if we just have different opinions? And your opinion is now a crime? Right. I mean, even if it's abhorrent, even if it's wrong and stupid, yeah, it's, it's still legal. It should be. You may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist, right left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth. It's between good and evil. It's between honesty and falsehood. And we hope we are on the former side. That's why you created this network, a Tucker Carlson network. And we invite you to subscribe to it. You go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. Our entire archive is there. A lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn when only an iPhone is running. Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast. You will not regret it. So your colleagues, I think it passed, right? Oh, yeah, it passed with flying colors. But at least a few people woke up to this. I mean, the, the members of Congress who, you know, go to church on Sunday, who've just voted to ban the New Testament on campus, make it illegal to quote from the New Testament, the Christian Bible. Like how did they square that? I think their voters let them get away with it. I mean, they, they don't have to square it unless they're, why would they want to do something like that? Because there's a lot of pressure in Congress to vote for these things. And our Republican leadership thinks they're so smart, you know, we're in an election year. And they want to bring up issues. They want to put them in front of Congress and make us vote on them, whether they're going anywhere in the Senate or not. And they want to split the Democrats. They want to show that Republicans are united and then split the Democrats. That's one of the reasons they do it. Another reason they do it is there's a foreign interest group called a pack that's, you know, got the year of this current speaker and demanded 16 votes in April on, on Israel or the Middle East. We haven't had 16 votes in April on the United States in Congress. So what's a pack? A pack is the American Israel Public Affairs Committee. And they didn't start out as a pack in the sense of a political action committee. But now they have a political action committee. Ostensibly, it's a group of Americans who lobby on behalf of Israel for anything Israel. And they're a very effective lobbying group. They get in there. They try to get me to write a white paper as a candidate, for instance, for Congress. They almost get on one on Israel. And I wouldn't do it. And they said, why? And I'm like, I don't do homework for lobbyists, right? I'm like, I didn't like writing term papers. I said, college, I'm not writing one for you. What did they say? They said, Oh, we'll hear just copy Rand Paul's term paper and put your name on it. We'll accept that. And I'm like, no, I'm still not cribbing somebody else's homework to do homework. I'm not turning in my homework for you. And what I hear laughing. But you know what? I bet I may be the only Republican in Congress who hasn't done homework for a pack. And it's just what it is. It's conditioning. They want you to do something very simple and benign and, you know, for them, they don't really, they don't really grade your term paper. They just want to know that you'll do something for them. And if you'll do something for them as a candidate, you're more likely to do something for them as a congressman when you get in there. So this my rift started out in 2012 when I refused to turn in and it is. It was fun to that. Well, they kind of got in my race a little too late there in the beginning. And because it was hard to tell that I was actually going to win. And when they saw I was going to win, that's when they try to get me to do the term paper. They didn't have a political action committee at the time. They couldn't spend hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars against me at that time. It was just sort of like a whisper campaign to try to, hey, don't vote for him blah, blah, blah. Because at that point, they sensed I wouldn't do what they wanted when I wanted that time. But what did they whisper against you? What were they saying about you? Well, they would do it through, for instance, churches, evangelical churches. They've got an organization called Christians United for Israel where they sort of co-opted evangelicals. People think it's a grassroots movement in Kentucky. It's actually a top-down movement from APAC so that people who aren't even Jewish will feel like they've got to support Israel, you know, no matter what. And even if it's a secular state that funds abortions, they just sort of forget that part and we've got to fund Israel. So they have networks. So it's more than just about the money. So you get elected, despite their efforts, and then what happens? Do you talk to them after that? And by the way, let me just put a little footnote here. I'm not against Israel. I've never voted to sanction Israel. I've never said anything, particularly, you know, critical of Israel, you know, other than, for instance, right now, they're bombing, they've killed 1% of the civilian population in Gaza. That's concerning to me. But so what do they do now? Yeah, you get elected 2012. Do you hear from them again? I vote my conscience, which they won't tolerate. So they ran with their 501c4 before they had a super PAC. They were running educational advocacy ads against me saying that, you know, I'm bad on Israel. They didn't say don't vote for it. And they just said he's a bad guy. And so I said, all right, well, you're not welcome in my office anymore. Because for years, I invited them into my office. Let's talk this through. Let me explain to you. I'm a libertarian leaning Republican. I don't vote for foreign aid for anybody. So don't be offended when I don't vote for your foreign aid. I don't vote for wars anywhere. So don't be offended if I do that. I'm for free speech, even if it's abhorrent. And, you know, we used to talk, but now they're banned from my office, the situation went from bad to worse. This election cycle, they spent $400,000 against me. $90,000 last fall running TV ads in my district and Facebook ads and whatnot, trying to equate me with the squad. And then this most recently, and in fact, as I'm speaking to you today, even though my election is over, there's still running hundreds of thousand dollars of negative ads. It's a little weird though, because as you said, you're probably the only Republican in the house who hasn't done homework for them. I was in on their side. And that's okay. I mean, you can have, you know, you're a libertarian, oriented Republican from Northern Kentucky. You're probably not going to single-handedly determine our foreign policy. So I think you should, but you don't. And you're not going to. So why do they care? Why don't you just let Thomas Massey be Thomas Massey adorable in Kentucky? Like why why the need to crush you? I don't know. I think it's they don't want one horse out of the barn. If one person starts speaking the truth, they're afraid it could be contagious perhaps. Or it's like a new car. They go to my Johnson, they say we want a Cadillac, you know, escalate with Pearl White paint. And here's, you know, here's the rims we want. And my Johnson puts that bill on the floor. It passes with the unanimous vote except for one guy votes no. And I think they feel like it's a scratch on their car. They wanted a brand new car and it got scratched by this guy named Massey. They were going to drive it over to the Senate and ask for unanimous consent. But now the senators are saying, wait, why this wasn't unanimous in the house? Why should we do it unanimously in the Senate? And it starts raising questions. And I think that's why they get mad. What I find interesting is it's not just that they disagree with your views, which they do. And I think they have an absolute rights disagree with anybody's views. We all do. But they've called you a big it. And they call you an anti-Semite and say you're a hater and try to destroy your character. That seems like a very different level of response to me. Right. There's no need to do that. I'm not anti-Semitic. I don't have an anti-Semitic care in my head. Okay. It's, I mean, I don't like a pack anymore. Like I used to be neutral toward a pack, right? But I have no antagonistic feelings for Jewish people. I am the last thing. I think I'm probably the least xenophobic person in Congress. I mean, these are the guys. My colleagues want to sanction everybody, you know, declare them terrorist states, you know, come up with these strongly worded resolutions. I don't vote for any of that crap, right? I'll unless somebody does harm to me, I'm not going to call them anything. So I get called names just for staying out of all of this political posture. That's disgusting though, isn't it? You know, I guess I'm character. They can disagree with your views, but to call you like the worst thing you can be in America, like that's disgusting. You know, I have a thick skin. No, apparently. And here's the good news, Tucker. My constituents aren't fallen for it. Two weeks ago, I just had a primary and got 76% of the vote with a pack running hundreds of thousand dollars of ads. So it's it's not working against me. I think it's shortsighted on their, you know, on their side to do this. They're just burning money, but they're trying to make an example of me. But they're also exposing their weakness. I think they are. I think they've exposed a real weakness here. And, you know, it used to be just me voting against some of these resolutions, but recently where they tried to ban passages in the New Testament, I think we got like almost two dozen Republicans who say, wait hold on there. I just question. No, just fundamental question. So the Biden administration has put a bunch of people in jail for violating something called Farah, the foreign agent registration act 1936 is it's been on the books for, you know, 90 years. And it's never been enforced ever until recently until really the Trump era and Biden era. So, but the law requires people who lobby on behalf of foreign governments to register was that simple? And this is the largest lobby in the most effective lobby in the United States. I'm about for foreign government. Are they registered with Farah? They're not, but they should be. Well, how can that, how can that be? How can they put Paul Manafort in jail, which they did on a Farah violation and a bunch of other people in jail on Farah violations, but the largest and most effective and most feared foreign lobby working for a foreign government doesn't have to register under the law. That's insane. Oh, man, don't make me take their side, but I'll explain as best as I can what their argument may be. I'm wrong. Maybe I should take their side. I don't know. Well, I'm going to agree with you at a second, but let me at least offer what I think is their argument. They would say we are Americans, you know, the members of APAC are Americans and that they have the right to free speech. Paul Manafort's an American. Right. Right. Yeah. So there's the good rebuttal as Farah applies not to foreigners to foreign agents of foreign principles agents of foreign Prince Americans lobbying on behalf of foreign government. So this is APAC is exactly what Farah is meant for. Now they would say, and we have the first amendment, right. Okay. Well, I agree with you there, but we also have election laws and to the, it's disclosure, right. They're not Farah doesn't say you can't take Thomas Masey's, you know, an ignorant hillbilly. You're allowed to say that if you want to, but we just want to check where your money's coming from. Tell us where it's coming from, what you're spending it on. And if you are lobbying on behalf of a foreign country, so they should be now to your point, they should be registered with Farah. This is what Farah is, is where there's gray area where it's an American representing a foreign country. Let's, let's look and see if you're getting any money from that foreign country. Are you a dual citizen with that foreign country? Are you being directed by, for instance, as Netanyahu speaking to your group, advising you on your next move? Those are you getting money from the military industrial complex? Like because to understand APAC, I think it's easiest to model them as a military industrial lobby. Like their biggest thing is they want more equipment, more military equipment from the United States going to Israel. In fact, when they used to be allowed in my office, the thing, the argument they would make is, oh, we're just stimulating the US military industrial complex because every single penny of the 3.8 billion that they nominally get, now they're getting way more than that. But the Israel nominally gets goes to US military contractors. Now, they didn't make me warm and fuzzy, okay, but that is their argument. And if you notice what they advocate for, I think sometimes they advocate for things that even Israelis wouldn't advocate for. I believe that. Like they would, I think be okay with the war with Iran. Like I'll all out, you know, apocalyptic war with Iran, whereas there are people in Israel say, whoa, hold on a second. We'd rather not have a war with Iran, but APAC does things that lead us in that direction. And so they're kind of like what the NRA is to go known as APAC is to Israel. Or what the farm bureau is to farmers. APAC is to Israel in other words. It represents a faction. Right. They represent a faction, but usually a corporate faction that, and they're using the imprimatur of grassroots that they've diluted or confused into bullying, congressman. And the NRA does that. And farm bureau does that. I'm picking on some, other right wing groups here. Well, for sure. And by the way, I think there are probably a lot of things that APAC is for that. I'm foreign. Farm bureau NRA same thing. Right. It's, I just the idea of a foreign government playing in our political campaigns openly in that they're showing you they're doing it. But oh, pay-cle in that you can't track it because they're not registered. Is there any other Republican who has your views on this? Well, I have Republicans who come to me on the floor and say, I wish I could vote with you today. Yours is the right vote, but I would just take too much flack back home. And I have Republicans who come to me and say, that's wrong. What APAC is doing to you. Let me talk to my APAC person. By the way, everybody, but me has an APAC person. What does that mean in APAC person? It's like your babysitter, your APAC babysitter, who is always talking to you for APAC. They're probably a constituent in your district, but they are, you know, firmly embedded in APAC. And every member has some of like this. Every, I don't know how it works on the Democrat side. But that's how it works on the Republican and when they come to DC, you go have lunch with them. And they've got your cell number and you have conversations with them. So I've had like, that's absolutely crazy. I've had four members of Congress say, I'll talk to my APAC person. And it's really what we call my APAC guy. I'll talk to my APAC guy and see if I can get him to, you know, dial those ads back. Why have I never heard this before? It doesn't benefit anybody. Why would they want to tell their constituents that they've basically got a buddy system with somebody who's representing a foreign country? It doesn't benefit the congressman for people to know that. So they're not going to tell you that. It's, it's, have you seen any other country doing anything like this? Like, Russia, Russia, obviously determines the outcome of our elections. We keep hearing that. Does anyone have a Putin guy that they talk to? Not only do they not have a Putin guy, but they don't, they, they don't have a Britain guy. They don't have an Australian guy. They, you know, they don't have a Germany dude. Like, it's the only country that does this that has somebody that like, uniform, I guarantee there's some spreadsheet at APAC where, where, you know, the, the APAC dude is, who's matched up with the congressman is there and then all the congressmen's votes on the issue. Oh, has the congressman been to Israel? They, they pay for trips for congressmen and their spouses to go to Israel. I may be, I mean, I don't, I'm not the only Republican who hasn't taken the APAC trip to Israel, but I'm probably one of a dozen that hasn't taken that trip. And the other ones just haven't got around to it. What's the trip likes, do you know? It's kind of like, I think, But I'm probably one of a dozen that hasn't taken that trip and the other ones just haven't got around to it What's the trip likes, you know? It's kind of like I think vacationy You go see the wall you go see the you know the sights Things like that. It's such a great I must say it's such a great country Jerusalem especially is just such a Wonderful place that that's got to have a big effect. You go like swimming the Dead Sea Yeah, yeah, I done that. Yeah, not an impact trip But I would recommend it to any For myself no, I mean, it's it's just funny I mean, I am like a legit lover of Israel of the place is right I like the people and I love the food and like the whole thing is so great look that they've but that's distinct from the government of Israel's just a foreign government my my sense is the people are very entrepreneurial Yeah, that only they're publicly-minded, you know, they care about their country That that they're generally good people right that's certainly been my experience in trips there for sure. It's great It's just that's I mean, I think it's probably one of my favorite maybe my all-time favorite place to go With my family, but that's just a completely different thing from taking orders from its government right I mean right now though again, they'll say it's these are American citizens who are you know coordinating all his just again this is almost a rhetorical question, but in your 12 14 years in Congress 12 years Have you ever seen any indication that Russia is influencing election outcomes or candidates or members not not in a quiet way like You know they'll put out statements Russia obviously has Russia today RT. Yeah, I think it's a band But yeah, I like think you know Kentucky fried chicken of which I'm a big fan being from Kentucky, right? They realized that fried was became sort of a pejorative and yeah, they want to eat fried food so they changed the name to KFC So you don't have to say fried. Okay, Russia today changed their name to RT. So you don't have to say Russia But there's a strong analogy there, but I mean there are efforts You'd be a fool to think that they're not trying to influence their here just like we are there we you know we have What is it radio free Europe and voice of America? We have I mean we spend a billion dollars Well over a billion dollars on the foreign propaganda that's out in the open that we know about right? So there are foreigners spending money on propaganda over here as well I don't want to say they're not involved But people don't say oh I need to go talk to my Russia guy But you've never like in the cloak room or on the floor at dinner You've never heard another Republican member say I'd love to vote for this But Putin doesn't want me to I have never heard that I like what about China No, there's I mean unless it's a spy sleeping with a Democrat Some of that going on. Yeah, but that's not that not in public. So how do you think? It's just interesting because you're clearly not a bigot I think it's very obvious and They've called you one and they've spent you know millions of dollars against you over the years And it has had no effect you get re-elected in the primary in the 70s so like why are they still spending against you and in your state statewide and Can you just continue disturbing Congress? Well disobeying? Well, they say that they don't want me to run statewide They're worried that I'll run from a Connolly seat And so they're trying to send me a message. That's what they would tell you But why I don't know what the message is maybe a little presumptuous to decide I've never said that I'm running for the Senate, right? Yeah, I I pretty much disinterested in it Personally and publicly but just in case they're running at statewide Now mind you there are six congressional districts in Kentucky and I only represent one of them They're running the ads in all six congressional districts just in case Amazing. What do you think of Mitch McConnell after all these years of being in the delegation with him? He's a shrewd guy. Yep. He's quick. He's Let me let me give you an example of how quick he is so we had a congressman Jamie Comer who's now chair The OSite committee he got elected in a special election which means you come in in the middle of the term and you have to boot up with no staff and So it's it's kind of you know disorienting so Mitch McConnell had a Had an event for Jamie Comer on his first day in Congress It was in a townhouse with like 200 lobbyists by the way I'm never gonna get invited to one of these now that I tell you the story It's so Jamie's there and McConnell goes I believe Jeremy took his first vote tonight and That's such a perfect temptation And I wasn't supposed to speak but I interrupted Senator McConnell who was at the time the majority later and I said yes Senator McConnell He did take his first vote and I know he has no staff so I advised Jamie when you walk into the chamber Look at how I vote and then vote the other way and you'll be just fine and Every you know 200 lobbyists thought it was a pretty good joke and they were laughing and it's the laughter died down McConnell goes well Thomas. I'm glad you and I are given Jamie the same advice And then the place just the walls almost call he's good. He's good funny so But I think it's time for new leadership in the Senate. I mean he's obviously It's way past time and this is just a fact. I'll say it. I'll get in trouble for saying it You know, I'm in races in Kentucky So we pull things in case you know we pull Trump's popularity We hold the senators popularity in case they get involved in your race Yeah, in Senator McConnell's Favorite abilities are lower Among Republican primary voters than our Democrat governors favor abilities seriously. Yes lower than governor. Breshear. Yeah, but shears around 40% among Republican primary voters and McConnell's around 30% well deserved well deserved so I'm glad to hear that because I like Kentucky and I think it's Voters are sensible. What do you think accounts for in the final months and years of his public career? his Public statements that all that matters is Ukraine But what is that I have no idea by the way I have so many fights in the house Yeah, I have tried to avoid every fight in the Senate that I can You're trying to draw me in and I love you and I'll indulge these questions But for 12 years my strategy has been pick my fights in the house smart let let Rand Paul and my Complete and Ted Cruz and and you know JD Vance Rick Scott let those guys Figure out the Senate because I haven't been able to fix the house So I'm damn sure not gonna be able to fix the Senate But you it's just interesting Okay, taking McConnell out of it. Yeah, and even the Senate out of it But some of the committee chairman in the house for example seem like Ukraine is all that matters to them and There's of course the questions you noted of donations from Lockheed etc The military industrial complex, but it almost seems Messianic to me It seems heartfelt to me. It seems sincere That they think that this is all that matters winning this war against Russia What do you have any sense of why they feel that way? I don't and the hardest ones to understand are people like Mike Johnson who used to be Against the you know sending more money to Ukraine But now that he's the speaker he's like you said he seems strongly convicted That we should be sending money there almost like it's a religious calling or something I mean it seems totally real to me. It doesn't seem fake I've heard the argument I think it's immoral, but I've heard the argument that oh this is a great deal We just spend money and we're grinding up Russia's Capacity to wage war particularly lots of Russians are dying and so we're told that's that's a good thing You know for since the Cold War began we've been taught that it would be good for Russia to be diminished but they've they've go so so far as to say Russians dying you know to the tune of 300,000 casualties They say is just such a great thing that we need to keep this this thing going And my answer to that is Why don't you tell us the Ukrainian casualties? They you know I have been in classified settings with CIA The Secretary's state secretary of defense Not not their assistance, but those people in the room and They're bragging about how many Russians have died and been injured and I asked them how many Ukrainians have died and been injured and they claimed they didn't know I mean, that's just a flat out lie and they said they would get back to me and they've never gotten back to me like Not only is our Americans being fed propaganda about this war Congress is being fed propaganda by our state department or and our Secretary of Defense and our intelligence agencies and you can just ask a few questions in these classified hearings if nothing else My colleagues should be convicted of a lack of curiosity Like they sit there and they believe everything they're told because these are supposed to be the authorities and they know things We don't but you can expose them with two or three questions like how many Ukrainians have died and they refuse to answer I've asked that very Same question to my Johnson actually directly But I've also asked him and a number of committee chairman just in personal conversations Do you believe your intel briefings because only a child would believe an intel briefing take it at face value? There may be truth in there right maybe largely true, but you're being spun you're being manipulated and If you don't know that then you're a moron, but they seem to believe them They Because they have no other reference and then here's what else happens Tucker When you go into classified setting Like a skiff you lock up your phone you take off your fit bit You take every electronic device. They even make me take off my debt badge. What? Yeah, I know you feel naked I feel exposed I do feel naked if I'm not wearing this. I've been wearing it for a year every day of my life. Okay um But they make you the Tripp you of every outside reference. Okay, and now your staff is not allowed in that meeting either remember congressman our primary rolls are like raising money Being friendly to constituents You know Putting on a good face campaigning and then then you know once a day or maybe twice a day We roll in there and press the vote button based on what staff advises you when when you go into a skiff You don't have your smart phone, so you're not very smart They start using acronyms that you don't know Remember what the acronym stands for you can't just like okay. What are what's the ID G F B Z? I don't know man. I must be stupid like But you know if you were in a regular setting you just pull your phone out and like oh, okay That's what that is. I know what that is and then you also can't ask your staff A question while you're in that setting. You know we have legislative staffers who Handle certain specific areas of course you can't bring them in and then when you go back to the office. You can't tell them what you heard So it's really quite an experience It's sort of it's you know, it's a deprivation Experience of any outside reference. So it's designed to produce Stockholm syndrome. It sounds like yes And when you get in there they really don't give you classified information I say there's three levels of classification in the skiff. There's Facebook level There's Twitter level and there's New York Times level like and the New York Times level is the highest level of classification I mean it's you're getting to the good stuff when they're telling you what's in the New York Times that week Have you ever heard anything you thought was genuinely secret? Occasionally just a few times and obviously I can't say what that is but they slip up and commit candor occasionally in there And you're like whoa, I didn't know that you know nothing like what's an area of 51 right But occasionally yours like what do people think is it area 51 by the way? I don't know. I'm not a you You guys pass this law the UAP disclosure act of 2023 and then they never disclosed anything What is that not my area of expertise? Yes, don't know but do you members of Congress to ever say wait a second? We're a co-equal branch religiously to branch we had as much power as the president collectively And you can't keep this stuff secret from us. You're not allowed to do that But see like I have this in hearings all the time. They'll say LS ATF director. This just this happened just last week Dental block or I'll I'll ask Merrick Garland something or Christopher Ray like I've asked all them this and they give you the same answer It's long-standing DOJ policy not to comment on on ongoing investigations and You know what that's fine to tell a reporter But you can't tell the branch of government that created you that that funded you you can't tell them that That's why the Omnibus was so disappointing to me Is the only way these three letter agencies are going to come to heal is if we cut their funding in some specific area I've joked we could just withhold one toner cartridge for one printer at the FBI and they would come over with a whole binder full of information But we can't even bring ourselves to deprive them of a toner cartridge So we put two hundred million dollars for new FBI building in the omnibus bill And you know to their credit Jim Jordan and Jamie Comer wouldn't didn't vote for that And their chairman of committees But they are completely frustrated with the fact that the FBI just thumbs their nose. So is that the speaker who? Love that to happen. Oh, yeah, absolutely allowed it to happen So to what extent are members of Congress committee chairman leadership controlled by black male? I really don't think there's much black male like if there is I'm not aware of it The I have people come up to me, you know, I travel around the country I get to Texas and you know other states and speak to groups food freedom groups You know first amendment second amendment groups And they come to me and they say why did my congressman sell out like I'll just do Bob was such a great guy And I campaign for him. I mean phone calls. I put up signs and then we send Bob to Congress and he He votes the wrong way every time. Why is it? What do they have his kids in a basement somewhere? Did they have kitty porn on him like what is it? Why did Bob go bad? And I have to look him in the eye and say Bob just wanted to be liked. Yeah, like There is a gene inside of Congressman, I think they if you look for a common denominator They they like people and they want to be liked for the most part and if and they're likable If they're not likable It's hard to get elected Okay, so this self-selects for likable people but likable people want to be liked and they're not surrounded by the wives and children Who usually give them plenty of like right when they're in DC It's like who am I gonna go to dinner with tonight? Well, I want to eat food with somebody that likes me Right so if you're not going to eat alone and you have to be liked and you generally have to be liked to get elected to Congress You you better be liked and and so it's literally it's almost like kindergarten when somebody says I won't be your friend anymore if you don't you know give me your launch Congressman fall for that, you know, they're in their 30s 40s 50s and they fall for that. How do you have it's interesting? You like people I've asked around you don't seem to have any real enemies in the Congress I don't even think a pack hates you. They just want you to obey, but they're not it's not part doesn't seem personal Right, you don't seem to be a personal word with anybody That's my take-out. I have a mutation So you like people okay? Laviously you're not some weird autistic who doesn't care about other people you like other people I love people I can tell and your colleagues say that but you also don't Feel like you need to fit in right same time like what is that? It's a mutation that chromosome the like the liking people and like ability chromosome usually has another gene on it right next to it which is the need to be liked and I'm missing the need to be like Gene I don't know what happened I can go like on the CARES Act. Okay This was under President Trump the 11th day to slow the spread of 15 right They said we're gonna pass a 2.2 trillion dollar package and you all just stay home It's dangerous. They will just do it by unanimous consent and it was 11 p.m. I'm sitting in my living room And they send us this message and I'm like WTF like this is the spit this is twice the size of the omnibus bill right This is going to cause massive inflation The policies ended are going to cause shortages And if we don't show up to vote we're sending at a message to all 50 states that you don't have to show up to vote in this election So I was like wait, I got to do this I got my car and I drove eight hours I slept one hour in a rest stop because I knew I had to be there by 9 a.m This was March 27th 2020 actually the 25th is the day I got to Congress to stop it and I got there and I said it's not going by unanimous consent and I was literally sleeping in my wife's SUV eating those Peanut butter filled pretzels like I had a big jug of those hurt good. Yeah for my three days of SUV eating that big tub of pretzels with peanut butter in the middle Like waiting just waiting for them to try to call it in session and sneak this bill passed and they're like shits Massey's going to do it So they they loaded up congressman, you know the airports were shut down for the most part There were some planes coming from California. They only had two passengers and they were both congressmen So they they roll them all back to congress It takes some two days to assemble a quorum Because I they went to the parliamentarian and they're like is there any way around this? That he's like nope, Massey's right the Constitution requires a quorum if one You know he didn't call me an asshole But if one asshole just shows up the jacks it says there's no quorum here So they brought every back I go to the floor Actually got a everybody was hating me. I mean everybody Did you know it's like to be in a room of 434 people and they're all staring at you like There I had maybe 10 friends who were like looking at me like that guy is dead Like I was never seeing Harry Carey like this They were worried for me, but the rest of him hated me They would come up to me and say I live with my mother and when I go back home You're gonna cause me to take COVID to her and she's gonna die and I blame in you for this And I said that's your face. Yeah. Oh, yeah. What like no, it wasn't just one It was like when he was done. There was a line of people. I'm just like stood there and they're all coming to hate on me and I was like but what about the guy that's going to the grocery store and bag in your groceries and carrying him out to the car Does he live with his mother too? Like what about the trucker who's out there driving and interacting with people in order to get the goods to where you need to be What about the nurse who's going to work every single day taking care of people is she gonna kill her parents like Why are you special? Like you're supposed to you know They they carved a hole in the side of a mountain in West Virginia for us in the case of emergency. Yes That well the sad but but realistic thing is now they don't have a place for us We're so useless right? They just like well here's where we were gonna keep him if she hit the fan But now we we've realized they're like useless We can declare war without them in the event of a nuclear strike. So you know, they're just the rounding error Re-branches we can operate with two. Yes, I've noticed so anyways These are the kind of people who are supposed to respond in emergency and they all wanted to stay home They all hated me for for recognize our constitutional duty and and Trump called me Three times on the floor of the house While I was getting ready to make the motion to object and I let it go to voicemail three times in a row Which is probably not good, but I couldn't leave the microphone Because I was asking people would you make this motion if I go to the restroom? They're like oh no So I I sat there I finally they yielded time for debate I go off the floor and called the White House switchboard back and And you know, I didn't have his number I just like if you want a tour of the White House You call the number I called right and the intern is like oh is this Congress of mercy? I'm putting you through the Trump right now And so he comes on and goes I'm coming at you like you've never seen Never in your life before have you seen the way in which I will come at you I'm more popular than you in Kentucky and you know it. I'm back in your primary opponent and you gotta lose I'm like oh crap. I probably will lose. I mean, I had 95% popularity in among my Republican electorate who I had to face in about eight weeks in my primary And I had a well-funded opponent and here knows Trump was mad at me So he screamed at me for two or three minutes. I kept trying to talk and he just screamed louder Then he repeated it all he gets no This is the second time you've done something like this And he took me out of it before but not this time And then you get a news Anyhangs up and like the thing is like I had he said he thought it was the second time I'd done that like eight times since he was president. He just started realizing it's the same guy The time before that was on war with Iran the Democrats were in the majority and you know he had just Vaporized Soleimani. Yeah, and we were worried that he would attack mainland Iran without a vote of Congress So the Democrats actually instantseerly there aren't too many anti-war Democrats left I've noticed But they realized this was a chance To make a statement so they put a bill on the floor saying Trump He can't go to war with Iran without a vote of Congress Which is constitutionally obvious So I had to vote for it But I was only one of three Republicans to do it So he remembered that time But he didn't remember the fake Obamacare repeal and some of the other things that I was kind of you know the turd in the punch bowl on Did it change reviews at all? No The president tweeted that I was a third-rate grandstander And that this is before I got back to my seat I go back from this week or slobby to go to my seat to get ready to make the motion And one of the Congress was like you better look at your phone, Massey Look at your Twitter and I turn it on. He's like tweeting hard and heavy against me. He said I should be thrown out of the party Then he the best one is I'm chairman of the Second Amendment caucus So his third tweet was he's terrible on guns This is like what where did that come from? Have you seen my Christmas card picture? What's your Christmas card picture? Oh, well, it's a little infamous No, I've actually seen it, but I just it's the benefit of those who have not So you know, I got my family together for Christmas And we got bluegrass instruments out We play music together and we took a Christmas card picture with bluegrass instruments And I said hey, wouldn't it be kind of neat We just like changed these all out for machine guns and took a picture And that was supposed to stay on my phone for eternity But I'd had a couple medical margaritas one night I don't do medical marijuana But I had a few medical margaritas and I looked at that picture and I thought well that's pretty good picture It'd be ashamed if no way of solid and I tweeted it And oh, I caught all kinds of hate for that The arts a great picture the archbishop of Canterbury condemned it This is the head of the Church of England condemned my tweet I'm like oh my god Are you in a Piscopalian? I'm a Methodist Good, so you can ignore him Yes, yeah He's a disgrace So so anyways, I you know the press asked me as I We're talking about the need to be liked to Jane, right? If I had that I would have been devastated that day If I had needed to be liked I couldn't have carried that through And I walked out of that chamber everybody's hate me in the chamber Nancy Pelosi called me in dangerous nuisance CNN called me the most hated person in DC John Kerry called me in asshole or something And President Trump called me a third-rate grandstander This is all in the course of a few minutes, right? I walk out of the chamber of the house and the reporters like swarming, you know like they do And I'm just trying to run back to the SUV with the pretzels with peanut butter in them and get out of there and The the press said what do you have to say for yourself? Your own president just called you a third-rate grandstander And I paused for a second and I said I was offended. I'm at least second right So what happened to your relationship with Trump? It um you know, I think he respects people that stand up Yep, even if I think you're absolutely right. It's a grease. Yes, that's correct And two years later he did endorse me No way. Yep. Did you get along with him? Okay now. Yeah I mean I did endorse or on the santis not out of spite But or animosity because we had already patched things up Just because I served with Ron to santis for six years and he and I were really good friends We talked about bills when he was in Congress. You know, he entered he and I fought over who was going to introduce the bill to eliminate congressional pensions You know, and he won and I co-sponsored it now I'm the sponsor now that he's a governor But I knew he was a good person and he thinks things through it. He was smart. So I end I endorsed him But you know because I have I call it natural immunity I have Trump antibodies at this point They may wear off So do you think if you did run for say just pulling us out of a happen governor of Kentucky do you think Trump would endorse you? Um, I don't know you'd probably do some polling and see who was winning Fair fair totally fair. I wouldn't turn down an endorsement. Yeah. Yeah So it's not would you are you a war with anybody in the Congress? No, I get along with everybody Mean and people try to use this against me. You know when a pack was running those ads that say I always vote with a OC And Rashida to leave and ill on Omar, you know, so I introduced an amendment and forced a vote on Eliminating the kill switch in automobiles. It's mandated. Oh, thank you. Yeah. Well. I was losing Republicans on that I lost like 20 Republicans so I knew I needed some so just be clear for the people. I don't know what you're talking about New in new vehicles. This has been the case for years They can be turned off remotely by the authorities Which is like the most North Korean thing ever to happen That's what you're talking about. Yeah by 2026 every new automobile sold has to be able to turn itself off If it doesn't like you're driving So I'm like how do you appeal this conviction at the roadside? Right? Maybe you swerved to miss a deer and pulled over for an ambulance and you got your kids in the car And it's not one vote for something that evil. I don't understand because again, they know it's a That I'm right But they're worried about for instance mothers against drunk driving or They don't have the bravery. Wait worse. We just let in millions of illegal aliens who are allowed to drunk drive Right and Biden has told us that drunk driving is not a big deal. It's not grounds for deported. Yeah. Yeah, so Who could mothers against drunk driving as far as I know it said nothing about this like who cares what they think I Know and but there may be let's say one constituent in your district who gets a hold of him They lost a child to drunk driving which is terrible and they say You know you don't care about me if you vote for massies amendment and You know they make that personal phone call that congressman doesn't have the fortitude to say or knowledge to say look This technology can't work. I really care about your child I think you're drunk driving is a scourge and I want to fix it But this is a false promise and it's only going to increase the price of automobiles and give the government more control So I'm going to vote with massie. They don't have the courage to say that so Long story short I lost 20 Republicans. I needed some Democrats So I went over to AOC who I get along with just fine don't hate me for saying that I don't And I said AOC they're running ads right now that say you always vote that I always vote with you Just want could you vote with me could you vote for my kill switch amendment since they're running ads the other way and she did She voted to defund the automobile kill switch never her so she Ran it's interesting. I mean obviously I don't like her, but I think she's talented She she is definitely talented But she ran as a radical as someone from the outside which I'm of course very sympathetic to But she doesn't seem to be actually be that person so like for example On the foreign aid stuff how often does she vote with you on Quite quite frequently about how to have a funny moment. You know this 15 or 16 votes. We had on Israel in April Well the squad and I Know this is going to be used in the next attic out of a funny moment, you know, this 15 or 16 votes we had on Israel in April. Well, the squad and I, I know this is going to be used in the next ad against me, this clip from Tucker. But I was the only note sometimes, sometimes the most of the squad voted with me, but I noticed AOC wasn't always there with me. So I went over to the squad on the Democrat side of Italy. Literally, sit together. They hang out together. Yeah, they kind of, it's really clickish. Even, you know, the freedom caucus sits together. The Texas delegation sits together. There are different clicks. The appropriators sit together. It's the military guys, the intel guys sit together. You know, sometimes it's by state, sometimes it's by click. A lot of the congressional black caucus sits together. I can't get the second amendment caucus to sit together. That's my caucus. That's you, and it's not independent. But so I go over to there. This is just high school cafeteria. It's high school cafeteria. That's what it is. And why would you, again, they need to be liked, right? They don't sit next to people. They don't like or who don't like them. So I go over, I went over to this squad a few weeks ago and I said, I told AOC and for the squad, I said, we're going to kick you out. If you don't keep voting with this more consistently, what did she say? If you laugh, she thought it was funny. I mean, she has a sense of humor. These people there are 435. I call them goldfish in the aquarium. You have to get 218 of them to pass a bill. So it doesn't benefit me to hate on any of them someday that you know, on some days they may vote with. Well, they're also people and if you can help it, you shouldn't hate people period. We've formed coalitions on the first amendment, on the fourth amendment, on war sometimes, like to eliminate cluster bombs, delivering cluster bombs, even though the Democrats almost to a person, actually to a person, want to give Ukraine more aid. Some of them are like, well, the cluster bombs, maybe we shouldn't do that. And so you can form coalitions, so I try to do that when I can. But why aren't there anti-war Democrats since it was the anti-war party for like 40 years? I don't know. And we've lost a lot of them on privacy and free speech as well. I think with Russia, you asked this before. There's this element that I didn't answer. It's sort of a proxy against Trump for them now. They, in their, in their file folders, in their brain, Trump and Russia are in the same file folder. Yes. Even though that's a false narrative that's been dispelled long ago, it's still in their same file folder. So when they see Ukraine is fighting Russia, they use that as a proxy for their hate for Trump. And so they'll vote for that. And they did. I don't know if you saw this. They were waving Ukrainian flags after Mike Johnson put the bill on the floor and every Democrat voted for it. This was premeditated. Somebody had to go by 200 Ukrainian flags and hand them out. And I filmed it, which you're not supposed to do, but you're also not supposed to wave flags of other countries on the floor of the house. So I'm like, all right, I'm going to expose this. So I filmed it and I put it on Twitter to show what like the humiliation that Mike Johnson brought upon us by bringing their, the Democrat bill to the floor without any, and it was leveraged too, even if you're a Republican and you're okay with sending money to Ukraine, that's a leverage point. Do something for our country and require that as a condition of doing whatever that is. But he gave up all the leverage. I put that video on Twitter three days later, the Sergeant at arms tracks down one of my staffers in Kentucky because we're no longer in session and says he needs to delete that video from Twitter or we're going to take a fine out of his salary out of his congressional salary. So my staff heard he knew what I was going to do. He told me what they just said. I said, all right, I'm retweeting it. Did you? Oh, yeah. And it got like 8 million views we're 4 million to 8 million. And then, you know, sometimes you just got to double down and the speaker had to announce on Twitter that I wouldn't be fined for that. But there, but no one was considering finding any member who waved the flag of a foreign nation on the floor, the house representatives. Right. And they were taking selfies of them with their foreign flags too. And none of them got a phone call. Only I got a phone call because I exposed the humiliation. It wasn't just a humiliation of those of us in Congress. It was a humiliation of our country. I mean, it's one of the most corrupt countries in the world. And they got everything they wanted for them. And the Democrats are waving the flag, even though the Ukrainian flag, even though they're in the majority. And we just have to like sit there and take that. It was horrible. Do you think any, I mean, the leader of Ukraine is not elected anymore. He's termed has ended. He's not having a new election. He's the unelected maximum power in some place we call that a dictator. And yet they're still hitting us with a democracy, pro democracy talking points. Do you think, I mean, have they thought this through at all? Are they just lying? Like, what is that? They're lying. I mean, they know it. And the good news is some Republicans are waking up to it. Remember, when we started voting on these Ukraine resolutions, even, you know, as soon as the war started, I was the only no. There was like this open ended promise in a non-binding resolution that said, well, give them whatever they need. And there were only like two other Republicans that joined me on this. But now we've got a majority of Republicans in Congress are saying, wait, this is, they aren't using this money like we thought they were. And we're giving them money to fund pensions of retired politicians in Ukraine who were most certainly corrupt. And we're paying their pensions with this money. But most Republicans don't support it. So that means that your speaker, the Republican speaker, the House of Mike Johnson is working for the Democrats. Yeah. It's that simple. I mean, and that's one of the reasons we went through with the motion to vacate Paul goes to our nice co-sponsored Marjorie's motion to vacate. And there were ultimately 11 of us who voted for it. Motion vacated would be to fire him to fire Speaker Johnson. Just like they had done Kevin McCarthy. Although I thought inappropriately and at the wrong time and for the wrong reasons, they did that to McCarthy. But here we had Speaker Johnson, who is doing all the things people were afraid. McCarthy might do, they pre convicted McCarthy for things they thought he would do. And here Mike Johnson came and did all these things. He put an omnibus on the floor. He passed the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, re-up that without warrants, built the FBI a new building and gave Ukraine all this money. So what happened, what Marjorie and I and Paul decided ultimately is we needed to expose the uni party. And never before have you had Democrats vote for a Republican Speaker? And that's why we forced the question, Nancy Pelosi voted for him. Hakeem Jeffries went on national TV and said, why would we want to get rid of him? He's given us everything we want. I mean, the uni party has never been so exposed as it was when we called that motion to vacate. I know some people got mad at us that we shouldn't have done it. But it's a long game, which we certainly hope that he doesn't become Speaker next January. And hopefully people with Nancy Pelosi rushing to Speaker Johnson's aid that he's not the Speaker you want when Trump wins the White House and we keep the majority. Do you think he will be? A lot of this depends on what the people want. And if they can see it, hopefully also Trump sees it, that Mike Johnson would be even worse than Paul Ryan. Paul Ryan put while he was still in the while we were still in the majority, Paul Ryan sent like a dozen CRs or omnibus bills to president Trump's desk that didn't have any money for a wall in it. Like he had no intention of ever funding a wall. Paul Ryan did it. And so I think Mike Johnson is going to be similar in the same way. He's basically working for the deep state at this point in the uni party. How did that happen? Do you have any idea? The Paul Ryan bit or? No, we'll be John Ryan is to change. You know, is a sinister person I happen to know, but also not just kind of not a genius and an ideologue at the same time, which is like a bad combination. Dumb ideologues for the scariest. But Mike Johnson seemed like kind of a moderately conservative kind of sincere decent guy. You know, maybe he would babysit your kids and do an okay job. I'm like, Paul Ryan. And but he just and then he immediately just becomes a tool of CIA and Jake Sullivan and the Biden minister. Like, wow, how did that happen so fast? Well, one of the things he claims, which I don't believe is true. And I have reason to say this is that he says he went in a skiff like he's had some 180 degree turns on some things like for instance, whether you need a warrant to spy on Americans using the foreign intelligence surveillance act, 702 program. Well, he used to be on judiciary committee with me and Jim Jordan trying to reform that trying to get the understood what it was. He knew completely what we were talking about. He's an attorney too, right? And he knows the constitution. He knows this is required, but he claims he spent time in a skiff and he learned things. Skip, that's secure compartmentalized information facility or something. It's where we go. We have to leave our phones locked up, you know, no staff in there. He claims he spent time in skiff and learn things that changed his mind. Here's the problem Tucker. I was in skiff with him. Like we had, we had DNI, not just the current DNI, but the former DNI, John Radcliffe, Trump's DNI. We had CIA. We had FBI. We even had a FISA judge in there and we spent three and a half hours. It was a four hour meeting and after three and a half hours is basically a SIOP where they're just trying to beat you down and do the things. And I was like, this is ridiculous. You haven't given, they didn't give us one example of any time ever since FISA was created that getting a warrant would have kept them from solving or preventing an act of terrorism. They gave hypotheticals, but they had no specific. And I think FISA has been in place since 1978 since the 70s. Right. So almost 50 years and they couldn't give you one example. Not one example. Now, they also expanded it after 9-11 and to do the program to go against civilians, to spy on civilians. And actually that product came out of the judiciary committee. Here's another place where the Speaker betrayed us. FISA 702 was created by John Conyers and Jim Simpson- Brenner. Conyers was the chairman and Simpson Brenner was the ranking member. And what Mike Johnson said this year was, well, even though the judiciary committee created this and is responsible for overseeing it, I'm going to let the Intel committee bring the bill to the floor without warrants in it. It wasn't even their jurisdiction. They have jurisdiction over FISA as long as it's for the CIA, but not for the FBI. So that was frustrating. But with shocking, it's shocking. So he said, you know, like end of civil liberties level stuff. So yes, yes, but it's not like he learned new information. The skiff is you were not, I was there. So what, so that's a lot of problem. Right. The fact that I was there at right. So that's telling why on your show that I was there for three and a half hours. And Mike John, go ask Mike Johnson. He'll say, yep, he was there three and a half hours. So what is the truth? What do you think changed? I think he's kind of a lost ball and tall weeds. I think he's in a position of power. He never imagined he would get to at this point in his life. He's not done anything in private practice or political arena that's prepared him for this. He took the job with a very small staff. He didn't have people to put in all positions on the field. And he had to accept a lot of suggestions in areas he didn't know a whole lot about, although he gets no pass on FISA. Yes. He gets no pass on Ukraine because he does, as you pointed out, he doesn't even know how many casualties have been incurred on the Ukrainian side. I mean, he's the second person in line for president after Kamala Harris. This is scary to me. He's basically getting moved around. You said nothing he did in his life before this prepared him for it. But that itself may be kind of a more charitable explanation because I'm trying to be terribly... I mean, I've got to go back to work with your life prepared for this. So just for those who don't know, you went to MIT, your high school girlfriend, joined you at MIT, you married her whilst she was still there. And then together you started a company based on a very sophisticated invention that you came up with. Maybe the first of about 30 patents that you now have, you ran this company for a long time that you moved back to Kentucky. And a lot of things happen and you went up running for Congress. So that's not the background. Well, so nothing in the political arena, but in my private life, you know, I raised $32 million of venture capital and I swam with the sharks. Like I had lots of moral dilemmas in the course of creating that company. I could have taken money off the table and gone and done other things. But instead I felt the commitment to my staff and to other investors. I had investors who said, if you'll just shit can that guy you hired as president will double our investment. And I'm like, no, he's my partner. I'm not like he helped me get to this point. I'm not going to abandon him. Good for you. And so, you know, I had experiences in life that and then also just put my hands in the dirt on my farm. Like, so tell me about that. So you tell us about how you live and where you live because I think it's one of the most unusual things about you. So I spent, I grew up as a hillbilly in Eastern Kentucky, what county? Lewis County, Lewis County, how many people in your town? 13,000 people, 13,000 cattle. It's a huge land mass. And it's a great county. It's one of the 21 counties that I represent. It's actually the poorest county per capita income that I represent. But it's the one I grew up in. So it's very unlikely that the congressman for the district would come from the poorest county. So I grew up as a little nerd. I love taking stuff apart because I was bored. There were no malls. You couldn't ride your bicycle to any store. And if you did, you didn't have any money. So I had to find things to do at home. I took apart things, built things, entered science fairs, built robots, made it to the international science fairs. It's a little hillbilly, wanted a ward from NASA there. And at the age 15, like I won the high school level awards. And got into MIT, never visited the campus. Didn't really have the money to go visit it. But I read about it. There was no internet. It seemed like a good place. I got there. I'd lived in a town of 1900 people all my life. And I was there for six hours in Cambridge, Massachusetts. I cross Massachusetts Avenue. They had a crosswalk and a stoplight. You know, they're really seeing two of those things together. I'd seen crosswalks and stoplights. But so I walked through the crosswalk and a car honked like that short little Boston. And I thought, oh my gosh, I've been here six hours and already run into somebody from Kentucky. And I turned around and waved at the car as big as I could. Like, people from Kentucky, I don't think so. I think they had one finger up. So and people were like, that's not a true story. Not only is it true, it took me a moth to quit waving at cars to beat. It was just 18 years of conditioning. You thought beeping was, hey, hey there. I mean, that's what we thought that little thing in the middle of your steering wheel was for. If you saw somebody and they couldn't see you through the windshield, just to the horn, throw your hand up wave and they rolled down the window. Oh, that's Bob. And if you didn't wave, I mean, you were pariah. You were probably an ax murderer who was in our town, right? Or you were just an a-hole. So I didn't want to be either. So I waved at that car in Massachusetts. And kept waving for about a month. But anyways, long story short, as you said, I invented a virtual reality device that lets you touch three-dimensional objects, started a company, raised venture capital, did that for 10 years, moved to the Live Free or Die state New Hampshire, New Hampshire. My company was in Massachusetts. I couldn't move the center of gravity too far out of Cambridge. I got it up to 128 on Wuburn. And then I commuted 40 miles every day. So I could live in a state that let you have machine guns and old cars and, you know, cool stuff. Redneck sports. The best. The best sports. So much you move back to Kentucky. After 10 years, you know, of doing it, it was, you know, we had three kids. And we wanted to raise them like we were raised in Kentucky. And we wanted to be near their grandparents. Like, both my parents were still alive, both my wife's parents were still alive. And you learned so much from your grandparents. Your parents are really busy. Just, you know, trying to earn a living or whatever. And if you're lucky enough to have a relationship with your grandparents, that's where I think the generational stuff carries on. Yes. And I had a great relationship with my grandparents. So we wanted our kids to live in that environment. And we came back. We bought the farm that my wife grew up on. We built a house off the grid. It runs on a wrecked Model S Tesla battery. It's been running continuously for six and a half years. So you built the house? Who built the house? I did. Like, I we had an ice storm and a lot of trees fell down. How big is the property? It's 1500 acres. And it's wooded. It's almost all woods. Like, and it's too steep. I don't want you to think this is like valuable Iowa. No, no, no, I know the part of the state. Yeah, pack your lunch if you're on the ridge and you fall off the ridge. Because you're going to be hungry about the time you get to the bottom. You're going to be grabbing like tree roots and stuff that keep them sliding. But it grows trees and some of it is flat. And you know, in the bottom. But this is not plantation land. No, these are haulers. Yeah. So in fact, interestingly enough, it's been a Republican county since the Civil War, even though all the counties around it have been Democrats since the Civil War. Because the geography, because the geography, the topography did not allow for consolidation of farms. Right. So there was no scale at which slavery made sense. You could basically, in your holler, you only had enough land that your family, if you had enough kids, could farm. Yes. And so that's the way people grew up. And by the way, it's kind of libertarian. You know, do my thing in my holler. You do your thing in your holler. If you need some help, let me know. I'll come over and help you. But I'll put up West Virginia's like this. West Virginia's like this. Yeah. Because the topography. Right. It's the reason West Virginia was Republican and succeeded from Virginia. So by way half my families from West Virginia and half my families from Kentucky, my mammals, who's 97 right now, is still alive. Her grandfather was Union soldier. Amazing. Isn't that crazy? From West Virginia. From West Virginia. Yeah. She still lives in West Virginia. But like, we're not that far away from the Civil War. Oh, I know. I know. You can talk to people who were alive when people who fought in the Civil War. I worked with a guy when I was in the newspaper in Arkansas that guy shared a desk with Bob Salie from TechSarcana, Arkansas. He said, I knew Confederate veterans. It's in my lifetime. I knew I knew Confederate veterans or Civil War veterans. That's just absolutely crazy. But my whole point of that was she's a Republican. She's been Republicans. My mammal since the Civil War and like nobody marries into our family if you're Democrat. You got to go see mammal and show either approved or disapprove. And she's been had pretty good luck at sniffing out the liberals. Yeah, the liberals. So you had an ice score. There was an ice storm on your property. How does that figure into your head? So I already had a bulldozer. So I got a winch. So I could drag these trees out. I got a sawmill, cut these into timbers, built a timber frame house. What kind of wood? It's 17 kinds of wood because we did whatever fell down in the ice storm. We've got oak, yellow, popular, hickory, beach. So hardwood. Hardwood. Yep. And then we wanted to be self-sustaining. Well, how did she know how to timber frame? I found a class on eBay for $500 in Tennessee. And I bought it now. And I drove to Tennessee and took one week class and we built a little shed slash cabin. And I called my wife from a payphone. And I said, I want to do this. Instead of going to get a job, we had just ended like left our company after 10 years of working there. And we'd moved back to Kentucky. And it said, well, just build a timber frame house. Like full time. Yes. We'll come up every morning. Have my coffee and started chiseling away or going up in the woods and dragging more trees out that had fallen down. So you built your house full time like as a job every day. And this and this is what our kids saw too. Like the flooring for our kitchen came out of the creek. We call it a creek. What do you mean the flooring came out of the creek? There are rocks in the creek that are flat that they look like the stuff you buy at Lowe's that's fake. And I'm like, oh, this is what they modeled the fake stuff after we did this free. Let's just go pick it up. Now, we had probably have repaying ourselves about $3 an hour compared to if we had just gone to you know, one of the box stores and bought it in terms of harvesting it. But our kids, I think in addition to being with their grandparents learned a big lesson that wow, mom and dad are growing our food. They are collecting the materials for the house here from the environment that you don't have to rely. You know, neighbors are good though, right? We actually sent them to public school that which was and we let them ride the bus. It was only three miles away, but we figured the bus ride was important too because when you get to school, they sort of separate you. But you've got can be 15 terrifying minutes on the bus. Where are you interacting with everybody, right? I remember my son. He was like 10 years old. He traded some Yu-Gi-Oh cards on the bus. And for this like awesome, the best Yu-Gi-Oh card ever. And he showed it to us. And it was a little plastic thing. And we're like, what did you want to take it out of the plastic? No, no, he told me to leave it in here. And we take it out and it was a fake. And he was so mad. But it turns out his dad had told me a leaky bulldozer and said there was no leaks in it. So like, every in the family family, like the same kid has dipped my son and it's dipped me on this dozer. So where? I mean, so you learn these these are life lessons, right? They didn't lead a sheltered life. And so we grew up, you know, they grew up there. We what percent of the timbers in the timber frame came from your property? All of it. What percent ever left the farm? Really? So you milled it there. Milled it there. Chiseled it there. Made the mortise and tenons and the dovetails. It was a lot of yes. How did you, you know, cutting a mortise and tenon, cutting a dovetail joint? These are having done it. Very difficult. How did you learn to do that? I can't tell myself, look, farmers without calculators pulled this off 200 years ago. And so surely if I've got a computer and some, you know, electricity, I should be able to do this as well. Just dents of will. But she'd been like a electric engineer. Right. But not nothing that's real. Yeah. Nothing. I mean, the only thing I'd built before that was a tree house, right? And even that didn't get finished. So, but I mean, some of that stuff is very complex, like actually complex timber framing some, some of the joints are difficult to cut. And the design itself is complicated. Yeah. You don't like, you have to plan it all ahead. You don't like hold the timber up there, like you would a two by four. It's not, it's not, it's not balloon framing. Right. Yeah. Definitely right. Or, oh, that 45 needs to be a 42 degree angle. Let's, you know, saw off a little bit more. You can't do that. Well, it's, you know, you're up in the middle of the air on scaffolding, trying to get two pieces to fit together. It's actually, it's a fun math problem. So I enjoyed it. But is there something honest about it? Because all the fasteners are wooden too. So it's one medium that you learn. There's no like bolt. So it's all pegs. Nails, all pegs. And once you realize that, and there's no metal fasteners in the frame. Correct. None. I mean, we had to nail the floor. I got it on the walls on it. But the frame is the frame that no metal fast structure. And it's 46 feet tall. It's 46 feet tall. Yes. The basement slab, which I timber framed the basement too. I still don't even know how to stick frame like, I'm like, well, I'm going to build one house. I'm going to learn one text. No framing that your average is if you're watching this. It's a stick frame. It's stick frame. So I was like, well, let's build the basement timber frame too. And the dormers, like, if you paid a company to build timber frame, they would stick frame the dormers. Well, of course, or, or buy them and just bolt them on. Right. Yeah. I timber framed that. I'm just like, let's just be pure of the whole way. And there's, as an engineer, I thought, well, I want to build a house with the timbers. I like how timbers look, but too. But, you know, we'll just bolt them together. We'll use iron brackets. That's the best way to do it. But in the course of this one week class, I came to realize, wow, if you just let go and make everything out of wood, it solves problems that you would create when you start using metal fasteners, like wood shrinks. It takes like six or eight years for a big timber to fully dry out. So how do you deal with metal fasteners and shrinking wood? Well, the metal fasteners can rip out. But if you build your fasteners out of wood, like it can all work. It moves together. And there's, you know, if you go to Germany, there's homes that are four or five hundred years old to show that it can work. So all the timbers came for the property. What about the stone? There's a lot of stone in the house. Yep. We got some of it out of the creek. We dug some of it out of the ground. All of the stone is from the property. How did you dig it out of the ground? What does that mean? You started a stone quarry on your own property? In my front yard, it's now a pond. But there was an old logging road and the erosion had exposed this layer of rock. And I thought, well, that layer of rock must go pretty far. So I started digging using a backhoe. I started digging the dirt off of that layer of rock. And I'm like, wow, there are lots of rocks here. And I just, I almost giggled out loud when I shoved on that layer of rock with my backhoe and all these rocks started rolling out in front of the blade. And they looked like rocks you could buy at the store. Like, well, why would I go buy them? Like I can just like shove three tons of them out of here. And you know, a few minutes. And then I had people coming and visiting. Obviously, we looked like a bunch of weirdos building this timber frame house up on the hill. And people would come up. And they were you living at this point. We lived in a mobile home. Like we just pulled in a mobile home. And I told my wife, we don't live in it for six months. We end up two years in a 900 square foot mobile home with four kids. No way. It's, but I mean, it's actually not that bad. You get to know your family really well. You can hear it's like being on a boat. Yeah, you try to go to the bathroom. And if you're gone for more than five minutes, like the wall between the kitchen and the bathroom is so thin. You're just enjoying private moment there on the throne. Trying to read a magazine about timber framing or something. Right. And you can hear the kids at the dinner table saying, we're daddy go. We're daddy. We're daddy. And then it's start trying to find daddy. Anyways, it was a good comfy experience. And now we actually kept the mobile home and we lease it to deer hunters. Really? Yeah. It's a double wide. It's so it's full of deer heads and bunk beds now. And the hunters call it the lodge, which we find amusing. My wife calls it the double lodge since it's a double Do you have a lot of deer on your land? We have yeah, trophy deer all over. What do you charge to rent it just in case people are interested? We were booked up. You know, on the weird internet people and right now we are booked up. Yes. So, all the hell. How long did it take you to finish this house? It's not finished. I've been criticized. You know, in campaigns, people try to use this against some guy because he doesn't even have doors on all these rooms. He's some kind of weirdo. Great. and criticized, you know, in campaigns, people try to use this against me. Some guy goes, he doesn't even have doors on all these rooms. He's some kind of weirdo. Great. Well, we haven't made that door yet, right? You're making the doors. We have made a few of them. Yeah. We're kind of breaking down now and buying a few doors. Now that the kids are going. So this is that was like your kids. So what year did you start? How long has this process been? So we started in 2003. So we're 21 years and we've been off the grid that long too. Again, when you say off the grid, what do you mean? We're not connected to any public utility, not electricity, not water, not sewer, not phone. The house is totally disconnected from everything. Did you build those systems yourself? Yeah. Using a lot of its off the shelf stuff, but some of it's improvised, field expedient. Like the Tesla battery, the car battery that runs the house. Well, let's just buy that out of a catalog. You go to a junkyard and say how much you want for that wrecked Model S and like, I'll say in the battery for $15,000. Why not? Why can't you just buy the battery separately? They won't like Tesla wouldn't sell me a power wall. I tried to buy one for years. Why? Because it has to be connected to the grid for some reason. Their business model involves that. So I was like, all right. Well, I'll get a battery. How much different can it be from the batteries in a car? So I drove to Lake Lanier, Georgia with a little trailer, landscaping trailer. The battery weighs, I think, 1200 pounds. But here's the funny thing. It's considered hazardous material if you pull it on a trailer. But if it's in a car, it's just fine. So I hurried up and got back to Kentucky with the trailer. I don't have a hazmat life. So it was a wrecked Tesla Model S and you pulled the battery out of it. And what'd you do with it? Disassembled it. I paid $15,000 cash. But this is like, you know, I can't, this is probably like 15 or 20 years. Hopefully it'll last. And so I brought it home, took it apart. Actually, I made a YouTube video of this. And what's kind of funny is I had these big rubber gloves that a friend who had worked on power lines. You know, they were leftovers and he gave to me. And so like in the YouTube video, I tried to make sure like I'm using big rubber gloves and stuff. And I did like this fast forward, you know, of the disassembly of the battery. And I forgot like my two little boys are in there, helping me. And they don't have the gloves on. They haven't earned the right to have gloves. Don't put stuff on the end. Like I once I have a Tesla Model S, one of the very first ones made. And I've got friends of coal license plates on it. Like in Kentucky, you can get friends of coal. It's a totally black. Oh, coal, COAL COAL. COAL, yeah. Sorry. So because in Kentucky, that's if you plug into the grid, that's likely where you're like, Trissie's kind of. What I would think. Yeah. So I'm driving this thing back from DC. This was when gas was, you know, getting close to $5 a gallon. It was over $4 a gallon. And I stopped in West Virginia to charge my Tesla to super charging station. It just to kind of troll people on the internet. And I made sure to get a picture of my friends of coal license plate. And I said, I'm just charging up with coal here in West Virginia. And within 30 seconds, I knew I'd made a mistake because somebody had zoomed in on the picture. And my tags were expired. And they started tagging the Kentucky state police, my local sheriff, the DMV. And they were like, they were trying to get me in trouble. I'm like, there's no way to stop this now. And so they were relentless. And, um, but then somebody realized they had been expired for 18 months. And then I'd actually made it a year without paying taxes. And was maybe likely to get out of taxes. Well, it's your win then. Yeah. But, um, in Kentucky, I think they make you go back and pay the old taxes. Anyways, what I learned there is like search everything in the picture before you put it on the well, yes. And, and others with zestier personal lives than you have learned this the hard way. You've got enough minor, minor tax evasion issue here. You don't have time to be too weird. So, so you get the Tesla battery back to your off grid house. Yeah. What do you have to do because it's not made for this? It's a car battery. It's made around 400 volts. All of my existing system was made around 48 volts. But there were 16 modules each, normally 25 volts. And I realized if you put two of those in series, you could make 50 volts. So I put eight sets of two in series. And so we put eight parallel, a parallel, eight sets of two in series. So I got 50 volts at a lot more amperage than what the Tesla car would normally draw. It was capable of doing that. And put a hardest that to do. But well, I mean, it took a few days. But it's lasted for six and a half years. I wouldn't advise doing this at home. Like, why? Put it in an out building. I mean, if it catches a fire, it's probably like Chernobyl that many series. Like, don't look at the reactor. God cannot put out. He created lithium ion, but he can't put the fire out if it starts. So I would not attach it to your house. Mine is like, he's in attached to your house. Kind of. Yeah. It's like a basement room that's not under the house. Like, I don't want to get into everything under my house right now. Okay. So my wife says our house is my science project and she's the mouse. And she doesn't mind that, but I keep rearranging the maze on the weekends when I come back from DC. And then she has to find the cheese while I'm in DC. But it's she's more like the astronaut, I think, in a rocket. I think that's exactly what she's only cross level required. Correct. Yes. She trusts me while I'm in DC. And I trusted to fly the house while she's in Kentucky. So what she's also an MIT graduate. So she is like kind of understand some of the stuff. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, though, she would like to have just one thing in the house where if something went wrong, she could call somebody, but she can't. She's got to like call me and then I walk her through it. By the way, it's a good like marriage security. But she's like, she never, whoever broke up or if let's say she put something in my coffee and I didn't wake up the next day. She'd have a hard time running the house. So, so you put these, you put the nodules, which is basically my separate batteries. Yeah. Okay. Within Within the big battery. Then I put a computer on it, a raspberry pie and I made a little graphic screen and the raspberry pie using an Arduino talks to the can boss, which is a proprietary Tesla communication system. So I use the battery management system that's native to the Tesla battery modules. If there's a nerd listening to this, this makes complete sense and they'll be like, oh, well, why wouldn't you do that? And everybody else is going to be like, he's just BSing. So did you have to add new software to this to run it? I had to write software from scratch. Yeah. But it's fun. Like this is what I do. Look, I've been in Congress for 12 years. My brain has atrophy to the size of a walnut. It actually to a raisin and it expands to a walnut if I can go home and do these projects and then I go back to DC and it's back down to the raisin. I believe that I don't understand how these projects work, but I know what brain actually looks like and I know that Congress induces it. It's an auto worm. It just shrank. So how does it work? Works great. We can run the air conditioner. Like for the first 11 years, we had lead acid batteries and they didn't work that great. You had that water to them. Oh, for sure. They put off hydrogen gas, which is explosive. No, they put off a sulfide gas that can kill you. Like lead acids or batteries are bad and they're like over 100 years old. But by the way, I love solar panels, like Republicans they look at me like you have solar panels. You have an electric car. Are you sure you're one of us? Like, well, solar panels are rocks that make electricity. They are amazing things. They take sunlight and turn it into something we can all use. So you can, I tell Republicans, you can hate the subsidies, you can hate the bailouts, you can hate the mandates. I hate all of those things as well. But don't hate solar panels. They're in hate technology. Right. Because it's actually given me, given me and can give other people a license to be independent from the heart. So let's get specific about it. So you have this, this test laboratory that allows you to do everything in a normal house. Can do you can run air conditioning, but a dishwasher, you got washer dryer, I'm assuming all this. Four deep freezers, refrigerator, four deep freezers, full of peaches, beef and chickens, running continuously. Continuously. So, um, so your power draws significant on all those appliances, obviously. Yeah. And the battery handles it. Find how much propane or how much diesel or would I assume you have a generator to recharge backup generator that occasionally in the winter. But I keep every time, you're solar panels recharge the battery. Yeah. For nine months out of the year, the backup generator doesn't run except for it's like test run. Yeah. The right way. Yeah. Exactly. When we bust out the machine guns, like who's in the driveway? Okay, back down to level one, that's just the backup generator. So your electricity is to, I mean, as long as you know how to operate the system, which apparently only you do. But if you can do that, then you're just living in a completely normal life. Correct. With electricity. Correct. How do you do heat? How do you heat your house? So in one of the greenest ways possible, like I think the whole carbon thing is a scam. Of course it's a scam. But if you do care about carbon neutrality, I wish we had more carbon, we need more CO2. Yeah. And periods in the earth's history, we had more CO2 and plant life was doing better. And we've seen plant life, we've seen the coverage of green on the globe increase as CO2 levels go up. Crop production goes up as CO2 levels go up. But if you did care about CO2, I am using wood on my farm, like just trees that fall down. I'm not even going out and cutting a living tree. There's enough trees falling down. Deadfall. Deadfall. That if I don't get to, I'm determined to do. And they turn them into CO2 and methane. But I can get to them and cut them up and bring them to my house and burn them in a wood gasifying boiler, which is super efficient. By the way, once you start cutting wood for heat efficiency, like if you figure out a boiler is twice as efficient and you can cut half as much. So what can you, because anyone has made it this far in the interviews, probably interested in wood gasification, can you explain what that is? How is it different from a normal wood fired boiler or wood stove? Yeah. And in a normal wood stove, you put the wood in there. It can be green. You light it on fire. You get it going and then you control the air that goes to it, to keep it from getting too hot. And a lot of smoke comes out, especially when it's idling because it's an inefficient combustion process. And it's at a relatively low temperature under, let's say, a thousand degrees. But in a wood gasifying boiler, you get the fire started. And it basically turns the wood into charcoal and drives the gases out of it into a secondary chamber that's ceramic because it's burning at over 1500 degrees. So some of the stuff that would, you get wood to burn that hot. You just, you deprive it of oxygen at first and get it hot. And then you drive all the gases off and you put more oxygen in that secondary chamber. And it looks like it's burning gas, like it'll be a blue flame. And then it'll turn into a yellow flame. It starts out actually as this is just oak maple beach. This is just conventional firewood. I burn near wood. nearest wood to the house. Right. Like mirror, but I don't remember that. Mirror wood. Yeah, near wood, nearest you burn softwood in it. You can. But the BT again, if you're doing this yourself, oh, if you're about efficiency, like if you look at the old timers, they were the greenest people on the planet, right? They didn't waste a thing. And they figured out the most efficient way to do things because it was minutes out of their lives. Yes. So you start figuring out how to be more efficient when you're trying to be self sustaining. So I've got a Twitter bio, I used to say, it may still say this on their greenest member of Congress. That doesn't mean I just got there and I'm green. Nobody I never got any of the fact checkers to come after me on that. Nobody wants to fact check me because I probably am the greenest member of Congress. Who is has self sustaining food, self sustaining without externalities, right? Self sustaining power, self sustaining water. So you heat with wood. How much would you burn? Would you say a season? The size of this table may be four stacks of wood, the size of this table. So this is about a cord. This is about a cord is four by four by eight. So it's like roughly that. So yeah, four cords a year. Yep. That's not much. That's impressive. How do you get hot water? We've got three ways to make hot water when our geothermal units running in the summer time, doing the air conditioning, it takes the heat out of the living room and puts it in the hot water tank. So we have free hot water from like May and tell September when the air conditioners running. And then in the winter, when the boiler, the wood boiler is running, that makes hot water. And then if there's ever not the air conditioner running or the boiler running, we have an on this is where we cheat on demand propane hot water heater that makes up the difference. Amazing. But you could pretty easily set up a wood fired out door. You could. Yeah. But in the summer, again, you get it for free from the air conditioning. I actually have a fourth way to make hot water too. So when we're not connected to the grid, a lot of people who have solar panels are connected to the grid. If they have extra power, they sell it back. Right. I'm always depressed when I have extra power. My solar panels just turn off. And I'm like, run around, turn on some lights, you know, turn on something. I mean, I don't want to waste this free electricity. So I got extra hot water heater elements that run on DC so that when the sun, when our house is full, the first thing it does is it tries to charge the Tesla that's sitting in the garage. So the Tesla's sitting there at half full and a solid state breaker in my breaker box comes on and starts the Tesla charging. Then when the Tesla gets full and the house battery is full, I create hot water with the electricity. So I've got like a fourth way to make hot water hot water is almost as good as water. I mean, if you've ever gone without water, you know, it's bad. But going out without hot water is almost just as bad. Yeah, right. I have experience with that. Yes. What do you get your water? So a dug a well. And dug not not drill. There are lots of old dug wells on our farm. So I knew it could work. Yeah. The way they would do it, they would dig a big pit. Yes. They didn't dig it just straight down. They dug a big pit. And then they laid up stones in a circle, you know, the stones you see when you look in an old well. But then they backfilled the pit with stones. Yep. So that extra area becomes like a reservoir. And then they put dirt on top of that so that, you know, an raccoon poops next year. Well, it doesn't necessarily go right into the reservoir. So I did a very similar thing, but I hit a bedrock and a borrowed a friend's jackhammer and spent a day inside of that hole with a jackhammer trying to get even deeper through the bedrock. I finally took my friend's jackhammer back and said, okay, that's deep enough. What was the jackhammer like? I mean, that's the best argument for public health care. Because I don't, I have a new appreciation for somebody that's running a jackhammer. Those are, those would wear your body out quickly. But really quickly. Yeah. Did you lose a crown? I did not lose a crown. So does the well, the dug well work? It works. One month out of the year, we're just kind of short on water. Yeah. Awesome. Yes, August, how do you know that? Have you ever? I have a dug well. Did in this situation? Yes, I have a dug well. So I'm aware of that. But again, you can serve, right? Of course. If you have, if you're connected to city water and it seems what's on the other side is opaque to you. You just use as much as you want. And what happens is during those peak periods, that's when the utility company has to work extra hard. That's when the price and the inefficiency goes way up is in those peak periods when people aren't cutting back and response to the supply because the actual cost of producing it isn't known when you're making it yourself, it's known. But I've argued that water and electricity, even when they come from, they're especially when they come from utilities should have variable pricing based on the instant, the cost at that very instant to produce it. And then you could have appliances not mandated, but smart appliances. If you're rich, you don't care when the price and power goes up. You don't know what cost. You don't know what cost. If you're poor and you go on screen, it says the power just went up, you'll go turn it off, right? 100%. You'll say, well, we'll do the dishes tonight, right? When it's cheaper. And if you're middle income, you'll probably, eventually the market will respond to this and automate these things so that, you know, if you know the price of electricity or appliance can know the price, I don't want utility company to know what you're doing with it. Of course not. But you can have these smart systems that make a lot more efficient use of our resources. So because you're not connected to the grid to any public utility at all, I mean, you're actually independent in a way that no one outside of Alaska I've ever met is. And it sounds like you're not giving up anything. You're not living in a, not too much. there are some sacrifices like, well, you know, if it's cloudy for a lot of days and hot, we may turn the thermostat up. Yeah. Just so we don't have to hear the backup generator run. That doesn't seem like a crazy sacrifice. There's some people with the instant they had to turn the thermostat from 72 to 75 as we screw it. I'm out of here. I'm going, I'm going back to the grid. But it means that the state kind of has no control over your land. Correct. Or me. Or you say when I go to DC and they threaten me or try to bribe me, it's like, I know once Friday comes, I'm going to be back on my farm and I don't need them. Like, it's not that I don't want to do things for people. I help my neighbors and my neighbors help me. And I want to, you know, do public service. But because I have this comfort level that I'm going to go back home to this, I don't need the job. We're self-sustaining. It gives you an extra dimension of independence, I think, when you're in DC. What about food? Can they start off you? I don't think so. Like they can cut off my fish supply because we don't raise fish and we don't raise pork, but we raise chicken, meat and eggs. We raise beef. And we usually raise a pretty good garden. And I have an orchard, uh, peach, peaches, lots of peaches. My first peach is going to be ripe here in a few weeks. And my last peach will be ripe in September. So I've planted 14 kinds of peach trees. So they get ripe different weeks. And they taste nothing like the cardboard peaches you buy at the supermarket. So you don't need to eat, actually, or form. No, are you trying to talk me out of like, I mean, this is a crisis I have some weeks. A bad man on Monday, it's like, you know, you know, you're going to get hit with a two by four as soon as you, you know, walk in the door in DC. Uh, it's like, is it weird? I mean, I guess what I'm struck by, I don't live off grid though I do have an off grid camp. But the amount of skills you need to build something like that is is really, really striking. Like you actually have to know how to do things, complex things. I mean, timber framing is another level, but electrical plumbing, masonry, agriculture, heavy equipment operation, like you can do all of that, obviously. So is it weird to be in a room with 434 people who can't do shit, who can't operate a micro, I mean, they're like actually incapable. And maybe that's why they're in politics so they can externalize their self loathing. Is that weird? Um, I don't, I really don't think about it that much. Good. I don't think about it. Where'd you pick up plumbing skills? So my rule is by three books for everything. Um, because you can, you can go to a hardware store and buy a book on plumbing, but I don't trust one book. So you buy two books. And then if the two books disagree, what are you going to do? Well, you got to have a third book. So I've got three books on plumbing, three books on wiring, three books on septic systems, three, three books on. Did you accept it to it? Real thing. Yep. Three, I get three books on everything. And you read them and I read them. And then there's the code book, which is like, you know, the, the, it's almost like international housing code thing that some municipalities have adopted and you have to abide by. I just look at that as like a suggestion manual. Like, so do you think now we're way in the weeks? I don't know if anyone's watching, but they're like four handymen carpenter general contractors are still in, in this, but do you think that code, which really determines how people live in this country? The code, it's on up to code. Is it, is it real? I mean, is it knowing what you do about all those different does the code protect people actually? Um, it protects the contractors. Well, I know that. And so they helped ride it, the unions do. So for instance, um, the roofers union and the plumber union, I think have conspired to put as many holes in your roof with plumbing as possible, right? Because all the venting. All the vents, right? If you try to build a house to code, you, you likely to have four or five per forations in your roof. I've noticed. And, and that keeps the roofers busy, like to guarantee to get a call every few years to fix that leak. And it's also very expensive. It's, it's fairly cheap to do roofing, but it's all the exceptions that cost money. And then if you're a plumber, that's one more thing. Like all the flashing and all the, every time you have an aperture in a room, yes. Like that's a vulnerability. So I my, my roof has no holes in it. Like I looked at this. I'm like, well, that's a good suggestion, but who, who benefits if I believe? Do you think you've been here still about the side of the building? Not the, no holes in my roof? No holes out the side. Have you seen that opera house in, uh, I think it's Sydney, Australia? Yeah, famous opera. Is it Sydney or Melbourne? Sydney. Okay. Did the opera house? Yeah, there's no holes in that. There's bathrooms in there. How do they do it? They have the, the one way admittance valves, like you have under your kitchen counter, they have giant ones of those that work for the whole system. And they're not to code, but I think that stupid because why would I want to put a bunch of holes in my roof? Well, I couldn't agree more. I'm interested in this topic. So I've been nobody else's now. Well, but for the, the four people who are, I've always wondered that why with wood stoves, right? I live, everyone has lots of wood stoves. And some of them, I have wood stoves that vent out the side of the building, like an external window, and then do an L up. It's not quite as efficient, you know, because you you got to turn in the run, but you don't have a hole in your roof and in a climate with like lots of snow, for example, you don't want any holes in your roof. Right. But how do you vent your furnace, for example? Um, so that I just run in a typical flu and it goes up in the chimney with my pizza oven flu, my wood cook stove flu and my room for fireplace flu. So I have four flues through the chimney on the gable end. No, they're in the middle of the house. I put the chimney in the middle of the house because it, it's a big thermal mass. And I wanted to smooth out the changes in temperature in the house. And so there's where I did accommodate one hole in the roof. Is the chimney? Because if you put a big stone mass on the side of your house, there's no way to insulate it from the outside. So by the way, let me say something like, I know there are some women watching this, wondering like, I want to live in a house like that. That sounds like a lot of fun. Talk to my wife first. Occasionally we have like some crisis that I have to solve and become a guy. So the first time I got elected to Congress for instance, the day before I went to go get sworn in, the well pump failed. Oh, and I'm like, I can't leave my wife from four kids at home without water. And we have a very unique well pump. What would I mean by that? Well, I didn't buy the one at the hardware store. So you didn't go replace it. So I went down there. And what did you buy? It's like in a catalog somewhere like at the engineer and me found the best one. Okay, it's not the most common one. But I had to fix it. So what I did is I found one of my drills, you know, like you drill holes with. And I took it down to the well. And I took the motor off the well pump and I chucked the drill to the well head. And because it's not submerged, it's off the side in a pump house. And I wired this, you know, had an outlet on it, but I just wired it into the well pump wiring and the drill pumped water for our house. I believe that long enough for me to go get sworn in. I've seen that. I've seen drills run winches. Yes. Well, I forgot it was there. Like, I did my Congress thing for you had it on continuously. Yeah. And then the, the, uh, accumulator in the basement that controls the pressure would turn the drill off and on whenever it needed more water pressure. And so it ran continuously. I forgot about it. I just got busy. And like a year later, a freaking water quit working. Because the fatigue to die, right? Right. It was actually a Milwaukee hole. What was it? The whole hog, you know, one of those. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I don't do what they handle on the side. Yeah. Those are cool drills. All right. You, um, last night, I just want to end with this last night, we were having dinner and which was really one of the most interesting amusing dinners I've ever had. But you made reference to a story, but we didn't get it. You didn't get it. You didn't get used to finish it because I interrupted you. But about putting new plumbing in a county jail, I think we could tell that story. Yeah. So quickly, I got into politics because we were living off the grid and I read this little newspaper and it said they were going to raise our taxes to fund this cronyism in the county. The conservation district, which was building stuff for themselves and not for other farmers, they wanted to tax other farmers to help their farm. Right. It wasn't really about conserving farmers is the biggest best conservationists there are. So let's don't punish them anymore. Okay. Good call. So I thought that tax and then I actually fought zoning in our county. They wanted to zone our county. I mean, zoning is to keep the smokestacks out of the cul-de-sacs. Okay. My county didn't have any smokestacks and didn't have any cul-de-sacs. Right. We did like the neighborhood and ET, you know, that movie where the kids ride to the neighborhood. We didn't have neighborhoods like that. So we didn't need zoning, but somebody thought if we zoned the county, that we would get prosperity because they saw all the prosperous counties had zoning. It's like, look, it's cargo cold. Right. No, totally. It's like saying we should import some homeless because then we'll have banks. Right. Right. Because if he more than we'll move here because in midtown, they're homeless. Right. So that was I was fighting that and writing letters to the editor and then finally, I quit fighting the guy who was doing all this. He's called the county judge executive in Kentucky like the mayor of the county and it decided to run against him. So you never been in politics. Never in my life. Also, there was this guy named Rand Paul who was inspiring. He was taking on the establishment. It was his first run for Senate and it decided to get involved in his race too. So just like with my house, I didn't go in part way. I went in all the end. Okay. On politics, one fall. Actually, one spring because I had went into primary and Rand did too. And so actually, did a fundraiser for hand at my house. It wouldn't nobody wanted to do a fundraiser for Rand Paul because he was running against the establishment. My house wasn't finished. We weren't even living in it yet. Sorry. Little side bar. But he traced up from the double wide. Yes, we went to the double wide and we said for $100, you can come to our pizza party. I did have the pizza oven working. And so you built the pizza oven before the bedrooms? Yes. Priorities. That's right. Had to test it out. Make sure it was inhabitable. So that funny thing too. We didn't have doors on the bathrooms at the time. We had no doors. So we did run to Lowe's the day before Rand Paul came and put a door on the bathroom. Good call. Because I was like, look, this guy could be a senator someday. And he might need to go to the bathroom. And we need something more than a curtain here. So we call it the Rand Paul door on the bathroom. It's the one room that had a door from the very beginning. Anyways, we did it. By the way, also this was in January and Rand is cheap as hell. He had a two-wheel drive SUV. So I had to plow all my drive. We did it, by the way, also this was in January and Rand is cheap as hell. He had a two-wheel drive SUV So I had to plow all my driveway so that he could get up there and The problem is it's gravel so I had to plow all my gravel off practically just to get so for what it costs to upgrade to the four-wheel drive for Rand Paul I like my gravel costs way more than that. Yes. Anyways, I went all in on politics Helped Rand get elect in any primary. I was on the ballot the same day in 2010 the primary May 22nd 2010 Rand was on the ballot and I was on the ballot But I was running for this little county Exactly to see trying to take a Republican out because he's trying to raise our taxes and bring in more government And so I won the election and it was the most terrifying thing when they handed me the key to the courthouse Like it's a small town and if the janitor didn't show up to open the courthouse and start the boiler Which looked like the African queen right? You had to kick it and do all this stuff to get it started This sheriff's office wouldn't be heated the clerk's office wouldn't be heated and my office wouldn't be heated If I couldn't get the African queen to start So anyways, I it was like the dog that caught the bus and I had promised I wouldn't raise taxes and I was immediately confronted with all these problems That had accumulated over the years in our county government and the jailer came to me Who's an elected official in Kentucky? His name's Chris and he he got elected the same day I got elected and he was all in on my you know Let's reform this county But he had some bad news for me By the way the state government had sold the county government a bill of goods They said if you'll keep our state inmates will pay you $32 a day and you'll make all kinds of money And the county was a million dollars in debt because this did not work out And I wasn't gonna spend another penny you know on this throwing good money after bad and But we had 30 30 state inmates who go out and pick up trash and you know mow around the courthouse and they they get real sweaty and the hot water heater had quit working at the jail Oh, and so the jailer Chris comes to me and says Judge that called me judge even though I'm not an attorney. He was the county judge executive said judge I got some bad news It's what's that you say well hot water heater quit working on the state inmates side And I can't mix state inmates with local inmates, you know, you get murderers along with non-support childly into why cases. Yeah. It's like this we can't have them taking showers together It's not gonna work And I said, okay, well just buy another hot water heater and he said well I tried that I got a quote we only had one licensed plumber in the county and I said well what was the quote? He said $12,000. I said I mean this is a small county for a hot water heater for hot water like all of our property taxes together We're like $400,000. I mean $12,000 for hot. I'm not paying $12,000 for hot water heater You tell that guy to get lost and he said well, what are you gonna do? It's like I go by one it look at you know the hardware store something so I go look at this hot water heater to jail It is not the kind you buy at the store. It's like a boiler almost and it's fairly involved It's got like inch and a quarter copper lines. It's not how I was plumbing But I had plump. I had three books on plumbing right. I felt fairly confident I said well if I can find one of these I'll put it in myself so I got on eBay and I looked for this model hot what there was one buy it now for $5,500 And I'm like I can save the county like $6,500 so I called a emergency meeting of our fiscal court brought in the magistrates Notice it to the newspaper did it all legally and made a motion to buy it now on eBay Then I hit the button. I bought this hot water heater If they bring it in a tractor trailer I didn't pay extra for the liftgate because I had inmates the The inmates take this thing out of the tractor trailer and we go in and we take the old hot water heater out and There were three inmates in that closet right working on that hot water heater just Demolishing everything so they dragged that thing out of there and I had to go in the closet with the inmates to put the new And then I'm like Only want one inmate in that closet with me fair the hot water heater needs plumbed. I don't need So it's the other two inmates that were smelling pretty rank at this point I said you guys go strip the old hot water heater I want anything of value on that besides you're in here for strip and copper and other thing You're good at there. We can do this judge. We know we know short irons bringing this tens bringing this copper will bring this Aluminium they could quote every price at the salvage seriously. Yeah, so they I leave the two inmates stripping the old hot water heater And it had a computer on it and stuff and I'm installing the new hot water heater And I noticed for instance even like the the plumber had left off this water trap that keeps gases from escaping like safety device So I made sure to do it completely safe by the book or by the three books that I had and I come out of the closet By the way, there's like 30 inmates I had to walk by the rec room that had a piece of glass and they could all watch me Changing this hot water heater and there's like 30 inmates like in disbelief with their hands and faces press to the glass like we have never seen a County judge exactly to get a callous on his hand or do anything so I Go back out and the inmates said we got everything of value There was this whole cup of an old hot water heater sitting there They had stripped the copper they had stripped all of the useful iron off of it and I said guys You left the most valuable thing on it and they said no judge we've done this all our lives We strip these things. There's nothing on here. They'll bring anything down at Livingston That was the junkyard place recycling place and I said no you left the most valuable thing that's it come over here and they walk over and I said you see this lime green Inspection sticker Get it wet and peel it off and glue it on the new hot water Remember I refuse to hire the only licensed plumber in the county if they go judge you could go to jail for this I said I'll have a hot shower won't You actually did that I did that and the only reason I'm telling you this public like is this was how long was it like 15 years ago or something and No 14 years ago. I think the statute of limitations You know practicing it without a license as a plumber on a public building is probably expired If not the DOJ will be at my house as soon as this airs But they have also since closed down the jail like a few years later They thought it was a good move. Did they take the water heater with them? I? You know, it's on my bucket list. It may still be in there. So what are they using it for now? It's I think it's just vacant Maybe they'll use it for drug rehab or something at some point which would make more sense. Did it work? Did your hot? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, it booted up the computer came on and everybody got I mean 30 inmates Just waiting to take a hot shower and it worked and worked to work until they shut the jail down That's so credible, but Anyways that set the tone like you could say well You're the executive of the county and you shouldn't be wasting your time on that But I I mean I had four hours of effort in it and I saved the county $6,500 You know like no, this is worth my time and it also shows the inmates like okay We're buying you dollar fifty launches instead of the two dollar launches now because we fired the crony who was doing the food system totally and and they were less likely to complain When they saw that the judge himself was actually willing to change the hot water heater But it also set the tone for the sheriff and the county clerk and everybody else who sees that and it's like man He is a cheap bastard. It's like I'm not gonna go ask him. It's an esfiscal who are waiting for anything. Why don't you tell the story to a pack and maybe they'll leave you I think it's not personal. I'm not against you or your country I just don't want to spend more money by the way, I'm traveling to be some plumbing lobby against me next What do you care after they see this well the one thing I know for a fact is that you will bravely Stand up to the I rate plumbing lobby. I will one more story about lobbies so I introduced this raw milk bill in Congress and I you know food freedom and power small farmers. It's more nutritious I thought there was nothing to hate about it. I got 20 co-sponsors I put it in the hopper. I got my HR number and that day the milk lobby comes after me Like they said there wouldn't be enough hospital rooms for all the children who were gonna die from bra milk if my bill passed and This is kind of weird you've got a lobby going after its own product The milk clobby so my wife saw all these things come up on her alerts on her phone and she texted me She was worried about me and she says OMG. I didn't realize the lactose lobby was this intolerant Oh, that's brilliant You said that that's pretty awesome Thomas Massey thank you. Hey, thank you talker amazing Thanks for watching our YouTube channel. We hope you'll subscribe to it and by the way you can hit the little bell on there and Get notifications every time we produce a video. We hope you'll do that also