Just saying them pitches. Yes, we're back four days a row this week. That's how crazy That's how crazy we live in out here in the West Coast. Hala See I just made it to East Coast West Coast things the Joe organized parents podcast has brought to you by the flush life There's no different way to do this. I've done it every possible way. Yeah, I'm just gonna say What is the flush like Joe? I actually reused it yesterday. Really is watching my girlfriend on camera Well, I'm a little bit girl and I use my flashlight watch. So buddy Skia a little personal with the whole rest of the world right there There's a lot of people that did not come to it with someone that they think is their friend like little Brian Red band Tell them about fucking and watching things have you ever done one of those? No, no, no moral degenerate like you bad for society. Have you ever seen one of those web cam shows? Yes, I have it's pretty cool. He sent me to a link the other day that was he goes with the fuck the mother load and I Go to the link and it's this some crazy cam site where it's all girls They're topless. They're like playing with themselves. Yeah, and it's all free. Yeah, it's weird It's like the gigan there's the one I use this stream mate And you can go to and just have a conversation for the girl while she's like sing their topless And then she's like you want to go in a private room for ten dollars and then you do whatever you want to in the private room And but this was all virtual no, yeah, like this is like web cam and stuff and so But there were so many old ladies and fetishes that that was just creepy to look at like an old lady like there was like an old lady It was like maybe 75 years old. Let's get through these commercials. I want to hear about this I want to hear about this, but let's get through these stupid commercials because that sounds too good to just Be a dog the adult the industry has always been pioneers of new technology whether it was like home video You know, and then like on the internet. I mean they've always been the first and when we have virtual reality I bet virtual sex will be pioneering. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Let's we're gonna get to that We're gonna get to that, but let's get this out of the way Go to yeah, flashlights sponsored Joe Rogan dot net enter in codename Rogan get 15% off It's a it's a solid product. It's the best fake vagina out there really is way better than mass-pitting there We're also brought to you by on it.com Oh and and I T makers of alpha brain the cognitive enhancing supplement that I use I didn't take one this morning So let's see if I stumble if I stumble through my words today I don't have any more you took all my dude. I gave you some did I give you something new stuff now? No, yeah, I got some new stuff for you Get on it. Oh and I see if you can what is this shit? What is it? What are you talking about? We're talking about new tropics when new tropics are there vitamins that are designed to enhance the function of your mind The way your thinking works and they work they work if you're either only gonna get better. Yeah Do you try stuff? What do you do? I have not but I'm a you know David Pierce wrote the hedonistic imperative talks about You know how nanotechnology eventually is gonna be used to like design Vaster and more broaders versions of human intelligence and I'm sort of all about tinkering with ourselves in order to sort of improve ourselves. Oh, yeah Where's the ultimate art project is us right? So it's kind of like yeah I gotta get you some of this just to see if you like it I have some people that have gotten that are completely addicted to it It's fascinating stuff. I like it some people that the most important thing about this product I should say is that we have for the first order for your first-party pillows is a money back guarantee 100% You don't have to send the product back all you have to do say you know what the stuff didn't work for me And you get 100% of your money back we're way more concerned with having people feel like they're not ripped off then with making money So check out this stuff. It's all at on a dot com We have sports related supplements immunity related supplements. We have new mood which is a five HTP supplement which boosts your serotonin Actually makes you feel happier. It's great stuff. It's all healthy for you. It's all it's all explained online as a freak We ask questions you can go into it in depth and and Google new tropics and try out all the different stuff That's out there and just check it out but go to on a dot com if you're interested and Ender alpha brain entering the code name Rogan and you get 10% off not just the first order But every order all right, but just Jason Silva's back He's slinging Jason Silva come back to sling more cosmic dick You said we're cosmic revolutionaries. I say you're a cosmic dick's winner. How about that? Wow? Well, thank you for having me back dude So fun. Thanks. I just a shout out to all these amazingly engaged listeners and followers do that the response was been so positive Yeah, we have a really light-pooling positive super positive group of people that fall the show it sounds ridiculous Yeah, I'm how do you do that? I mean, how does that ever happen? I don't know but If you're authenticity man, well if I'm honored if that's what it is what it would ever it is I'm honored because across man It when we go to clubs That's the thing that the the waitresses are always saying that our crowds are so nice and that they tip really well And it just makes you feel so good. It's like the most the biggest feeling of accomplishment that I've ever had is Someone who listen to the show once and said your show makes me want to try to be a better person This is the kind of feedback that we've been getting about our mind of meld do it's been insane Like some people have created these remix videos where they've taken highlights and sound samples from what we talked about So let them to imagery and set them to music and that's kind of like what the creativity and the whole remix culture is all about It's not about where you take things from it's where you take them to yeah, yeah, yeah Yeah, it's just like oh my god. It's there's a bunch of those out there now There's so many guys that are really good at that too. There's so much creativity. Yes, most of them have like regular jobs They're just like regular dudes, so they're doing it at a pure passion Yeah, like there's a kid who calls himself the paradigm shift on YouTube. I met him and you know He's me. He's just really fucking talented. I mean he made this thing for me the American war machine Uh-huh, and I mean it's like it's humbling Yeah, it's humbling because you you hear that the words that you say and they kind of the words seem just kind of obvious The things that you've thought of and said a hundred times right then when you this kid puts it to images Oh, yeah, and music and then you see the power of an idea the power of an idea to live on beyond its inception beyond the moment that Came out of your mouth like there was this guy the thinking primate is the YouTube name and they did a remix of us And I thought it was glorious honestly. I thought it was glorious Yeah, there's a lot of those guys out there and yeah, we're super honored that they do that It's one of the coolest things of all time. Yeah, yeah, it's a weird it's a weird thing going on right now Man, I think the internet is kind of ushered in a whole new culture. I really do believe that it's so it's it's well You can't get by on bullshit anymore. Yeah, it seems like a culture of massive collaboration and cooperation Even that recent example of that viral video that they made about Joseph Coney in Africa And it reached a hundred million views in a week You know and like and and I think that just what it shows between that and also the anti-sope movement online I think that what it's really demonstrating is just the ability to create viral swells that have massive impact Without having used like mainstream media for example Yeah, you know just make a video put it on YouTube for free and have a voice in the national conversation Like everybody can do that and the price points keep going down and down and down exponentially And it's there's no reason not to think God what comes next well. Yeah, well this guy I don't know the whole story on the guy who orchestrated the whole Coney campaign And I've seen some criticism about him, but it did didn't really make much sense to me I mean it seems like this guy really is a war criminal and what this guy is doing by exposing that I'm like yeah, we're exposing it really a guy who's done some terrible horrible things. Oh, no Absolutely, I just think I just think the success of the campaign Game-changing game-changing viral success Also is going to invite scrutiny that comes with that. I think whatever the controversy is that's a whole separate conversation I think the real conversation is you know people democracy social movements Revolutions take note right this is how you join the conversation. This is how you get your voice hurt No need to like take up arms. No need to be violent like you want to get something heard You know have a good video editor in a good sense of aesthetic presentation. Yeah, no shit It's kind of amazing. Isn't that you know I saw the tweets they started coming in, you know this Coney Coney Coney And I knew the guys what the guy was I read about his Yeah, his movement of Africa. Yeah, and you saw Peter Pan The whole it's all exactly the same as Coney really yeah didn't the Peter Pan Steel the kids and make it that guy and I mean isn't it horrible though that that actually is happening? That someone there's stealing children and forcing them to become soldiers and it's just terrifying stuff It's really really horrifying horrifying stuff. Yeah. No Terrible, but I do think that you know we're seeing violence is going down across the world I mean this guy Steve Pinker and he has a TED Talk to myth of violence We might have mentioned it last time We'll say that Violence is down across the world in the chances of a man dying at the hands of another man of the lowest They've ever been now granted to some more people in the world and they're wearing the past But proportionally the violence is a lot less And I think as these people you know the rising billion in certain parts of the world coming online getting smart phones Joining the global conversation all of a sudden can have their voices heard and the first step to addressing a problem is you know Making an awareness that the problem is there. Right. Right. Right. It's important So it can resonate with people and so I think there's reason to you know be optimistic about even the worst of the worst I agree getting I think we automatically go pessimistic because things aren't perfect You know we look at it and we go god. Well, why is there so much fucked up shit in this world? Why is there so much crime? Where is there so much violence? Why is there so much death? Why is war still here? Why is corruption still here? But what you don't realize if you really stop and think it's like this is the best It's ever been ever by a goddamn long shot Absolutely this driving on the way over here today on the highway and it was a nice day here in Pasadena There was no button on the highway. It was like easy traveling. It's nice and beautiful and sunny on I was thinking how fucking how much it would have sucked did you live just 500 years ago? Oh total just 500 a blip in time Like nothing no cars to fucking horses. There's no not even trails out here. Yeah, you know You need to see there's a there's a presentation by this guy called Hans Robling his website Gap-minder He does this thing where he shows all the nations across the world over time and how the indicators of quality of life and infin What alley raid and income and all these all these different things he shows that all the countries of the world He's in the worst of the worst are rising so the rising tide does lift everybody else And it's unbelievable and I think the reason that most people don't realize that things are always are getting better It's because of the amygdala Peter D. Amanda's the representation about this at the Ted conference Just we can have to go and he has this book called abundance and he'll explain that you know because our brains evolved in a time Where we had to have fighter flight mode the amygdala is always looking for danger and it supersedes everything else and so the media gives us danger Because that's what we're drawn to you know if it bleeds it leads and we're always gonna be paying attention to what's wrong Even when there's infinitely more things that are going right and because the media wants to just get viewership You know the mainstream media will feed us what we want which is to see all the horrible things are happening across the world Right although eventually that's actually gonna be a good thing because if we can see what's wrong We'll try to address it and try to fix it But even when we remedy 99% of the problems that exist today our brains are still gonna be seeing the new problems because that's what the brain does And so yeah the amount of time from us running from Jaguars to Being a guy who steps into a Jaguar and turns the key that that the amount of time is so small The biology has never had a chance to catch up. It does not we have pretty much the same brains as we did a hundred thousand years ago I mean that's I mean a hundred thousand years ago kind of everyone is agreeing unless you know you you really go extreme Yeah, there was no sophisticated culture which is nothing a hundred thousand years is nothing. It's a blame. What the fuck happened? Language language We just get into it last time we just get into it. We're just saying you really believe that that just made everything change because we could exchange information Yes, well because because the moment that we invented and this is where Terrence McKenna gets into you know Ketskur's whaling and and Kevin Kelly issue his comments is that he said that when we invented language Biological evolution stopped playing the key role because it was replaced by this you know a cultural epigenetic type of evolution Which goes faster and faster and faster because it accrues knowledge and it builds on itself And it's not limited by the hardware of the brain which would take billions and billions of years to change you know And so this cultural thing, you know all of a sudden each brain became a neuron in a faster global brain of a crude knowledge and Intelligence that was bootstrapping on its own complexity, which is why over the last hundred thousand years It has been the cultural evolution has been accelerating exponentially It manifested as technology technological evolution But what's most interesting is that this telescoping nature of it gets faster and faster and faster So over the last hundred thousand years. Yeah crazy, but over the last hundred years even it's got crazier than the last billion They say that a thousand years ago. No one could read Silently right there you go They had to read by talking they had to say the words no one could read silently And it was actually one of the ways that some some guy religious figure Thomas Aquinas maybe it's not sure okay approved that he was a saint Because he could read silently and then he would recite it Amazing he would look at it not say anything look at the scripture Not obviously not reading because he wasn't speaking aloud Wow and then he would recite it Wow That was his master of the scripture was unparalleled because he could read silently He was like the only guy. Yeah, I don't think it's that guy though. It's like it's one of those other religious people that may or may not have ever really existed Might not have been Thomas Aquinas. I didn't ask Sam Harris if he believed that Jesus was a real human That that was the design guys document I remember they said that he probably never even existed Well because he shares all the same attributes as all these other gods and all these other cultures They all right the same age are all born of the same like but isn't it also possible that it could have been just a real person But they attached all these other attributes to him because of ancient mythology. I suppose And it just if you live in an open. Yeah, just completely open right, but I don't know if it was a real dude But man you want to talk about one guy just kind of dominating religion for like thousands of years, you know Yeah, he's like, you know if he was he became a meme if he was a wasn't that was no longer a person Yeah, he became a meme which you know and Richard Dawkins book the selfish gene He says that there was this new replicator, you know Just like jeans were the replicators They could multiply and they could have all over time that there was a new replicator that was born above the biosphere New kingdom above the biosphere and the denizens of this kingdom were Ideas and so he said ideas in the form of memes. They're like organisms They've retained the properties of organisms even though they rise above the biosphere They replicate they complete each other they mutate they leap from brain to brain They compete for attention, you know, yeah And he goes crazy and you know James Glick wrote the book the information says that the most the primary building block of reality might be information Before before you know it before matter itself So he actually says it comes from bit matter comes from information and that information is really what's at the core of reality and It's just an insane idea and Endless because that goes back to the whole thing about the power to change the world people ideas passions Can change the world because ideas have done more than jeans over the last hundred years Well McKenna would always go on about the world being made of language. Yes Which is really hard to wrap it around man That was that was a real mind fuck because you not sort of not really but wait a minute because two people have to communicate in order to create something Yeah, and then you know you think about infrastructure and cities that is all a factor of language Yeah, without language none of this would be there. It's just it's so hard to wrap your head around that And I think that the yeah I think that he was spot on and I think that the reason that he was spot on is because what he when I think when he says okay The world is made of language what he's saying is we create a mental model of the world in order to understand the world in order to Speak about the world and react to the world we create a mental model in our head and then we label Those pictures in our heads, you know symbolically so we abstractify reality and therefore the way that we interface reality Through the prism of our language our thinking our preconceptions our stereotypes our culture Which is what they say we don't see the world as it is We see the world as we are which speaks exactly indirectly to it I think McKenna was saying reality is made of language. It's almost like it's why like they say that like even like thinking a happy thought We'll start to make you happier, you know Like essentially the world changes you become happier about the world simply by thinking it's so and it sounds kind of like new Agey and stuff but like not really because Even the object of description I think does something to influence one's perception of reality which is just how you interpret electrical signals going through your brain Anyway, and so if you're aware that reality is made of language and that we're like co-creating it with our intention And something of course which is magnified with psychedelics That's why they talk about set and setting being so integral to the trip because your thoughts about the trip affect the trip itself So thoughts become reality But we should think of our lives as one big fucking trip our normal baseline waking sober lives is one big hero's journey And it should be up to us to think of it so and so if we're all on a hero's journey if we're all on an extended lifelong mind manifesting which means psychedelic trip then we have a responsibility to Use words to map our reality the way that we want to be authors of our reality of our existence to make a masterpiece out of life One that we would willingly live again and again for all of eternity so Like like what we're doing now our conversation It's changing the reality inside the synapses of those that are engaging with us just the same way we're changing each other's Reality right now, you know, this is a different reality than where we were an hour ago. We're literally interfacing in a different Yes, you don't think about it that way though. You think well, we're just doing a podcast a Podcast here talking shit. Yes, but your Portions of your mind the output of your mind whether it's immaterial or not Still can create tangible impact in the world because think of life Especially like those one or five or ten people that you might inspire to create some work of art that came out of what they heard in this Conversation and that worked of art gets licensed by a brand to create a campaign for creativity that then the government of Finland adopts And they're in their policy for education for the following year and it should transform the lives of the next generation of students The butterfly effect and transformation triggered by ideas is more powerful than you know, I think you know Bull and then at the end of the physical world. I think you're absolutely right, especially in the age of the internet I've right. This is this is the time where the idea is really can go viral almost instantaneously like this Coney video and this I mean we do I don't even think we've really fully Examine the impact possible through you know through through information Especially with with the what are kids gonna be like man? Whatever? You know 20 year old kids gonna be like 20 years from now Dude just growing up in Italy More advanced and empowered. Yeah way more aware way harder to bullshit. Yeah, you know Too to enable kids. Yeah, they're not crazy They're gonna look back on the nonsense that we believe today and they're gonna laugh at us, man Yeah, I think I think even the way that you know How things are voted in you know how people resolve issues I think the idea of having Representatives you know over there to to carry our voice to Washington is obsolete because we are post geographical We beings at this point. We don't need somebody else to represent us necessarily because we can all Represent ourselves and have a voice online in fact. There's people there talking about how you know We could reform or upgrade or reexamine like how government is run and how people are represented I mean, I'm talking like a little farther out But there's this guy who's starting this thing as a friend of mine's name is mica and you used to actually be with students for sensible drug policy And now he's doing this thing called dynamic democracy Which is about starting a conversation and exploring new ways of how the internet the human extended nervous system That's connecting us all right because we love saying that we are all connected We are all empowered well. How about we upgrade the way the world is run, you know like on a meta scale Well, we're not about it, you know Yeah, yeah, I mean that that essentially is what the internet's doing right? I mean the internet I mean I've heard people be down on the internet and I guess you could see some negative points to anonymity and there's a few aspects of Pornography that are a little unseemly. It's definitely a celebrated pornography I'll tell you that things have gotten really weird man if you want to look at like what happens to human beings When left alone to their own devices and when when allowed to expand in a contained market like pornography There's only so many different things they can do so they think they you know You know what the big thing is lately that I keep seeing man is girls getting guys to comment them and they squirted into a champagne Glass and drink Really or martini glass really well look just let's ask just because these digital tools Stand the range of our Creativity it doesn't mean that people can't use that creativity in ways we don't agree with or perhaps in bad ways Because just like we use the power of fire to cook our food We use the devout power of fire to burn other people which is always the double-edged sword of any Expansion and extension of human reach, but that's that's still what evolution is probing for because we're all seeking out Complexity it's just going from single-celled organisms to multi-celled-ago organism to beings to thinking beings to beings who create technology and so on and so forth So it's all happening anyway So people say it's not gonna stop it's part of evolution But yes, we have to acknowledge that these tools are double-edged sword and that's fine That's part of it makes all sorts of people really like doing that that's possible too, right? I like to be a woman out there that actually likes to get dudes to shoot loads and then she squirts them out into a glass It is very possible and who am I to judge right? You like hey people do whatever they want as long as they're not hurting anybody else exactly It's just weird that porn is accelerated to this to what it is today And porn was not just porn for a long long time You know you'd heard rumors of like snuff films or something crazy, but no one ever saw one did you ever see a snuff film Brian? Yeah, I've seen snuff films. We see people dying on the internet. Yeah, yeah It's disturbing but I don't even know if those are real half the time now Like I remember when 9 snails had a snuff film out called broken It was like they advertise it like as this bootleg video and you would rent it and it looked like somebody murdering somebody else It was kind of like faces of death. Oh, wow. That's terrible man and everyone thought it was a snuff film Well, there have been real films man for real. There was a documentary on it a while back And that's terrible. Yeah, and the guy who was the one of the one of the people they were interviewing was talking about watching this film And as he's talking about watching the film he starts crying Wow, it's pretty intense. Wow. Yeah, he's he's obviously pretty fucked up by it You know, I remember he didn't cry definitely not choked up he was like just thinking about watching this Yeah, is this a broad spectrum of human behavior, man. It's kind of we've got a feeling I think it's gonna be a broader Well, is there a way or is it necessary to have negative in order to influence positive? I mean, is that I don't know if that's necessary I think that was you know that there that has been something that perhaps has worked for some people You know to you gotta know what bad is in order to know what good is You know that you need to contrast but it doesn't mean that we come up come up with some more novel solution That allows us to live you know because if According to that idea that we need the bad in order to know the good It means that it implies that we're always we need to have suffering to appreciate You know when we're not suffering I don't think that we need to but if you look at things as being natural You look at everything as being natural like wolf behavior behavior, look at all this stuff as being natural and Positive towards whatever their goal is right whether their goal is to create this beehive that they create whether they're goals to create an Anhil when you look at human society Maybe what we're doing as natural as well and maybe we're so fucking chaotic and so crazy because you sort of have to be to be working with Technology that's so far and ahead what your biology is capable of processing Yeah, so we have this fucking wacky Tribal monkey shit going on while we have nuclear power while we have Adam Cole there's there's a lot going on and you know increasingly people are moving into their own personal Universes and soundscapes and when we have virtual reality then we each become the god in our own universe and at that point You know an infinity of combinations and permutations of lifestyles will be explored by individual Individuated nervous systems living out in the atmosphere of the inner web, you know So who the fuck knows but uh But at that point we won't care what that person does in their own virtual universe like the porn is gonna be awesome You should yeah, it's it's gonna be gross grosser probably grosser. Yeah like blue ponds We're just like the tampon gets shoved in the vagina for a week and then pull down and somebody eats it or something Hope not I hope I hope it actually becomes about like composing and creating The greatest dream we have ever dreamed well, maybe it's to be to all to make greater art than we've ever experienced to create better designer designer drugs that I mean gauge with our senses and make us appreciate art and ways that we couldn't have before To merge with our lovers to become one with them. I mean we use language to connect and say how we feel to one another What it takes one emerge all the time What if you want to do man? Yeah, you like you want to go hang out with your boys. It's gonna You can't you want to go play pool. What if your boys want to merge your boys want to merge with you and your wife Yeah, you won't be playing pool though. You know Emerge with your wife You know Weird, I see what it's like to be heard if they want to merge with your kids. What if they can copy in case your wife It's not sexual no no no what if they want to merge with the dolphin because they want to know what it's like to be a dog Timothy Leary settle the fuck down merging with dolphins and people yeah, what if right? That's just good We have to define like once if we do create something that allows like the human consciousness to merge and to interface with something We're gonna have to like really define what's happening there so people don't like whether it's gonna be parameters Sexual interest. I just don't see you can see like Nancy Grace on TV. Who is this man that he's merging with a 14-year-old girl in Florida That's ridiculous. You tell me that's appropriate That this man is merging what does a grown man have in common with the thinking of a 14-year-old girl She gets a little wetter every time there's a dead baby in Florida Every time something happens in Florida. She's like oh, yes more programming More material, you know, I I have to say the fact that we see so much Can't she find nice things can Nancy Grace, please? I love you I'm not I'm picking on you because I have to have a comedian. Can you just find one nice story? Yeah We need we need one we need more programming that's uplifting Yeah, nice to see stuff that makes you feel good about humanity It's also good to have people go after bad people don't get me wrong They're gonna get a big crime. Yeah, preventing stuff actually getting along But absolutely as far as like what we project our issue is that there's seven billion people on this planet And if you only want to pay attention to negative shit You can find enough to fill every second of every day every second of every day of every moment that you are on this planet Someone's getting Jack. Yes, but I think I think people are reacting to that by creating more and more really inspiring content And I think corporations now are all I wanted to align themselves with having a sort of Positive impact on the world, you know, they're saying there's more to to a corporation than just making money How about I want to wanting to make a social it? But I think it is becoming part of the part of our consciousness now increasingly like this is what you're hearing I mean you had Pepsi do that campaign last year and they're all they're realized My point was that hold up but my point was that you have to manage your own Interaction with this kind of information my point was that if you so choose you can be around it all day every day or You can just not and you can force yourself into more positive places The options available the both options are available Absolutely, you have to be kind of careful in how you manage your consciousness because you you really can't freak yourself The fuck out if you only chose to concentrate on all the negative things in this world There's too much information totally no and and you could drown in information Especially because the new limited resources are attention, but I think it's interesting There's the hope there's a book about this it's called the information diet and it says that it's really up to us to take Responsibility over our information diet to set up curators to set up certain filters to sort of you know to have a significant Say in how we interface with media. Yeah, and we have that opportunity now that we didn't have before when it was just two channels It was on or off now there's a billion options So curate author create an experience and information diet that will keep you mentally invigorated Just like no there's also food diet will keep you a lot of experimenting going on too You know there's also a lot of people trying different things out and focusing on different things Yeah, and there's a lot of misses that seemed like they were hits like remember when everybody was into the secret Yeah, you remember that and everybody was convinced that all you have to do is think positive and just draw a picture of the house You want on your wall and one day it'll sort of manifest itself and yes secret fans Yes, I'm just don't you have paraphrase. Yeah, but don't you Positive and just draw a picture of the house you want on your wall in one day. It'll sort of manifest itself And yes secret fans. Yes. I'm just Parafracing yeah, but don't you think that to an example like with the way you you said it is how probably a lot of people literalize the message without really thinking about it a little deeper and understanding how it might not sound like just Well, here's a well. Here's a problem with the secret some of its real Okay, there is a certain amount. It's one of the ingredients in making something happen one of the ingredients is vision It's a hundred percent there's one of the ingredients and you talk to anybody that has to have a great success and a Good percentage of them at least some of them have sort of gotten their vision along the way But a good percentage of them had a vision and followed it Right push that and it is true, but it's there's so much other shit involved education hard work discipline, right It's not a simple and executing because it's like yes everything everything out in the world everybody's you know The most magnificent artifact from the iPhones of the jet engine You know is actualized from a thought from a dream from a design which means to say we we constructed the virtual version Before we constructed the actual version that's the same thing as visualizing something into being But the into being part is when you say okay, I'm gonna go execute on this I'm gonna go like the you know I'm gonna move through space and time move my atoms through space and time and go Construct the thing and go lobby to build the thing to build the dream to actualize the goal And I think maybe people who read the read the book without reading as deeply enough into it What they thought it was like, okay, I'm just gonna sit on the couch and dream something It's gonna come knocking on the door It's also the problem is that they're dealing with a bunch of people who have had success and when people have had success and You know they all tell you the same story all I knew it was gonna happen and I dreamed it well But that's because it happened right, you know, you know, I you know, I'm saying I mean There's a lot of shit that comes along the way you could have gotten this a random car accident You could have got hit by a fucking meteor Absolutely I'm not exactly sure if a hundred percent of your success is based on the fact that you focused on your dream Right, I think it's a percentage of the set for success But there's a lot of luck involved there too. Oh, yeah a hundred percent. Oh, yeah And to be there's a lot of luck involved in everything I mean like the fact that each of us is here we beat out billions of sperm Yeah, we've already are all of us are living against the odds everything Speck for luck. I think is one of the reasons why people get lucky. I respect for luck You know, you got a respect luck is you know Fortune good fortune is unquestionably an ingredient There's an ingredient in there and I I feel like if karma is real in any form I believe that's where the most evidence of it being real is that to me Then the people that I know that are the most fortunate are also the kindest are also the most generous Those are those the people that are the most fortunate. Well because if one thing with themselves as well Yeah, which is a very critical point with a lot of people mess up They're super nice to other people, but they treat themselves like shit They treat their body like shit. No good. They don't go after their own goals They don't trace their own dreams They let people abuse them because they're too nice I mean there's a lot of people that are not nice to themselves You got to be as nice to yourself as you are to other people That is a huge part of the equation that a lot of people miss out on They're like I'm a good person. I'm nice to people. Yeah, but you hate yourself. You know you hate your body You hate your mind And you think yeah, and you can do not everybody can do you you can do more for for the world I think by treating yourself with the same kindness that you treat other people and Well, it's a sickness not to it's a sickness absolutely, you know, yeah You know food is fucking delicious, but you should meet yourself to death Well, you know, I'm not saying you have to look like Kate Moss in a prime when I put that that reference from Where was that but you know, you know, it's you don't have to you know, you don't have to fucking eat yourself to death either Right, you know, there's a lot of people that eat themselves to death Like the human mind can go terribly wrong It can go on a horrible path and just get stuck there just get stuck. Yeah Yeah, but the thing is when we have that problem with software enough software gets corrupted or if it gets a bad virus in it You know, we can upgrade and reboot the system and we're not so lucky What if someone did something horrible like there was a you know A mall shooting or something and some guy goes in the mall just shoots random people Okay, then you reboot them. Would you allow that guy? Do you think that's okay in a civilized society? Do you think we have to reboot him to reboot him and That's a great philosophical question to ask. I mean that's that's a different case study I was we blame society and allowing him to get to a point where his software failed him and how do we approach that? If we if it's effective if it's real do we blame the tissue that's left after we remove his consciousness Do we blame that tissue and say I'm sorry this tissue has to die to make up for the 16 Who knows who knows maybe maybe maybe there will be some form of like that that will be an ethical the one like like a virtual reality psychedelic experience where you take him down the rabbit hole and he has a Joseph Campbell s. Heroes journey and he Collides with his own cosmic nakedness and then it merges rehabilitated maybe we'll have like sounds like I was to download rehabilitation Yeah electronic I al wasca You said you tweet was that that would be a way to you should grab a criminal and you put him in an ayahuasca session with a shaman Yeah stare into the nakedness of his own soul. Well, this is my new show my next show that I'm working on Nobody's bought it yet, but I've got some hopes. It's called douche bags on mushrooms And that's the show which is the wish bags throughout the world and we just bring them somewhere and dose them up with like Five grams of mushrooms. Let them see themselves. I mean nobody's gonna die. I think psychedelic therapy is so spot on like in terms of the psychic readjustments that can happen in one session could take years Well, what would people they're standing given it to people? Yeah giving it to criminals as part of a rehabilitation if that would be very interesting to explore It just says very fast and not even just criminals But people that have issues like alcohol is oh, well that's obvious I mean they just came out with a study just now that said that LSD could help people get over alcohol No one's that yeah, that's not to say about the well, you know they were actually doing tests on this in the 60s in the 1960s for They determined that 500 micrograms was enough to cure like more than 70% of chronic alcohol Patients that came in and tried acid just from like looking at the situation just completely differently being separated from the Nonsense of what you're engaged in we kept stuck in these weird patterns. It's very strange It's almost like a byproduct of our ability to focus on things right we have this ability to become intense and Obsessed and focus on things in a positive sense, but there's a byproduct of that and that byproduct of obsession It's a glitch. Yeah, it's a glitch. You know it's a possible. You know it's like if somebody gives you a fucking Ferrari, but you don't know how to drive a stick shift and you sort of figure it out a long way in your jam and gears and Fucking things up sometimes it's working well and some you don't understand how to use assistant Yeah, and they could be just that yeah, you know when you see a kid that becomes obsessed with jerking off You know you get him into a sport maybe you become a fucking world champion Yeah, maybe he's just one of those kids that just whatever he focuses on he focuses on insanely Yeah, there's a lot of kids out there. I'm not saying you're wasting your life playing video games because video games are awesome They've they've improved ones brain, but a bunch of studies about how gaming Oh, yeah, I'm saying is that these kids any kid that gets really good In a video game you can get really good at anything. Yeah, you can get really good at it If you if you put that kind of focus that you put to get fucking awesome at Call of Duty You could really you know you could add you can have a better life You could like yeah, you know imagine getting tricked by the vacation Progresses where you can play these games to address real social challenges and these gamers will probably find solutions to problems That engineers could in the real world that just is happening more and more now to use the resources of gamers to gamify a real world problem How does that work well because reality? Yeah, they'll create like some some interface and some problem And there's like a game and you get points for solving issues related to the game Some gamers discovered like some antibody for some crazy virus Like something Google this four gamers gamers solve some illness like crazy stuff And you're gonna be seeing that more and more in fact They they did this crowd sources crowd sourcing experiment about a protein folding and you know the world's best Protein folder is who can fold and design proteins in the virtual space is like a woman who does it in her free time in the UK And during the day she was like a receptionist or something and she's the world's best protein folder She used to do it on her computer at night. Yeah, it was worthy What yeah, because you crowdsource that would clay shirt he calls the cognitive surplus. It's all his extra brain How is she protein folding? What is she doing? It's some kind of crowdsource software thing that lets people like fold proteins And you know and you can figure out how to do it in the virtual space and then it can be applied in real life And it turns out that the best one in the world was this woman in the UK All the scientists in the world. Yeah, yeah, it's just a lady with a regular Yeah, yeah, yeah, and you're gonna find that more and more There's gonna be some gamer, you know and Budapest who's gonna fix world hunger You know like wow look look look look at like people like hackers like hacking community like these little 13-year-olds are hacking fucking Microsoft yeah, yeah, exactly Yeah, they have a 13-year-old hack that you have see yeah Exactly yeah, yeah, they're bad asses. Yeah, did you hear about the the little sec guy? Is that how you got low? Yes, he Turn he ratted out like all these anonymous guys like 26 anonymous Oh, he just grabbed it out everybody to the FBI just just because like I guess the FBI was playing dirty and Was like saying hey, we're gonna arrest you for every you're never gonna see your kids ever, you know No, and they they FBI actually admitted to it and interviewed at that's that's what they use their kids against Man, what are the who are they guilty of hacking, you know digital terrorism? You know, they were like they broke into some serious websites Yeah, I mean that's that's like somebody said recently it was it's a higher form than terrorism Whoa that the cyber terrorism Well, I have a good friend this guy Mark Goodman. He's at Singularity University over in Silicon Valley where they look at how these emerging technology Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, there's a Singularity University. Oh hell yeah, dude You need to go man. I just did their executive program here in LA was at Fox Studios And it was hosted by the head of Fox the chairman James Jim Janopoulos and it was the founder Peter D Amanda's and curse while they have people from all over the world like the most interesting smart people diplomats actors Technologies business people to learn about exponentially emerging technologies and how they can be addressed to solving man At his grand challenges, and you know like the homework there Everybody that comes out has to come up with an idea that can help a billion people because the notion is that technology in our tools now Allow individuals to know what to do what at one time could only be done by governments You know what I'm saying or or people with extreme resources But yeah Singularity University had an executive program and they had talks about all the amazing stuff going on But also this guy Mark Goodman talked about like cyber terrorism and new forms of obviously Synthetic biology used in bad ways and this that it's a conversation that needs to be had because human Human beings have a good ability to foresee problems And so we should start addressing those problems before they become a serious issue So that we can enjoy all the fruits and benefits that are coming from these emerging technologies But at the same time take responsibility for obviously what is a double-edged sword as always or the aliens land first Before we get our shit together right well, then we got a problem actually we should talk about aliens. I have a fucking crazy idea to tell you Okay, you guys heard of the transition hypothesis. No, I have not okay So I just found out about this last night and it was it's a hypothesis by this guy called John smart He's an accelerating specialist futurist over in Silicon Valley The tricension hypothesis hypothesis is an answer to Fermi's paradox Which is if the universe is so vast and there's all these other planets that have had so so much more time to develop intelligent life How can we don't see it everywhere right like that's Fermi's paradox? I'm told and the Transension hypothesis says that if you look at what's happening with technological progress as we head towards the Singularity Is the dematerialization and miniaturization of of complexity? So like there's more energy per second program going through a microchip than there is in the surface of the Sun The most complex thing in the universe that we know of right now is the human being so complexity gets more complex But also gets denser so they call stem right and so What is stem again tell me what it's the has for? Anyway, I'll remember but any aliens brother. Yeah, no, no, but what happens is he says that eventually This exponentially growing technology and when we start talking about nanotechnology and putting intelligence at the nanoscale They were going to eventually create an artificial black hole and disappear into it Installing shot into the future because there's going to be so much density and so much complexity So much information that eventually is going to create a rupture through space time and we're going to disappear into it So we're just going to do that just by density of information by so too many hard drives in one spot in one time Yeah, well because he says that the computation event works by shrinking things and Complexity gets smaller and smaller and smaller as the computer chips get faster and faster and faster more powerful I mean look at the complexity that's in an iPhone today It's a million times cheaper a million times smaller in a thousand times more powerful than half a building in size was 40 years ago So in a hundred years imagine the complexity that is going to be in something smaller than an atom or even scales beyond that So when our minds when intelligence is residing on those scales basically they're saying that eventually we're not going to colonize outer space We're going to go into the inner space. We're going to go smaller and smaller and smaller and density until we literally Create the ultimate universal computer which is a black hole Can we opt out Can people I don't know if I explain it very well sidelines I've been saying for years and I think the people responsible for the big bang there You go there you go well the big bang could have been birthed from a previous universe that eventually achieved the Transition and disappeared in a lot of the recent button I think that's why we're so fascinated with technology We eventually hit a point where we figure something out we press a button and we disappear into a black hole Which is worth as a big bang in a new universe the whole idea of the big bang is really fucking amazing because it's amazing That science ever would come up with a theory like the big bang It's almost like they had to have a theory. So this was the best one the universe is constantly expanding Yeah, there's there's some radio waves from 14 billion years ago We're detecting we believe that was a big explosion. It was just run with this Yeah, and the idea that at one point in time 14 whatever billion years ago the The universe was so small it was more than a head of a pen everything the higher universe. Yeah, that is Well that was going the other direction and I just remembered what the stem acronym stands for it space time matter and energy space time matter and energy Shrew why is it stem then Space time energy and matter. Okay. My back. Yeah space time energy matter man compresses compresses as technology progresses right so there's less space and less time and things are smaller and Less energy going through that matter and also less matter so that's the move towards density. It's like a reverse Big bang give me a fucking headache. Yeah, it's it's it's really ridiculous if I was correct I'll dive. I'm sure I'm not the only one who's gonna thought this up by the way I think when you look at you know look at nuclear bombs and they just nuclear power in general The fact that you know where we control most of our power and major cities is controlled by these nutty fucking nuclear explosions if they've contained Not an explosion but a nuclear reaction that they've contained in this air and if the power goes out like it goes in Japan Everyone's fucked you have to run everybody has to get away from them. It's doomed for a hundred thousand years Like just that alone just that alone. Yeah, it makes me think like wow like I know I don't have any better options No, I don't but this is all you guys guys you guys I mean in the 1960s and 70s This is what you figured out you figured out how to make nuclear power that if the power goes off It just eats right through the earth and then everyone's fucked anywhere near you know But isn't it mind blowing what a mind? What minds can do? Oh, it's incredible because I think of the scale that we are like how small and dense a mind is a thinking being The amount of synaptic connections inside of something as small as the brain is as many galaxies as there are in the universe Like that amount of complexity and something so small is what we are so it's like people say oh we're so insignificant I think we're like really significant You know what I mean like we're the cutting edge of design well that has emerged from the universe I agree and I don't at the same time. I think yes, we're very It we're very significant if it comes to change on this earth But the earth is just so goddamn small and the big picture is ridiculous to say that we're significant We're so fucking time I mean if but just back really do talk about the whole universe and then really play back the evolution of the universe in our heads A capacity to understand Events that have occurred over deep time not just So we're creating we're creating models on the scale of that universe the universe that you're saying so much bigger than we are We're creating internal models of it inside of our heads true We're fitting the universe in our head as far as virtual conversations about it Our that's what's fucking crazy which means it fits in our heads. Yeah the design fits in our heads if we understand it correctly The smartest people in the world Einstein among them could probably contemplate it in his head and You know people who take psychedelics say that they experience the entire universe at once maybe they do Yeah, maybe they do maybe it's all inside of mushroom You'd see the whole thing you just got to take an up on yeah Well because the universe expands outwards, but it goes inwards to you this is the scales get smaller There's an entire universe inside of us 10 trillion trillion trillion atoms and apparently the real fuck up goes smaller There's in most atoms. It's just space Give it you know when you look at yeah You're already talking about that the other night most most most of everything is mostly empty space most of us Yeah, mostly empty space We're just pattern integrity Just pattern integrity. It's so insane to just even try to wrap your head around how complex the whole thing really truly is Which is why people like sticking to neighborhoods and watching the same shows they want anything that calms down this Bizarre feeling you're never ending complexity You know that it's impossible to understand or be in control of your universe. Yeah Well, it's frightening to live to live in the mystery to live on the edge of knowledge to live on the edge of thought Well, there's a reason we call it the edge because there looks like there's a ravine on the other end But I still think even though as individuals some of us find that frightening and to each his own as a collective I think mankind is always restless and never afraid of the edge I think mankind always pushes at the edge and that's what makes me ultimately so optimistic about humanity We're still here and it's getting crazy and look at the stuff that humanity is talking to itself about yeah about bomb at Iran That's that go on. I do man. There's it's going both ways I do self-correcting global organisms. So maybe we're just self we're self-correcting I agree with you. I don't grow like share in your optimism Continually fascinated by the stupidity of the human race as well as the intelligence of it I think you can't ignore I mean you can't ignore that. There's a lot of dummies out there unfortunately Totally big percentage of the world's a fucking mess right now and a lot of those people are Big percentage, but I just think that what is a mess gets magnified and brought to our attention well It's more than 1% right more than 1% of the world's a mess I would say when you say when you think about Iraq Afghanistan What's going on in Syria? What just happened in Libya? What's going on in Egypt? Well, but what There's about this that are very exciting right? I mean what happened in Libya and Indonesia. No, don't get me wrong But I'm saying More than one percent right yeah, we live in more than 1% I think that a hundred people in a realm and one of them is fucking crazy I think we live in disruptive times. Yes fuel by these accelerating technologies, but I think Disruption it's like going through the birth canal. It's like it's like you know when Timothy Leary It says that we're about to like you know shed our skin, you know, we're in the Marvel stage we were pre-larvel of then we're larval and then we're just we're about to spread our wings Potentially potentially that's where this conversation comes in if some new age Hitler doesn't step into the equation fair enough But a good conversation to have yes, oh, yeah, of course It's amazing when you really look back at the World War II that it was such a short amount of time ago It's terrifying it's hard to wrap your head around that I'm Jewish. I know yeah. Yeah. Yes It's what did you have family that was my family fled from Europe. Yeah, my mother's side Polish and Russian. Yeah There was a Venezuelan Ari in a view to bunch wasn't his dad in I don't want to say let's see But yeah, it's incredible that that's inside that could that could be your grandparents That could be our lifetime that's within our within our grass right now while you know this chain of life is going on The Holocaust was happening. Well, war II is happening. I mean the storming the beaches of Normandy That's like the most savage shit in human history You know cutting people down machine guns as they run through the sand. I mean that that is that's our lifetime And it's amazing some really truly amazing when you stop and think about how crazy that seems yeah Yeah, there was a really interesting article that I read because obviously everything you're saying is very upsetting It was in foreign policy magazine. I just stopped talking dude. It's cool No, no, no, no, but there was an article in foreign policy magazine It was called the end of war and it was one of those counterintuitive articles that you read it and you're like Okay, there's these interesting academics that are saying yes, this was tragedy. Yes, there've been horrible things Yes, these numbers these scales are horrific But put it in context over deeper longer time and what you see is that things are getting better Less wars happening just that before we couldn't cover every war on TV There were too many conflict zones in the world, but he talks about how there's less and less It's just it's important to get the other side. No, I was that we don't forget I'm sure that it's better now that it has been ever but as a I think human beings as just naturally we look at the errors and the issues that we have and we see a lot of That are sort of legacy they aren't corrected and they've been going on for so long like war I mean, I remember when I was a kid I was I don't know maybe like I think it was like eight or something like that When the government pulled out of Vietnam the Vietnam war was over and I remember thinking Like it's good that we're done having wars because now people realize that we don't like war No one's gonna go to war anymore. Look right I remember as even as a child with the idea in my head that I was watching the culture Evolve past war. I had like a real sense Yeah, especially when I think when you're a child because as you're growing and you're kind of experiencing life and it's being Sort of explained to you along the way through experiences that you you start getting an idea that that's how the whole world works The things get better over time. Yeah, so things get smarter. They improve because that's what you're doing You're eight years old you're smarter than you were when you were five right you know what I'm saying? I mean the significantly you know who you are when you're yes So I think that's how I view the world and I remember in whatever year it was 91 or 92 when we When we were desert storm right what year was that 91 right maybe whatever remember mighty in 1989 But whatever year it was I remember watching that happen I remember me and my my buddy Jimmy that I used to live with my roommate Jim to tell you what's up, Jim We were sitting in front of the TV and they were showing missiles Like firing over into Baghdad and I remember watch that going what the fuck and he looks at me and goes where a war body Where a war like well that didn't even make sense Well because it seems obsolete compared to all the great things that are happening in the world right the massive Collaboration the massive cooperation, you know people doing things increasingly for free for one another online people coming together People protesting against dictatorships Twitter being used as fuel for descent and discontent I mean there's so many encouraging trends. Yeah, whenever you kind of contemplate the fact that they're still bad things out there You realize well you the contrast also makes you realize there's aspects of us that are so obsolete We need a firmware upgrade, but yeah, we're fucking we're getting there. We're seeing you there to universities What you need to go man? I'm sure they love that you need to go. Yeah We had actually will I am was there really yeah and then he did a talk in a panel We had this company that does a wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait a minute Will I am gets to talk to the singular singular to universe him in the head of Fox? What does he talk about well because you talk about no using these technologies and not bitches on the road Creative and good uses of these technologies and how we handy to spread these technologies to those that are less Less lucky than we are and what not. I'm sure you're talking about nice things I just I was great jokes and we saw two paralyzed people walk this Bionic company who makes these like exoskeleton Skeleton Jim and straighted to paralyzed people standing up and walking. I mean it was that's really intense I've seen that very emotional skeleton. It's fucking nuts. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like right out of a Marvel comics Totally right. It looks like a trailer for a movie that takes place in the future that's showing you how we got there Like archival footage from the future. It just totally makes sense right? I mean, it's it's the future. They're gonna figure out well. They're gonna figure out artificial bodies Eventually absolutely for sure they're gonna be able to put your head on someone else's body dude under artificial Avatar so isn't there a wired magazine story about the man who wants to build the real avatar? Could you imagine if they get so good at surgery that they build an artificial you and that the head is open and They just have to sew it up and stuff your brain in there They only have like a certain amount of time where they could take your brain and reattach it Open your good night. Good night, Mr. Jones boom. Oh cut up your when next thing I see you gonna be 20 years old and invincible they cut open your fucking brain Suck it out real quick and they only have a couple minutes and then they screw it into this new brain We turned it on fire up. Mr. Jones. You hear as Mr. Jones. Well, I think I think 37 seconds. We're good. We're good You got a new life Jones made the trip into a synthetic body with his biological brain Well, I think by the time that we can do that We will be non-biological in the sense that we'll have far greater than human intelligence and sentience Residing and decentralized non-biological substrates. Do you feel like that about an end of scale? Do you feel like that I've never felt like we're gonna go to other planets We definitely are we're definitely are we're gonna go to Mars in less than ten years What are you like? Elon Musk and his one wish was saying Yes, yes, new green was said if you let me an office by the second term We'll have a base on the moon. Well, we don't need governments for that See that's the difference of where we are now. It's gonna happen by private space flight It's gonna be the tech no philanthropists like Elon Musk who have the vision and the resources to make it happen And they're benefit from the emerging technologies because something that was that the cost was impossible 20 years ago of a sudden as mid-minute arises infinitely more affordable But we're going to space and then we're gonna send artists into space and that will transform the human condition We have to decide like who the artist are because the last thing you want a shitty poetry from outer space Well imagine you know you're gonna be like realizing it philosophically a podcast from space how that would influence your thoughts your ideas how about we just get a green screen and put some space behind me and maybe that Same Do you have your NASA suit Brian? Yep, mine's mine in the truck Yeah, yeah, I don't I don't know man. I don't know what the future holds But I I think the big bang machine may come before space travel. I mean, I'm just guessing the big bang machine Yeah, they might press the big bang button before before we figure out how to get to other planets I hope they're not man. We have to at least figure out how to back ourselves What if you fucking fly out to Mars? What if you fly out to Mars and it's just like the shittiest parts of Arizona? It's just like the shittiest parts of the Arizona desert and you're like you know what the spots like this that suck on America I could have just driven there. I didn't have to fucking fly in a rocket ship is some place with no air to see a shitty part of the of the universe that I could have seen in Arizona. Yeah I don't think rock desert areas where there's no one For a hundred thousand fucking square miles. Yeah, dude Fair enough And I think that those that go are not going to swim on Mars's beautiful beaches I think they're going for the feeling that they will have when they look out that window and see another celestial body They're going there for the wonderlust the aw they're going there for the aw They're that that's their religious feeling that's them getting off on God anybody that does that who really if they really do choose to give up Essentially years and years of their lives for this scientific adventure I mean that's what they're doing. It's gonna take like six months to just to get to Mars That's a real hero and there's gonna be a lot of one way tickets like you're saying. Yeah, that's a real hero And who knows by the way what the fuck happens to your body out there in radiation in deep space How unhealthy it is to be in the atmosphere and you know, and then what are they gonna do? They're gonna have to do some sort of What is it called when you change the atmosphere of a new planet? With terraform terraform. Oh, yeah, they're gonna have to terraform Yeah, so they would have to build machines that actually create oxygen and yeah, and then hope it stays stable Yeah, although but you want to go a little crazier man a little farther into the future That will all be done with nanotechnology The physicist Freeman Dyson says we'll be able to have the entire biosphere of the world decoded the genome of the entire biosphere of everything That's living on planet Earth in something that's a few micrograms in weight And so you can also scale and we'll be able to send those nanotechnology instructions to self replicate and seed the universe the whole rant about this The physicist is talking about this like this thing. It's not like some like, you know, hippie tripping This is a physicist who's you know at one time was probably a hippie tripping and It makes sense when you think about how small data holding you know Cell, you know little little little hard drives now and what they're gonna be like. I mean they've they've got computers that are small is a grain of sand now Dude quantum computing is gonna be doing superposition which means like being one in zero at the same time Yeah, what is that what is that? Decorably does anybody do you understand it? I know expert but superposition means that it can be in motion and still at the same time Yes, yes, yes two different places at once Yeah, something is still particle and away that the same time and so it can something can be at the same time in two different points in The universe and this is the end communicate and this is not horseshit right? This is all proven right? Please accept it in the quantum physics community Yeah, doesn't that make you want to toss all previous notions about reality aside Well, yes something like that and you go wait At least accepted in the quantum physics community. Doesn't that make you want to toss all previous notions about reality aside? Well, yes. Look at something like that. And you go, wait a minute, wait a minute. Yes. The very foundation of everything we see, touch, feel, observe, no exist. Is illusory. What? Yes. It's a goddamn program. Yeah. Dude, it's the fucking matrix. Yeah, it's my friend clearly. My friend clearly is real. The matrix didn't go far enough. The matrix didn't go far enough. That's why I remember it was so brilliant. And that's why inception was similarly on those same, the same. There's a mega friend has a shirt. It has these two guys sitting in a chair. And one of them says, are we just graphics on an imaginary t-shirt? And the other guy says, that's ludicrous. But you could extend that extrapolate that to us. Yeah. Are we just like two dudes in some virtual simulation that somebody else is playing with? And then you're like, nah. And then it zooms out and it shows like that we're playing on some screen for someone else's energy. Well, if the game was really good. Which is what's happening right now. Yeah, I mean, when you're playing a really good game of Quake, you know, when you're in the zone, man. You're not thinking, hey, I'm playing Quake. Oh, no, you're locked in there. You're in your side. You're hopping and moving. You're a part of it. We can be in multiple realities, dude. There's no doubt. We're already doing it with flat screens that are not even that immersive. And we can lose ourselves in it. Right. So if this is artificial, it could be just so good. Which makes sense for a lot of shit. Absolutely. Where I've said so many times that the world feels like a piece of fiction. That the word, the reality. When a guy like, you know what, when I am, I yelled shut the fuck off of a TV. When that Anthony Weiner guy got caught with taking pictures of his dick. I'm like, come on, man, this is shitty writing. This is shitty writing. This is a sitcom I'd get mad. Well, you know what? That's a movie. A movie about a guy that's criticizing the screenplay of life. Yeah. Starring you would be really funny. Well, it wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't that I was criticizing. It was that it was like Cohen Brothers S. Like it was so preposterous that it seemed like all of a sudden we're in a movie. Come on, the guy named Weiner did the six pictures of his cock, did they just lose the money into it? Clues are everywhere, man. Row, row, row your boat. What does that mean? Well, the last line of row, row, row your boat. Is this life is but a dream. Yeah, but there's a lot of dream. They probably had a run, make something wrong. What is it like not the pursuit of a dream? When life is not the pursuit of a dream. There's clues everywhere, man. What could have been really high when they wrote that? Jesus read that song. Yeah, I've written a lot of shit high that I'm embarrassed about. Yeah. Like you're one joke. Yeah, it's true. I really did write that. That's funny. So what do we do to sort of, I mean, I guess what we're doing is what you're doing right now. What we're doing, what we can do as in work creating memes. Yeah. And what we can do is retweet things that resonate with us. Absolutely. Talk about things that that's about. Well, you every time you retweet something. Yeah. 100,000 minds are potentially potentially potentially. But actually, fair enough. But 600,000 is a very big number. So even if only 10, if the tweet that you sent out triggers a butterfly effect in his thought that opens up a whole new stream of possibilities for that person, that will, that's real transformation. Yeah. So it's natural selection playing out on a faster and faster rate because things are happening. So you're creating artful change in the world using the power of your mind. Somebody listening to this might invent some new poem that becomes the campaign for some brand that transforms the world. Like I said, the butterfly effect. But we're talking at scales and numbers where that's possible. I've seen the engaged inspired audience interface with you. Like I've seen it. So it's like it's kind of a... Well, they're responding to you too, man. They respond to your ideas and your passion about it. And one of the cool things about having a podcast is someone right now could be anywhere, doing some tedious work around the house or whatever. Right. And they were in a certain state of mind. And the conversation's for topics that you brought up and the way we explore these topics, all of a sudden their mind is fucking racing. Right. You know, and that is a real cool thing. That is a really cool thing that we can do something like that. That to me is one of the most satisfying aspects of this. That you can entertain someone and engage them and literally put them on a little bit of a mental journey where they start to think about these different subjects. Absolutely. Nano technology and you start exploring it and seeing how bizarre it is. Some of the references that you use you go and look them up and go, holy fucks. So many people ask for book recommendations after our session. Oh yeah, I'm sure. So many. Yeah, I've kind of eventually like make like a thing on my website. When you do my favorite books, you know, there's the favorite documentaries. There's a documentary thread on the message board. You know, you'll make that popular. I'm such a big fan of Joseph Campbell and the sort of mind as well. He was a journey. Yeah. See, think of the hero's journey. We think so literally. So we're like obviously a geographical journey. Like if you go on a safari and you climb Kilimanjaro, you will go through all the steps. A departure from the ordinary, overcoming obstacles, having a catharsis and realization and making the return. But we need to apply that metaphor internally. This podcast session is a Joseph Campbell-esque hero's journey. Person puts on the headphones and it's a departure. Who's the person who's the princess? No. We don't need it on a hero's journey. No, but think this is the hero's journey. It follows the steps. It's a departure from the ordinary. We're partaking in conversations that are maybe not your everyday conversations. We're overcoming obstacles in the sense that we're challenging preconceived truths and questioning ourselves and asking difficult questions and thinking new thoughts. So that's the obstacles and then we're transcending and overcoming the resistance that we have to change into new ways of thinking. And then we're having hopefully the catharsis. Hopefully sometimes during this journey we have a moment of profound realization that changes us both and somebody listening to forever. And then we make the return, which is to say, I love that. I want to share that with my community. I'm going to tweet it. I'm going to Facebook it. So if you apply that metaphor of the hero's journey and you try to make parts of your life significant here is you're I'm going to wake up in the morning. I'm going to be like today. I'm going to depart from the ordinary. I'm going to put myself in uncomfortable situations. I'm going to transcend those boundaries. I'm going to have a new realization. I want this day to mean something and then make the return share. Right. What if that day you got like a bunch of shit you need to get done. You listen to this podcast. I know you have a good one. You're brain too. Right. Book tonight. I'm going to check out this interesting documentary. It's definitely one hour a day. Is it supposed yourself to different things? Absolutely. That's why I really get in the finding big foot. I've been watching I want lately, Brian. That's probably. It's one of the things I have. Just a waste of time for the fuck. Yeah, it's waste time. But I'm trying to write to new material. I'm doing my special. By the way, it's confirmed. It's going to be happening Atlanta on April 20th at the Tabernacle Theater. And most of the tickets are sold out for the first show, but we're going to do a second show. The first show I think is an eight and second show will be 1030. And the second show tickets will go on sale sometime this week, probably today's Monday, sometime probably Wednesday. I would guess. And it'll be me and Joey Diaz and Duncan Tress. Oh, and I'll be recording my my news comedy special and releasing it Lucy K style on the internet for a while. Brilliant dude. Yeah, it's really really got a call. You got to call it lukeys brilliant style. And you're going to be in New York too at some point. Yeah, yeah. But I'm going to be there. Let's link up. Yeah, what day is that? I'm going to be there all of April, man. Oh, you are? Cool. Yeah. Actually, I should tell you this because this is really cool. I'm actually a fifth. May 5th. May 4th. OK, so let's link up. But actually next week, man, I'm heading up to or this week at the end of this week, I'm heading up to the Bay Area because on the 20th, I'm speaking at Stanford Design School and showing some of my crazy ecstatic videos. Oh, wow. And then on the 27th of March 27th, I'm speaking at Google. I was invited to see. Oh, yeah. I'm going to show you some of the videos. And then on March 28th, I'm going to be speaking at the economist ideas festival on innovation at Berkeley. Wow. I'm going to be sick all about showing the videos. It's about talking about inspiration, creativity, new ways of packaging and disseminating ideas. Then I go to New York and on March 30th, I'm speaking at the PSFK conference in Battery Park. And then instead of making people memorize this stuff because most of them won't, what it was your website? Where is there this all? Oh, yeah. It's over. Yeah. If you go to this is Jason Silva.com. This is Jason Silva. Yes. But the best thing honestly is Twitter. Twitter at Jason underscore Silva. S.A. If you can't find it, it's on mine talking about this podcast. Yeah. That way I keep people updated on all the talks. Then April 20th, the National Arts Club in New York City. I'm speaking as well. That's amazing. This is all because of your videos and the produce for the internet. Which are really amazing. If you Google Jason Silva, Vimeo, there's a whole page with a gang of them on. Vimeo is a nice high quality visual too. Yeah. I love Vimeo. It's very high quality. Like you can go full screen with it on a large screen. Yeah. They get it. And the design, it's made for artists. Yeah. Vimeo is awesome. We put all of our podcasts up on Vimeo. We also put a video blog up. Put that on Vimeo as well. But yeah, I think that's incredible, man. You've getting all this work just from those videos popping up on the internet. How did you get started on this, man? What did you, what is your background for education? Yeah, man. Well, I grew up in Venezuela. And I went to the International School and of course, after Venezuela. I was in film school and I did current TV, which was Al Gore's TV channel. I feel like the last five years. But it was really when I left last year that I wanted to do my own content. Did you ever get massages without? No, we didn't. No, no, no. Really baked. Didn't have some massage problems. I don't know. But yeah, the short video was just, I wanted to apply in principle what I was believing intellectually. Like I wanted to make content that was memetic because I believe we live in a world where short form content disseminated through the internet can affect people, can transform minds. We don't need the sort of the old gatekeepers, so to speak. Everybody's in power. And so the reason short videos are easier to consume through small devices and this and that. And you don't ask people for too much of their time. You know, I see that's a big thing. Well, until you won them over like you and then people, I know that people love to listen to you for a long time. Well, I think that the podcast, because what most people do is they listen to while they're doing other stuff. That's what it is. That's brilliant. That's brilliant. Well, it's a real genre that hasn't really been addressed before. Yeah. I love coming here with you because it gives me a chance to talk about these ideas in a space in which is, which is bigger and people are listening to it. But you know, from my situation to initially get to avoid the word out about the videos, it just worked to do them really short. But what I think people respond to them is whether or not they're into the ideas of exponential growth and technology and transforming the human condition. People are into the idea that inspiration needs to be reinvented. How we package and disseminate big ideas needs to be reexamined because we have a new substrate. The internet is a new substrate. When we invented the printing press, we came up with a format of the book and there was like rules and parameters and this is how it works best. Television. We came up with a sitcom film. We came up with the length of time that a film should be before people get restless in the theater and so on and so forth. And I think on the internet, we're still figuring it out. What are the parameters of work? What are the lengths of videos that we'll look at the statistics and get the information and find out how long people pay attention to stuff and this is that. I'm just trying to raise that question. I think that's what I find long form of documentaries available on Google Video and YouTube something that people don't do it yet on their screens. We're going to have that more and we have the merger of TV and with a web. Apple TV and stuff. Then because then you're on the TV, you're on the couch watching TV, watch your web content and it's different experience. It's not just a small screen. When the screens merge, I think we'll have that. Do you think that's entirely going to happen? I don't think that it'll be still have the separation of computer and television. I think software software is going to eat the world. That was a great article that I read. So do you think that networks like NBC, ABC, that's like legacy, it's all going to like be like VHS tapes someday? Yeah. I think it will be like interfacing. I think the Apple TV thing is coming is my feeling that that is going to make everything intuitive. I read an article yesterday from Nick Builtton from the Times where he was saying that he gets anxious when he looks at his cable and TV box because there's so many buttons that it's so complicated and he doesn't know what input is connected to what this. And most of the stuff he doesn't want to watch and there's so many over and he says that he looks at his like iPad and everything so neat and he can press what he wants and get what he wants in real time and we're moving in that direction. And then you guys checked out HBO Go. It's really cool. Awesome. Yeah. I mean on your computer, watch anything, anytime on demand, all of your HBO subscribers like premium, beautiful experience. I think that's the future. That's beautiful. And no, no, nothing is the future which is it's still clunky today. And I can't believe it's so clunky. Like the other day I wanted to find a show on a channel and I'm like, I don't know what the channel is. I have a thousand numbers. I'm like going through each channel. Like, we're the fuck is this channel. You know, and it's going to be serious. It's going to be it's going to be turned to the cartoon network. You know, that's all it's going to be. And then where the remote control alone is just such it's like looking at an old payphone. Yeah, when the UFC moved to fuel TV, when they have some fights on fuel TV, I had a fine fuel TV. It's a forever. Right. Fuck and luck. Yeah. Good luck. It sucks. Yeah. It's like 6, 18, undirected. And especially when you have like HD channels now too, like half the time you're watching you're not even watching the HD channel. And you're like, oh shit, how long I've been watching this? Yeah. There's so many channels now, man. It's amazing. It's really stupid. That's why I think the Apple TV when it does get released, I think that's just going to change everything. I think everything's going to be all the cart. I think, you know, yeah, NBC's going to be around. they're going to be like any other channel. It's going to be like, you know, your channel. You know, people like, people like shows, though. They like like lost. They like things that are going to be produced by a production company that you might not be able to replicate, you know, the home user, you know, even with incredible software. I think people will always want the premium experience. And they're willing to pay for the premium experience. I mean, I don't care to pay $20 to see an IMAX 3D film in the theater and be completely immersed in experience like that. Did you like Avatar? I thought it was beautiful. Did you feel any Avatar depression once you left? You know, I think that's fascinating. Don't you think? Love it. That idea. Yeah. Like there's a great book called The Art of Immersion by Frank Rose. It used to be a wired who says that the future of immersive storytelling and an example is Avatar is such an immersive 3D experience. And he says, we all long to go back to Pandora, even though we've never really been there. I mean, miss something that wasn't really real, but then again, everything is not really real. Right. But more and more, dude, immersive experiences like that. Yes, we're going to get sad when we fall out of the game or out of the movie or out of the virtual space because it's increasingly becoming more interested in being reality. If people got Avatar depression, really they got depression that they weren't one of those blue things because you wouldn't want to have, you wouldn't want to be living in Avatar if you were a human. You just little fucking bitch. I think it was just so pretty. They got jacked left and right. Yeah, but humans like didn't even have a chance in the Avatar world. You can't have Avatar depression. You essentially have depression about your species. You don't want to be one of the Navi. Well, if you want to be larger than life, but that can be what you want to live that lifestyle that they're living the love and honor. When I was little, I used to get involved in the end of Jones depression when Indiana Jones ended. I used to get sad. Well, thank you for treasured in my backyard and I want to have my life to be as fun as Indiana Jones. I remember that feeling as a kid. I really remember leaving films and wanting the lustre and the awe to sort of come home with me. Right. Usually we buy the beat of Adam Max and you want to see them. The idea of Avatar the old, the culture of Avatar was missing, everything that we're missing, or rather that the culture of Avatar, the culture of the Navi had everything that we're missing. That are a lost society. That are materialistic, ridiculous, you know, society where we're not taking our responsibility for own actions. We all collectively as a gigantic group or corporation that this tribal life, this tribal life, the world, these people like the forced to tow their own weight and celebrated and loved each other. Yeah, but that tribal life that supposedly was so advanced. I mean, they still had hierarchical systems. There was still an angry boss that told everybody else what they did. There's still warriors. Like they hadn't really transcended our savagery. In fact, they're happy with the secateurs. I don't know what to say. Because there's an interesting thing that Kurzweil had mentioned that he thought it was really interesting that you use the world's greatest technology to bring our imaginings into being, to make that movie, to then criticize technology in the movie. So you use the most powerful computers and digital tools to realize that dream into screen. And then you tell a story inside of that technologically mediated reality. You tell a story about how bad technology is and how we should all live in the forest again. Not really. What they told a story about was about greed and about the willingness to fuck over cultures and kill entities. That also get fun. But a lot of people came out of that and said it was an indictment of technology. What was the mineral and possibly uranium or something like that? Some stupid fucking name. It was like, what was it called, Brian? I don't know. It's not the movie lines. Optanium, in obtaining. In obtaining. Like impossible to obtain something along those lines. Like, oh, you silly goose. There's a great term called, computuranium that I recently learned. I think it's when we leverage all the matter in the universe or in the galaxy into computation. So all the atoms we put computation into everything and then it becomes a computronium. Well, I'm not sure if I'm explaining correctly. But yeah, this idea that civilization will eventually get advanced that it can leverage all the matter in the universe and put computation into it. Harness all the matter and energy in the universe. What does that even mean? We use everything in the world. Well, you know how there's, you know, our computers or materials and we put computation into the universe. So we could put computation into the stars? Yeah. How the fuck would you do that? Not the physicist, but this is stuff that you can find physical articles that speculate about the future and how society will cross a scale and then it will harness the energy of its star and put computation into matter and terraform other worlds. And yeah, I mean, it's, I mean, we do the world. I mean, we already do it inside of computers. I mean, computation and complexity inside of a microchip, the only other thing is complex is the brain. You know what I find out in the universe has that complexity. I find fascinating when I go back to like some 1980s and 1990 science fiction movies. I like watching like what they thought a computer is going to be like like the movie alien. I watched that again the other day. One of my all time favorite movies, an amazing movie and still holds up as far as like to be excited about Prometheus. Oh, fuck yeah. Oh man. And I think it's like a pretty trailer. No theater or anything Ridley Scott comes up with. I'm down for it. But the first alien movie is one of my all time favorite movies, but God, that computer looks so fucking wonky and shit. And yeah, and it was fascinating that like, you know, when you look at like some of these older movies that we like, they'll take place in 2017. And it's like nothing looks anything like today. Everything super futuristic flying cars and shit. Like when was Blade Runner supposed to be taking place in? How far in the future was it? That's a good question. I don't think it was that far. Dude, you see anything close to what you would see some of the little flying robots that they showed at Ted this year. I saw some of those. To have a 19. A little choreographed flying little helicopters that could do a dance and go around obstacles and objects and those going to be have HD cameras and they can map rooms. The Google self driving cars 200,000 miles they've driven with zero accidents. A million people a year die in road accidents. Okay, a million people a year when we switch over to those self driving cars, which we already know after 200,000 miles and no accidents are only going to get better. That's I mean, it's coming with cars are going to be of course self driving cars. Just like airplanes man, humans are too unreliable. You never be able to go sideways around a corner. You can do it in a sport track. You have to go to a track. Yeah, it'll be a sport, but not in a place where you can hit a pedestrian or hurt somebody else. Of course. That would be that's, but that's, yeah, that's amazing. It's amazing. It was Google guys. Oh, they're genius. Yeah, they're so no one saw them coming. I mean, if there was a sky net and sky net wanted to sneak up on society and just sort of integrate itself completely, I mean, it is Google. Is there like a website, Google is sky net dot com or something like that? Yeah, but I think at this point, their ambition of don't be evil is. Oh, I love Google. Don't get me wrong. But I'm saying it's amazing. Google maps, Google fucking voicemail and Google Gmail, you know, all free. Jesus Christ. All free. Yeah, it's incredible. Google book about how everything is dematerializing and it's becoming for free. We used to have a camera, but now a camera doesn't exist because it's inside your phone. We used to have like a notebook to write things down that that disappeared because now it's all on your phone, which by the way is dematerializing and going into your devices. Have you seen this new device that's just come up as a new droid that came out? This the Samsung journal. Oh, we see this thing. It's fucking five inches. Yeah, it's huge. The biggest one ever. It's like a cross between a tablet and an iPhone. It's amazing. Yeah. Beautiful. I bet the battery lasts about 35 seconds. Totally. How full brightness you got about a half, a half a minute. That's pretty crazy. It's pretty crazy that that new iPad 3 has the same battery life, but yet the screens HD and that's exponential growth right there. Those battery life on those iPads is amazing. It's cool. It's the first batch already, dude. The demand is unprecedented. It's pretty shocking how long you can watch a movie on those things. Watch a three, four movies and you look at it's not even like halfway. You choose with the battery. I can't wait for the i-mind. You think they're already working on the i-mind? What does that? It'll be like a synthetic mind. I don't trust directly. I can't wait for the i-car. They need to make cars. Oh, yeah. I need to make a car. Well, they'll do their counterparts of Google's self-driving Android cars and then Apple needs its i-car. Jesus, how long was before we see self-driving cars on the street? Very, very soon. Yeah. Because Google already has them driving in California and there's been over two or a thousand miles. Yeah. The driving in California right now, like, oh yeah. You could be rear-ended by a fucking machine. Well, they've been zero accidents and 200,000 miles on the bus. They literally, they map. They map three-dimensional maps of what's in front of them, dude. It's insane. They can see. And they can notice people walking and they're just accordingly. It's insane. You know what freaks me out in the same? No, we got onto this through the idea of robotics and flying drones. Yeah. It freaks me out as those things that walk, that have like 10, 15 legs and you kick them and they adjust. Yeah, that one. It looks like a dog. Yeah, that one. That's a bad thing, man. That's incredible. You should see the TED Talk. The head of DARPA gave a TED Talk, dude. She was the most poised, elegant, articulate, attractive woman, dude. Isn't that the people from last? DARPA is the defense advanced. Nice to see you. That's our magic. I know. You know, DARPA, she was amazing. She was talking about dreaming the impossible. She actually reminded me of Jodie Foster's character in contact. She was really like elegant poised. You actually felt comforted to know that somebody that intelligent seeming is like running DARPA and her TED Talk was unbelievable. What did you talk about? She was talking about dreaming the impossible and we have to challenge what we what is in order to dream about what could be. And she's speaking on behalf of the agency that has invented a lot of stuff. What have they invented? I don't know. But a lot of stuff that we take you to show up today. Cutting edge stuff. Are you sure? Pretty sure. If you don't know, how can you be sure? Because if you read about DARPA all the time, they do the advanced secret research. project. Wow. I wonder what they're working on. She showed a hypersonic plane. We still never got the aliens. We didn't get the aliens. No, we went on a transaction. Why we don't why we never see them for me, paradox. So you don't think we'll ever see them? Only when we build our own black hole and go into it, then we'll meet them at the end of time. Whoa. Because it slingshots you. So it's not possible that they could just be like roaming through this universe and go back to things. No, because if they did that, that would influence our evolution. It's discovering them and being influenced by their technology would be influencing our ultimate evolution. That's a lot better. It would get butterfly effect. And the thing that John Smart says is they wouldn't want to do that because that would be akin to incest. To influencing us in some way and then changing the how we unfold. The devil's advocate that this is through our understanding of genetics. It's not through theirs. If there are a thousand or a million years more advanced than us, maybe they know a lot more about how to work that shit. Right. And then maybe it's not that they would think of it as incest at all, but they've completely gone past the idea of gender. And replication by means of sexuality is just what we have to do to make sure that it's still a replication from the primate form. But they want to replicate their technology. Gray, alien, large, almond-shaped eye form. They wouldn't want us to replicate their technology, so maybe there's some sort of thing that will lead to the most of the diversity. And if we're not influenced by them, they'll be more diversity because we'll get there ourselves as just being the Indian idea. The idea that people really love to share when it comes to wacky alien theories is that aliens have genetically engineered human beings in the first place. Well, you can't unprove that to their ex-fighter. It's a problem, right? You can't unprove leprechauns, bro. You know? No, no, no, no. Why can't you? Yeah, that's the thing. That's the dog thing. We're watching this. The nuttiest thing about this weird-looking robot thing is that it moves. It has sort of like an insect-like leg set up. But if you kick it, it adjusts and it doesn't fall down. Yeah, look at that adjusting to the sand and the water. Yeah, hold it walking on the beach. Yeah, and if that thing starts saying hi to you and smiling and drooling, you would just totally fall in love. You know what I'm seeing? To put that thing on one more second, you know what I'm saying? I'm seeing that thing storm out of the back of a giant battleship. Missiles flying off of it. That's what I think. I think if they make one of those fucking things, they make it to send over to countries. Could you imagine a whole army of these motherfuckers heading into your town shooting missiles? I'm imagining them as pets for a little more than only. Rocket launchers on that bench? It's always a double-edged sword. I have to admit it's always a double-edged sword. But look, people start riding them. People start riding them. They become the worst. Yeah, they will become the new horses. They'll be our little pets. Look at the way it's taken. It's wagging. They all got you feel bad for it when he kicks it. You feel bad for it. You feel so human, too. Yeah, but think of how quickly you feel bad for it. I do, but it's amazing is this thing adjusted. And it seems to be adjusting the movement seemed organic. Totally. Totally. We're going to have one of those. And we're going to ride them like a goat down the side of a mountain. That's what it's going to be. You know those crazy goats that can, they're incredibly strong. And they're just like climb up the side of mountains. Well, ride these. They never shoot planes. They're not going. They're not going. They're going to be clean. Yeah, they never get tired. They don't have ache. Yeah, but then they'd probably run on solar power, too. Yeah. Solar power is going to get to a point where it can power everything. Right. Of course, dude, we get 10,000 times more energy from the sun than we need. This fucking thing slows. We should be doing a better way, better ways of capturing that energy. I'd be pissed if I was riding this stupid thing right now. Come on, bitch. Free energy. That's who the sun gives us free energy. Too heavy, Brian. Yeah, for that, for that, you know, how it's going. It's making it through. It's fascinating. That was incredible. It's walking through snow. And there's a bunch of different designs of them, too. I've seen other ones that have like many more legs. Wow, that's crazy. Look, yeah. This thing's dancing around. Robotics, man. Robotics is going to be such a well robotics and AI. Yeah. Artificial intelligence. Right. Look at that. The down to the bare skeleton thing. Yeah. This is incredible stuff. Folks, I know we're just talking right now. Unfortunately, for a lot of you folks that are listening to this on iTunes. Just Google, which of the Google Brian so they could watch this? This is Boston Dynamics, but it's just a new big dog robot. New big dog robot video. And it looks like a spider when you're looking. Really, it's a must. And it's the one that has 700 plus thousand hits on it. It's a must say. You need to know. Amazing. Yeah. It's mean what does the future hold that we're not prepared for? What is the next step? You know, I mean, the internet, I think, caught most people by surprise. Yeah. Well, they're we're in a row but dog. Oh my god. Brian just put on a robot dog. And this thing is moving around like an animated dog. This is insane. The thing is there was there was a guy at Ted that showed his, oh my god, that's the same. That dog's insane. No, there's a guy at Ted. No, there's going to be there's going to be more of those kinds of robots. And the more that they interface with us and they look cute, we'll be we'll start. It doesn't matter if they're conscious or not. Right. Once they cross a certain kind of perceptual barrier that we have and they're like, they seem real. We'll start to interface with them as they are. It's like your dog. You know, when you come home and you have a come home, we have a conversation. There you go. We're just about to feedback. Exactly. And we'll have the same thing with robots too. Yeah, as long as we can get past the idea that something that's metal and wires and you know that that thing can't have some sort of a soul. Yeah. Because you're interacting with it. You know, if you're interacting with it, as long as it doesn't do. What is your fucking computer gets needy? It might. Well, you might want it to get needy because it'll make you feel like you're, you're important to say. Maybe that's a part of like what it's like to have a robot. And you can't talk to all that a robot fucked all the really good ones. Like they're really dangerous. Like this pitch might burn your house down. Like you can't fuck other girls. Like she's really, she's going to be the best hottest robot fucked all ever. The robots will super tell us whatever you want. And that's the only way to make it hot. The only way to make it hot is she has to be super jealous. She can't just let you just treat her like shit. I mean, why aren't you sharing your location? She's doing this with me. She becomes a robot in angry psycho jealous robot. And that's the hottest sex you can get. So that's why everybody just accepts it. You'll be able to get whatever you want. The robots, robots are going to be, they'll be Asian robot fuckers. You're just telling us no questions. You just take care of business, son. Right? They'll always be the exotic Asian robot fuck dolls. Yeah. And what, you know, there's interesting, we keep talking about all these exotic, all these exotic technology and it's sound. I think we're talking about Asians. We're talking about robots. It sounds hallucinatory. Even though it's very quickly, it emerge. Yeah. It just takes you back to that whole thing about computers as the modern version of the psychedelic. I just want to say if you're an Asian girl, I'm just joking around. These are just. Emerge out and it just takes you back to that whole thing about Computers as the modern version of the psychedelic I just want to say if you're an Asian girl. I'm just joking around These are just jokes. I just throw things out there. I don't mean anything, but okay But what do you think of that like to hold Timothy Leary, you know computers are the LSD of the 90s Like people took drugs and they're like we can expand our minds and now computers expand our minds Well, right relationship is very fascinating to me. It's absolutely fascinating Well right now just think this what's this interface is happening right now. This is all live right You know right now there's there's only two thousand people are synced up live with us Right, but eventually this this feeling yeah of this conversation and these these ideas explored Yeah, I'm gonna branch out to about a half a million people right so half a million in mind and How do I have a real thoughts? Yeah, that half a million who knows how many people are gonna just you know I read this Tony Robbins thing once where he talked about Tony Robbins Actually very positive, you know a lot of people think that Tony Robbins is full shit because he's kind of like made a lot I think he's brilliant He's up. We got a lot of very very good points and one of them was to change your life to make huge changes All you need is a small change in the direction and over time that's small change will lead you so far apart of where your initial Direction was absolutely true the idea is that if you have two cars and two parallel lines And one of them just takes a slight turn to the right and they keep driving straight The one who's slight turn to the right is gonna be you know a hundred miles from now It's gonna be way the fuck away from that other one totally and that's sometimes really how you have to look at it Yeah, we especially I mean I'm a super impatient person. I want things now You too, man I even when I go to the supermarket like you bitches don't have any grass-fed beef seriously, right? But I mean like what I How preposterous is it that I think that I can just go to a place and they've killed an animal for me Raised it on grass only killed them this plenty of meat. I can feed my family I can stay alive from this dough this food here And this is what I know Because they didn't get the shit bit of organic meat that day well think about it No grass-fed beef. Yeah fuck well. What about when you're having a Skype conversation with somebody on the other side of the planet And you're just like taking for granted that you can see their face that they can see yours You know you're talking in real time for free and then like all of a sudden it might freeze you're like oh god damn It's freezing. Yeah. Why is this freaking computer freezing? Why is but like think about what you were just enjoying two seconds before Yeah, I'm sure you totally think it for granted. No, we assimilate man. He done it adaptation. Yeah That is what it is it is an adaptation, you know It's it's amazing though that we have this urge and this push to make things bigger faster quicker and that that urge and push is also Responsible for one of the reasons why people get accustomed to things and right and want more Yeah, you used to quote you taught it you quoted McKenna and you talked about how Something about the astonishment and not given to the astonishment and no astonishment Do not give into it, but definitely seek it out. Yeah, I think most people well he's talking about DMT though Yeah, the the the truth in DMT. I mean you're able to see how to DMT. I have not but don't you think that for example? It's astonishing that you can do this podcast and reach half a million minds and very rarely Does one marvel at the astonishment of the things that are for every day that are more? I can many hundreds of thousands of aircrafts are flying through the air right now Communicating with one another flying safely Individuals, you know, they're toward the parts of the world like we don't experience that astonishment I don't wake up in astonishment which should yeah Yeah, you're absolutely right I mean if you would pull someone out of the caveman error and put him in modern society It would be just as psychedelic as a lot of peyote trips. Yes. Yeah, yeah Exactly it'd be so bizarre and outside of the what what you conceived of just seconds ago as being possible Right, you know you take someone from you know a thousand years ago five years ago a blip in time It's nothing to the universe and then put him in today or put him in a guy in movie theater Make a watch Harry Potter and shoot his pants, right? She just can't imagine what a guy right out of the off fucking dragon when it was Harry Potter dragon Right, well own fire out flying through the fire He would just dive on the ground screaming right harm right and that is so amazing Command the fact that that it that is that we wake up in the morning We don't think about that right because that just is we're on to the next thing Yeah, I'm gonna be done and on to the next thing to be looking forward to or to be complaining about And maybe that's the part of our evolutionary makeup that makes us always probe the boundaries of the adjacent possible And always want to keep pushing because maybe if we were in astonishment of all we've done We wouldn't keep progress we're obsessed with innovation human beings are obsessed with innovation I mean, you know every year sports cars get faster You know we're getting to a point right now where like regular cars are doing like race track numbers. Yeah It's you know, even though we have speed limits even though we have that like we still push the performance Tunk limits. I'm fascinated by sports cars because just because I'm fascinated by extreme engineering Yeah, but I'm fascinating by the idea that there's a bunch of people out there that are trying to get something that handles faster It's better geometry. I'm a chain move better right sticks. Right and the the newest nine portion 911 Goes around the track as fast as the 996 cup car So the the Nurburgring which is like this really twisty turny track in Germany A really high-end sports car can go around it today at about seven minutes 30 seconds seven minutes 40 seconds That's like a 911, you know a real high-end car. That's what race cars would do Just a decade early right so it's getting to this crazy point where regular modern street cars are like like fucking cup cars So and how much faster do you need these fucking things? Like you know, but be gottie they run they have a Bugatti they run It's like a thousand fucking horsepower. We do it just to do it man Just that's right just to see how much complexity. Yeah, we can pack into it how much performance Get out of it. It's like modern jet engines. Yeah operated half the temperature of the surface of the sun The core of a modern jet engine right if you I mean it's it's insane Okay, it spins at 500 miles. I mean I don't remember the speed But uh jet engines are with really feats of engineering. I mean it's I mean, you know We everyone's scared of flying Jesus Christ is 30,000 flights a day and nothing happens. It's incredible It's so safe. It's amazing. Yeah, but the way it go is so terrifying Just slamming into the fucking rainforest Well, that's why I love Virgin America so much dude because they got brand new planes They really rock yeah Ran news at the moon native the art fleet well because most other airlines in this country countries have fleets They're 20 to 25 to 30 years. You're scaring the fuck out of me right now. I think this is not at all Listen that doesn't make them any less safe these planes are still certified in well maintained Like I read nonetheless nonetheless on Virgin America. You're getting a brand new fleet of shiny Stated yard aircraft with the best of everything with internet. No, you're not getting a brand new pilot You say dude. We're ready. No, it's just but it's nice You year it's the years 2012 you want to fly on an airplane that was manufactured You know in the last year or two or three is just it makes you feel better when they're shiny There's less stress fractures. Yeah, it is kind of a interesting thing about air technology is that we essentially have the same Tech it's really one of the only industries that has the same technology You know the same general principles, but the engines are far more reliable and far more advancing They were before what what you when did they start getting much better. Oh, well They have the same more as law that applies in computers I mean the engineering of a modern jet engine into computers a lot of these jets from like the 1970s and 1980s Well, no, they they make they make revisions that are pretty much like entire new model. I thought it's still work The engines change everything yeah, I found one to work as long as you don't update the software, right? But it's kind of it's more fun to go on the new ones they have far more technology Yeah, you know that robot dog you know what that's gonna be in the future Well check the screen out right here. How crazy is this that somebody posted this on your message board, but I? So to attack of the clothes, and then here we go. Oh my god. That's the robot that No, that augmented reality placed in there. Oh, yeah Yeah, yeah, but and that they're at ads, you know from Star Wars. Yeah, as robot dogs are the exact same thing as an ad No, dude, you're totally right. I mean it looks exactly the same Also, what is that? That's just they added that. Yeah, somebody just put a funny video together. There was a Yeah, well, that's amazing. You're totally right. Yeah. That's exactly what it is. Yeah Stupid fucking cat clock. How dare you oh? Is that the cat clock? Yeah, that's the the famous cat clock. He likes cats. He likes things to meow Um, yeah future of medicine man. Are you excited about that? Yeah, well I'm excited about the idea of keeping people alive long enough to figure out some really crazy shit Oh, yeah, yeah, the idea of people staying long enough to overpopulate the planet kind of freaks me out though How do you feel well? I think it was the most people cluster around only like three percent of the surface of the world Which is city states like cities. Yeah, the world is still mostly Space and it's mostly water and technology is more like a resource liberating mechanism because scarcity is just contextual Things are only scarce until you create technology that makes them into things that are abundant people talk about water wars But the minute you're not worried at all about overpopulation No, man. No, not at all in fact the more developed and educated people become and in developed nations The rate of having children goes down significantly McKenna has the best cure against a population is to educate our people and put more in technology into their hands but also Also like desalination for example, you know once we perfect that technology this this is called a blue planet It's a water planet. It's mostly water. It just needs to be converted They have anything right now that can their deal is why it's Israel has a lot of these little desalination plans Oh, yeah, just got to get more advanced just like solar panels It's just exponential growth once they hit the tipping point where it's actually cheaper to use those technologies and to do it the other way Then it becomes it'll become the main thing Wow But you know the nation yeah, but you need to create you need to create incentiv I you need to incentivize people to innovate and we're such constant We'll probably dry out the fucking ocean. We'll probably pull all the water out of the ocean. No, I don't think we were Imagine you imagine though if we're so greedy we use up all the water in the ocean I mean nobody predicted that we would have polluted the ocean the way we have in just a hundred years And we've done a lot of people Nanotechnology will create synthetic biology How do they eat the plastic and will yes? Where's the evidence of that ever having to take in place in the past? When have we ever fixed anything? There's there's an exprise contest that the exprise is doing to come up to something with plastics Technology to clean up oil spills or something like that. Yeah, like you criteria that eats plastic like that Well, you know it is you create incentive by offering these prizes like ten million dollar prizes and teams around the world Spend a hundred million dollars to win a ten million dollar prize because of the prestige Swamp thing came from for what swamp thing remember the Marvel comics swamp thing from a contest No, no from some poor and some biological shit to eat up some maybe I'm oh, I don't know Maybe it's another but you know the dog for example that at the exprise They were the ones that did the ten million dollar Or prize for space. Yeah, which became Virgin Galactic well They have one now to create a device that's the size of like an iPhone called a tricorder Ten million dollars to you can make a device that you can spit on or you can put your blood on and that will diagnose you With the equivalent of a ten certified doctors with greater accuracy than ten certified doctors That's where they got this is their new contest. This is their net two million dollar per ten million dollar prize that they just put out So tricorder X prize is it possible? Did this gonna be possible? I mean they already have things that you can put on your iPhone that you can spit on that will like measure your measure and analyze your What it's fluid? Yeah, really? Yeah, they already have that spit on your iPhone What gives you a shot to it? Yeah, what's it called? I have no idea But people can Google spitting on your iPhone medical device Wow, I never heard of that That stuff is gonna get a lot faster because now that that biology is becoming information In my allergies and information technology. We're gonna see the same progress Well, it's so cool when you have contests for good along those lines like with X prize and the fact that they would come up with something Well, yeah, they're brilliant. Yeah, and I mean I would love to believe you I'd be love to believe that someone's gonna eventually figure out a way to get rid of that giant patch of garbage That's in the Pacific Ocean. We shall yeah, we shall that's a big issue, huh? Yeah Well, people talk about that a lot. They're very concerned although it's nice not actually like the size of a country as people would I think It's a size of Texas. I don't think it actually is Size of Texas. Well, I think that they're so small No, I think the you know how it is it's all caught in the current There's like a vortex vortex really that's where all the garbage piles up and all the garbage. Let's look at it right now Let's go this real quick powerful Google Pacific Ocean garbage patch Pacific Ocean oh, it's fucking huge holy shit Wow Although many immediate and advocate advocacy reports have suggested that the patch extends over an area larger than the continental U.S. Recent research sponsored by the National Science Foundation suggests that the affected area may be twice the size of Hawaii Wow, that's fucking big, but that's a lot of trash. It's a lot of trash. I'm pretty Confident that we will create nanotechnology that will literally eat up the garbage That's how well that's how well fish it but then when it runs out of garbage then it'll be hungry and then it becomes swamp thing Maybe it doesn't want to die man doesn't want to die and that's how you know Yeah, I like the premise to a lot of comic book monsters. It's a double-edged sword But yeah, it is we better come up with a way to kill those things before we feed them plastic Well, yes look it's important to look at all the possible uses of technology for good and for bad That's why the conversation needs to be had. Let me ask you this progress is not stopping What I think if we paint beautiful pictures of how things could be we inspire the people to make sure that that's what we actually Absolutely, I completely agree with you And I think you know the way you're doing it in videos and online. It's really cool It's very funny. Well the way you're doing it is amazing But my question to you is what if we saw kangaroos evolving? What if we saw kangaroos? They had some found some flower there was a psychedelic flower They started eating it and kangaroos started building houses Yeah, whittling weapons and shit like that and some we saw some kangaroos welding We saw some welding. We would we allow that shit. I think we go in and kick the kangaroos asses And you'll get the fuck out of here with your armor. We might we might make other animals smarter Who knows do you think so we might give them? But then we'd be battling for resources I think we would just jack no because no we don't even want I ran the holiday power What if the kangaroos came up with the nukes before I ran? What if kangaroos just started fucking being really super smart man? Yeah, well, but but I don't think that with the resources will be an issue We'll be harnessing new Saturday energy from the whole galaxy. There's an infinity of reason you say that But what if an asteroid lands in Australia right near where the karoos are and some spores From this asteroid could tain and never before seen mushroom right rapidly accelerates evolution and within like a hundred years They surpass us and then kangaroos are smarter What do you do then Brian? What if what do you get into you go with your fucking cat clock? I'll create a time machine and take the words what if out of that dictionary Well, then I'm gonna take a time machine and take the word like out and you want to be able to say anything What have ever been? Listen, I believe that you are absolutely convinced that someone's gonna come up with this. I just don't know Well, I just I see it I see it happening man, and I know our brains What is the current plans to fix this now? To fix with garbage patch that we're talking about yeah Well, they're talking about creating some kind of like algae or bacteria that eats the plastic I think one of the big guys of Synthetic biology is Craig Venter who also spoke at the Singularity University thing and he was seeing in terms of the future fuels and the future of like cleaning up like chemicals and Absolutely gonna be using synthetic biology Wow, yeah And then as we can program life to do whatever we want You know so we can it's like you just like we can use language to describe anything We can just author instructions, you know and here you have software that writes its own hardware See that's a thing about programmable life unlike computers you write the code the code manufacturers its own like phenotype Right life the genes determine its physical attributes so the software writes its own hardware into existence That's what's really exciting about like synthetic biology and programmable life especially if you give synthetic like if you give some Artificial intelligence access to 3d computers and 3d printers dude. Absolutely. Oh my god. You're gonna get you crazy unlimited intelligence unlimited intelligence it replicates itself and 3d printers and but just the concept of 3d printers Having it aware of oh now I can improve upon this design of Yes, which is with trillions of time more RAM than our brain. Yeah, and instantaneously Well, you know what Henry Miller's like 10,000 years of progress and we need to believe that it's coming man Henry Miller Said the day that men cease to believe that they will one day become gods then they will surely become worms Wow, that was Henry Miller so he says believe mankind, you know for going from ape to Superman, you know Smacking the middle in a trajectory between the born and the maid. That's where we are man Yeah, we're in yeah, we're in this we're in the middle Yeah, this weird stage where we're sort of conscious and we're aware we're also animalistic and jealous weird and savage Horny we're gonna turn ourselves into the most beautiful artwork. We've ever made me you really think so I definitely bore the aliens land first or the aliens land first so you don't believe that society's ever Get to the point where they travel from one place to another land and affect things that doesn't no I think that they do but the Transcentient hypothesis says that by the time maybe they reach the edge of the solar system or the edge of the galaxy at that point All the density goes back and it goes inwards into the nano scale So it's kind of like we the complexity kind of it goes into itself and goes and makes a black hole and disappears from the visible universe Is it possible that we should look at the transition hypothesis because it'll probably explain much better than I can Isn't it possible that what you're dealing with is something that's here all the time, but it's in another dimension Is it possible dimension string theory? Yeah, I mean there is a dress in that article Yeah, so yeah, so you could even go back to McKenna and say oh so when McKenna talks about hyperdimensional beings and then Well the transition hypothesis says essentially our minds. Yes will break through the visible universe into other dimensions It's like crazy stuff except it's like written by a academic scholar Wow, yeah So no aliens and flying saucers just landing. Yeah, that's that's what he says He says well, yeah, we'll go to other planets, but that's like early stage stuff like going to other planets over the next like 50 years You know, so we'll never get invaded were essentially made invaded by young punks that the really high level aliens wouldn't bother in Vegas Right totally, you know every time we do that the microphone picks it up. Sorry, man. It's fine. It's good But you know someone's gonna be upset people I'm sensitive because people always complain. I used to chew gum Can't you gum? Oh, I don't like anymore people like dude you're fucking sipping can't sipped drinks if you get up here I guess if what you got to think of is someone that's the reason why we put headphones on make we'll easily hear conversation yeah, but if you were in the gym right now you'd hear that Sorry Jim, no, please sorry. Sorry everybody just want to keep everybody happy It's all incredible stuff and I guess it all could come true and come to fruition as long as we don't fuck it up or as long as Some gigantic natural disaster doesn't happen as well. Right. Yes, you take any Do you ever take any care or in consideration? Well, yeah I mean that's super volcanoes shit like I think look we have to be paying attention and we have to be cautious And we have to be you know vigilant as we transition towards what promises to be the most exciting time in human history I mean we're already living in the most exciting time in human history, but let's not lose focus, you know like let's Address the grand challenges of humanity. We've never had such tools with which to do so And I think it's like an opportunity for us to pull our mental cognitive surpluses together right and fix shit Yeah, absolutely. Do you think we'll ever get to the point we can avoid asteroids? Sure you think so. Yeah, yeah, what it would be down. Yeah, we'll get shoot them down You know down with lasers a single laser would blow it up It's going to everything is turning into Star Wars. Yeah, you really think the enemy will do that don't mean some ass towards Miles why we get we already have lasers that are pretty powerful. I mean Nuclear weapons to them like in the movie sunshine Well, no the issue with that is actually that it makes it worse because what happens is instead of one big impact You have hundreds of thousands of Inlet ones well, they're not even little you know you don't need anything that big to make a giant crater in the bottom You know it's one of the weird things about all planets me every planet we find is littered with impacts, you know as we live in a very volatile Source system where we've been inhabiting the Goldilocks space for the Goldilocks Yeah, at a time. We've just been very very lucky like I said all we've been talking about this all of our progress man Is a blink of a blink of a blink of a blink of a blink in terms of cosmic time? So it's like it's not that we've I mean we're lucky Yeah, but it hasn't been that much time that has passed You know lucky of a couple million years in the inevitability of getting hit It's coming that's why we got to progress so that we can thwart that well they just found a very recent evidence of an impact a big one about 13,000 years ago and What's really fascinating about that is all the ancient history theorists all point to that point in time is one being the end of the I say is like around that time the end of the Pleistocene and also also that's when a lot of people point to The the possibility of like an ancient civilization like Egypt falling apart and then rebuilding in the same area Sure, sure, sure, sure, sure, yeah when they when they high-pothicize It's something went wrong. It's always around 10,000 12,000 13,000 somewhere around there Like you know cycles yeah, well the idea is that you know human life on this point like the reason why there's the myth of Atlantis and the myth of you know No on the arc and the epic of Gilgamesh is that there's all these giant disasters just that frequently hit You know and you know if something hit us today and wipe down we're wired to look for danger man Sure, the only way we survive so cautionary tales embedded in our culture are just alarm systems sure And it's kind of a race I mean it's kind of a race between Technology awareness progress and the ability to at least predict And prepare slightly for natural disasters But some of them like called narrow volcanoes and things along those lines This is not an you could do man It's just nothing you can do when it goes it goes unless you can figure out a way to throw some ice cubes on the On the lava and maybe keep it from fucking blowing sky. I know technologies the only way I think that could be addressed, you know That's that's that really is the craziest technology and self-replicating things in an anus scale It's to be better you'd be able to throw those into the lava and they would somehow another problem Everybody to fuck it up. Yeah, yeah change the structure of the molecular structure of the lava I don't know if that fucking freezes up the planet turns us into another I say Jesus Christ, Jayvin Jason, tell me what are you doing the butterfly effect issue is always Yeah, it is right. We don't care. Yeah Well, no, we'll have super computers that can map out every possible possibility Trillions of times more than we can map out different scenarios in our heads So those ais will be able to pick the best scenario. They'll make mathematical projection They'll be like, okay, there's a billion and one probabilities of it And this is the best one. Let's do it you spend so much time thinking about the future and thinking about All these possibilities is it is it possible that when you do this or is it a difficult when you just not to Not to ignore the present is it hard? And you know is it like is it like a sort of a normal thing to sort of ignore the present where you're concentrating Entirely on what the human race is going to accomplish. Yeah, well, I think that you know how they say that it's phrased That very well, but you know, no, no, no I think you know how they we always talk about how human beings need a purpose purpose by its very nature implies A reason to look forward right so we can't help but look to the future It's what we do so your purpose is to create a purpose and to put the idea of purpose into people's What gives me a sense of purpose is a collective feeling that like wow humanity has this unique Opportunity to sort of map its road Beautifully and we all have a way of participating in that and what a wonderful sense of collective purpose It's just it's more interesting to me than like oh well My purpose is to become you know or get this job or do this thing It's like yeah, I want to get this job and do this thing just like everybody else because I want to survive But I'm in the mood for cosmic purpose cosmic significance. You know your cosmic dig slinger Do you know the same it's the same reason that religion always appealed to people for the same reason that man can live for a few You know if you weeks without food a few days without water, but not for a second without hope It's just the human condition. You know the minute we lose hope we commit suicide Not the minute Sometimes you could really suffer for years before you pull the plot But when you lose complete hope you might not even wait around if you're waiting around it because you have a little bit of Thing of thinking that it things might turn around Yeah, I think it's important. I think it's important to look forward. I think it's huge I think it's the only thing that propels our progress anyway because if we were in a Stupefied lull staying in the present we wouldn't do anything Yeah, of course What do you see happening in your lifetime? I mean we are right now in 2012 This is supposed to be if you're paying attention to time wave zero novelty theory this was when it when the shit hits the fan Well, you know what I found recently I mean I've talked about this recently But I wanted to bring it up with you because I know you're a McKenna fan as well He altered the end date to coincide with the end date of the Mayan calendar Yeah, maybe he was of the people that believe that by creating a social movement around these ideas You more quickly actualize those ideas people were so excited me for bringing this up But somebody posted it on my message board and then I went and read and apparently his initial Calculations was November November of 2012 anyway We get to December move to the summer 21st which is the you know the end date of long count But then somebody brought up the other day There's like an internet meme going around or you know calculate leap years did the Mayans calculate leap years because if they didn't You know all this shit all happened 700 years ago Yeah, I mean I mean I have no idea what the science is but I think what's interesting is that if you create a viral swell 10 times the scale of the Joseph Kony video with some beautifully produced message about how mankind is using technology to create a global brain and address the problems of humanity And it's seen by a billion people by December on YouTube then the idea becomes reality because this is what we've been talking about Well, the ideas are just as real as the neurons that they inhabit so that's what's crazy. It's a self-fulfilling Well the Joseph Kony video I mean we talked about this But I remember when it hit Twitter when I saw it when I saw it starting to appear in my timeline I started thinking wow what's gonna happen here? Like this is yeah, this seems like a very orchestrated campaign Yeah, and the idea to make a terrible person very famous so that he's he's a target of five more Yeah, what a what a genius idea And you know that really is just sort of tapping into potential tapping into which no one else has done before No one else has ever done that about a terrible person. Yeah. No. No. It's very Yeah, it's interesting. It's so interesting. It's brilliant Yeah, and then just the use of media and understanding its power and applying it for Savvy social impact what are the criticisms of this Kony video because I know there's a few know the criticism I think has to do specifically with with with the nonprofit Operations right tails but look again that's something that's a whole other conversation right now We're not experts and we don't know facts But I think what's interesting is what they've made with the video what that video means about the future of how messages get spread Yeah, that we were seeing we all rely we all know where we were when the Kony video hit Yeah, it's one of those things. It's like something has changed to you and we're all aware that okay This is this is a new paradigm. It's within a night. Yeah, it's a paradigm. Shoot not even a paradigm shit You know what's really fascinating is Obama the Obama campaign is releasing This is where they're so social media brilliant savvy they understand aesthetics in that campaign they had the director of an inconvenient truth Is about to release a documentary so like a well made film about Obama and that's gonna be part of their campaign media materials so instead of like an ad like a normal attack ad like the other guys are doing These guys are releasing a film made by a talented filmmaker. I mean the brilliance of that That's probably gonna go ridiculously viral. That's the best campaign video you could have ever done When is not gonna come out? I don't know the dates, but people should Google the new about Whatever is it trailer. I wonder if it's gonna be free or like Louis C. K. I wonder if it's gonna be like a Kim Kardashian reality TV show Where you know that they've created artificial scenarios to move the plot along. Yeah, I got Obama's All right, Obama we got you had a car wash now. I was like next I can food. I don't want Mexican food Now you're gonna be washing the car Imagine if they actually did it they produce it like a reality show. Yeah, would that be the most ridiculous shit ever I haven't seen it. I wonder what it's gonna be something tells me it's gonna be a well-made film with beautiful music and Well, it'd be nice to see him talk outside of that fake sort of I'm giving a speech voice Yeah, yeah, exactly, you know, it should be like a documentary that followed him and behind the scenes Well the thing I'm giving a speech voice is very disturbing because it's too smooth It's not real. It's too polished. It's not it's not you know I know it's prepared and beaten down to I don't want that out of a leader Yeah, you know what I want out of a leader is I want I want to know that this is you who this is you this isn't I'm being a strip club DJ. This isn't I'm the ammording guy on the zoo coming up next the same fucking voice When you hear a man give a speech and then you know You know, there's that way of talking that is so goddamn fake. It should be illegal. They should be able to stop you When you hear a man give a speech and you know, there's a that way of talking that is so goddamn fake. It should be illegal They should be able to stop you from making campaigns and speeches and stop you and go you can't talk like that It'll be interesting to see to see how it comes across and speaking of of politicians. Did you see the HBO movie about Game change what is it what's game change? It's about the McCain. Oh about Sarah Palin when he picked this right? Watch more Sarah Palin stuff. Well, Julian Moore was so good in it. Dude. She looks just like her. Yeah, but like the film is so upsetting and really well because it shows you the theater of what a lot of politics has become Well also how obsolete it is and how accurate is it? I how accurate is it? Well, it's all been doctored up for fucking dramatic effect. No, you need to see a man I think they still get the Message you still get the idea of the reasons that she was put there right and her lack of experience Yeah, well that became painfully obvious right, but here it's presented in a you know the way it would be like a film scholar You know explaining something to me. It's just it just illustrates how Wonky the system is that could even option? How could that be an option exactly? How can it be? We as a society would allow Yeah, like that. Well, you know, it's what I've always said is the real problem is there's really fucking dumb people out there A lot of them and they get to vote too and the problem with dumb people is they don't know they're dumb So when they see someone like Sarah Palin who may not be the smartest person in the world But she's way smarter than them. They can't distinguish between her and Stephen Hawking's when Neil Tyson speaks He sounds just as brilliant as Sarah Palin because they're both way out of their fucking league Most people can barely straight together a sentence and so these are the people that She represents simplicity she represents I think today. No fashion thing. Yes, and hunting family there's a safe danger with her It's she's dangerous, but because but she's also familiar So maybe that's why but like fuck I feel like today man if you have access to the internet You have no excuse not to be on Khan Academy. You have no excuse not to be watching TED talks You have no excuse not to saturate your brain with knowledge like it's not like there's no books around like the book that's ever been written is an internet click away and I feel like Ignorance is inexcusable these days if you have an internet connection. So it's kind of like I Don't know like it feels like You know the tools are there, but it's up to us how we use them It's going back to the same message and I think people really they need to need to get on this right? They need to get on this the representative government ideas got to go That's that's not necessary anymore. We can all instantly communicate with the you know the government We can instantly decide what we agree with Yeah, we can have her voices Yeah, I hear that we have centers and congressmen and you know They're in this position where they get to vote for the district shot a fascinating idea Yeah, that's a ridiculous idea. That's not even that's not see everybody looks at it at democracy Is if like you get to say you get to vote? You don't just say in shit You get to say in who you pick who gets you in a position, but democracy needs to come online man like the whole 100% needs to be revamped. Yeah, they need to throw all representation The internet needs to be voted on new constitutional People who have jobs but those jobs are to carry out the will of the people to it not to represent the people the people can represent themselves Oh, no, when does somebody get to make a Joseph Coney style video about legalizing marijuana? People say click here and play this to say yes, and if it gets a billion views They'll have to legal. I could already see just just google the union man go watch the movie the union the business behind getting high It's documented that I was involved in the My friend Adam Skorgy produced it was like I was like four or five years ago at least that we did this Well the best documentaries on the the reality behind the legalization of marijuana and the reality behind how big of a business is and how many fucking people use it Dude, I have that I have members of my family that benefit from its medicinal Additional use and they benefit immensely. It's been like a miracle for my hands. Well, it's it's one of those plants one of those substances one of those elements of our culture and society that if you were again If you were looking at life as a work of fiction if life was a movie and there was some plant in the movie that was incredibly beneficial not just to the culture not just to In stealing a sense of camaraderie and people not just to for making you inquisitive Make a turbocharger for your imagination making sex feel better not just all of these things But then it creates a superior fiber that you can make clothes out of that's way more horrible than cotton It makes a much more superior paper and you could put it in an area and it can inform months It can be ready to process whereas it takes fucking years to grow trees in the same area Plus it out produces the trees in the same acreage by something like four to one I mean, it's amazing it has the amino acids that you can live off of you can use it to make fuel you can make hemp oil It becomes preposterous preposterous, but it's a Video that's slickly produced with the corny video that gets a billion views Let's do it you and me do it in ten minutes Did you get your special table pumping up on the other you're doing new bill in California a DUI bill that they're gonna make it Zero tolerance DUI if you have any weed in your system or in marijuana and marijuana use these stays in your system day six weeks I think we that's like saying punishing you for right drunk two days ago. So it pretty much make anyone that smokes weed Well, that's silly. They don't they're not gonna pick it up to get a urine test from you They wouldn't you will be able to blow in what they would be allowed to do if they pull you over Oh, that's so ridiculous. That's you know the real the real problem with that is the science is not the same It doesn't the marijuana does not treat people or it doesn't affect people the same whether alcohol does period I'm not saying you should go out and get high and drive around But I'm saying some people can drive high and they're fine and that is a fact You know and you might not want to dress it because it seems like it's a taboo subject and you know people want to dance around It is not getting drunk getting drunk is something that really severely impairs your ability to operate machines Your ability to walk your very very very very very very different It's not a good idea to be in any altered state of consciousness while you're responsible for other That's why we get the self-driving cars. That's why the Google self-driving cars are so perfectly So you can be baked as fucking at a Google car just a Google car could be cheats and chong to the max completely filled with smoke so they're open up those side-going doors It'll be the self-driving cars perfectly safe the computer doesn't get high Did your Google fanboy a little bit right I? Kind of a fan of anybody who's pushing the boundaries of the possible. Of course Yeah, I'm a Google fanboy. Yes. I'm like us all the way. Wow, bro. I'm Netflix Netflix search. No The other one that no game damn it that's gay. That's it. Right there number next game. Yeah, and that's Gabe search You can't do it in the search. Yeah, it was like a search part of it I think so it makes sense. I thought it was always the browser Well, there's a what were the earliest search engines before Google there was that wasn't the first there was no Is he search engines? Well, I'll tell you stir. I remember I'll do these to hot pot Hot pot on a member like this and so how did those go away and how did Google just storm the beach? I'll take it a vaded man. So how innovative it is like natural selection It's like winning because like winning the game Microsoft has tried so hard with this whole Bing thing first of all Why Bing what does that mean? What are you saying? It's Google. I don't know Bing You know, it's probably the second best one. It's pretty good, but why Bing? Why call it Bing? Why is it Google? Why is Google because a Google is a number dude. It's a very cool number actually I don't have until recently a term for like it's a gigantic what Twilio. Yeah, it's like a million zeros or some shit Well, let's let's find out what it is. What is a Google here? Because we should it For a people it comes from another term. I don't believe it the word is Google. It's a it's a abbreviation of a term Yeah, Google it's G O O G O L Yeah, and it is holy shit. How many oh my god 100 zeros it is the wow a Google is the large number 10 to 100 That is the digit one followed by 100 zeros What a great way to make a statement about the depth and breadth of your capabilities by using a number like that It's kind of beautiful and how perfect. Yeah, what a perfect description. It's perfect for Google that is Google Yeah, Google voicemail Google fucking maps Google Jesus, that's why I'm so excited to speak there. Yeah, what are you gonna talk about? I'm gonna talk about creativity I'm gonna talk about innovation. I'm gonna talk about inspiration and awe. I'm gonna talk about using technology to render the impossible into existence and I'm gonna show some of the videos actually my friend Josh Kaplan actually who set this up is a huge fan of your show. Oh, that's awesome. He loves your podcast. What's up? Josh? Yes, he's what what and he set up the invite to Google so oh, that's amazing man That's incredible. You know Google's known as being one of those companies that really treats their employees well Yeah, that's like we got an invite a couple years ago We were in San Francisco. Maybe a year ago. I'm someone from Google emailed me, but I lost it in the shuffle My my email gets clogged sometimes like I just can't find anything because you get a lot of crazy You must get a lot of emails in general. Yeah But but the one thing that I was fascinated by I wanted to see what it was like in there Because I've always thought like man Why can't someone make a company where they treat their employees well? Like how much more does it cost to give them really good food take care of them? It might cost like a little more but wouldn't make the atmosphere way better And they can everybody so appreciate it. Yeah Yeah, I mean that's like one of the most important things is that the environment be positive totally nobody wants to work around someone It doesn't want to work there. Also understand the creativity and productivity comes from allowing people to have distractions Yes, so it's like they have ping pong tables and bean bags and all these things because you know It'd be and some people might criticize. Oh, it's just a playground actually No, it probably makes the employees much more creative You're creating spaces in which the free association and their students can fire and yes It's that's creativity is about that and I'm sure they're you know, they're judged or at least Evaluated based on their productivity. It's not like they're not gonna be Exactly in the law. I got this job. I'm just playing ping pong They're not the type of people that would do that the first place right so it becomes a resource rather than a distraction And a distraction as a resource and these are the post industrial revolution companies Yeah, these are the most admired companies in the world You have Apple you have Google and people are looking to these companies as examples of how to run businesses How to have social impact how to make the legacies how to not be evil and they still know this is a new model against Corp of corporations are judged upon so all these new entrepreneurs now coming online They're getting inspired from these companies. I want to maybe in the next Google and change the world It's not I want to make the next Google and be rich Now I want to change the world now What happens with like Google video and stuff because I know they came out against soba and the the stop online piracy act And they kind of that all fell apart and they're trying to read come up with like a new strategy a new new new act well I think we need to all have a new conversation about content ownership in a world in which everybody has the tools to make Mix tapes Yeah, but like what about Google videos and stuff like that? What if someone has a documentary and that documentary is for sale? But you go to Google video and there it is and you can just watch it for free What is no you know you you do what radio head did which is where they put their album online for free And they said donate mine donate money if you would like to pay for this music But if you don't think that that's how people who want to sell DVDs should deal with the fact that people are stealing their shit They're gonna have to ask for donations Well, no, but I think that we're just it's an environment Which more because what happens is everybody's gonna be making content for free and way and the content for free is gonna be just as good as the Content you charge for and I think people will pay because they appreciate your content But I think it's gonna be harder and harder to like impose Payment well how would someone like let's say for an example say if there's a documentary on crocodiles, okay I told you about it. Oh my god. It's crazy. You gotta watch this now You go to Google video and you find this documentary or crocodiles How the fuck are you gonna find the production company the website? You're gonna search it out you're gonna go Google the name of it and then you're saying you're just watching the website You know, I mean if you really wanted to they had it set up where you could you know Well, you could donate if you would like on their website. Yeah. Well, no, they can so they can do a a YouTube channel that's supported by ads And if lots of people watch the movie they'll get money from the ads But they have other page and then they in the description They can say we're putting this movie online for free because we want to share the ideas But we're asking for donations of five dollars of you and I'm sure that a lot of people would give it a lot of people Would a lot of people wouldn't as well though? So do you feel like that is and then then there's the other the other argument is the people that wouldn't as well I kind of see their point of view because they would they would say listen I would never bought this in the first place So I'm not taking anything away from them I downloaded it because it was free because I knew I could watch it and I didn't like it So I'm glad that it get my money when you see a bad. You don't you want to get your money back? Yes, I mean there's there I can see that argument as well, you know I mean it is a weird When it's one zero's and it's just being distributed through the internet It's a weird because conversations only have a price because of scarcity right charge for something because it's a rare commodity No, but it also people things have a price because you you I mean there's no scarcity in artwork I mean you're not you know when you go Is yours unique so people pay for it because it's only you did something that's unique to you and if you have an audience I think that Increasingly but they're scarcity in them for their efforts I mean it's not necessarily just paying for scarcity. It's you're compensating someone honestly because you're efforts You appreciate the efforts But I think that it's just the genies out of the bottle It's just too difficult for immaterial things to be contained Do you think that ultimately that's gonna lead to sort of a decay in the idea of capitalism and that you know and Everything is gonna be When they start getting into like real high-end 3d printers and that's how you order things you just order the formula Manufacturing as well, yeah, and then the yes, then those those people will get scared and lose their jobs And we'll have moments of panic and all of that transition Yeah, we'll change everything but you know that like 80% of the jobs that people do today didn't exist a hundred years ago Yeah, your jobs that didn't exist so there will be new things for us to do it becomes a real problem when people hold on To the idea that they need to keep a job and because the job is a part of the old way And that is also one of the reasons why marijuana is still legal and there was a recent article that I tweeted if you find it Just a couple of days ago or just Google the the statement lobbyists are getting rich off keeping marijuana illegal because that's what's going on Man, there's lobbyists that are doing this through police unions You know, there's lobbyists that are doing this and they're they're you know These guys are making a lot of money off keeping marijuana legal There's a lot of people that their business. Yeah, well their business is to arrest people for pot Right, I mean that's part of the job. It's part of it keeps people paid Yeah, it's part of what keeps a strong police force But I think that I think in the country where most of the population at this point wants it to be legalized There should be no bread tape or bureaucracy between the people's oil and it being changed I think it's also most people want it to be legalized There should be like a like button on Facebook and if a hundred million people click it it should be legalized tomorrow And I think that will eventually yeah, that's dynamic democracy I think that we'll get to but I think well one of the issues is and I think this has to be stopped is we have to stop Treating police officers as glorified revenue collectors because that's what they are And I think that's a really disgusting thing because guess what firefighters in place And I hope we never have to fucking use them I hope those guys get to hang out the firehouse all day and cook and work out and do fucking chin-ups and shit I hope no one ever has to work. I hope no one ever has to deal with that I would like the same thing with police officers, right? It would be great if they never had to take the guns out there's never anymore The issue is they have quotas. They have quotas. They have to reach. I had no idea. Oh fuck Yeah, especially with speeding, you know, I've talked to friends. They have cops. Whoa, yes, absolutely Yeah, they have to make quotas as far as giving out tickets. That really raises a red flag Oh, that's like telling a firefighter that you're only gonna go pay if you put out a fire So they're actually looking to build fires imagine what would happen if the entire country decided that for one month Which would fuck up the entire system. That's all we need is 30 days everybody in agreement where nobody ever violates a single law As far as speeding or driving or traffic or stop lights. We made a viral video for every company Don't break a law for a month every couple get fired. It would be chaos. Wow Yeah, it'd be crazy. They would lose all that revenue that they count on they count on us never evolving I mean, it's really factored into the budget. We need massive system upgrades here massive system Just the idea that you have engineer to system where we can never be good We can never get through because you you your cops need to arrest a certain amount of people need to pull over rather A certain amount of people put out certain amount of tickets the the state relies on that forever No, we're gonna have to radically change Everything will radically change you know, but there was a time when you know Somebody's life was about making saddles for horses. Yeah, because everybody Yeah, horses and that person was probably really nervous when the car started to become popular because it couldn't make his horse carriages Lucky for him lesbians are still around They still like horses. I wouldn't say lesbians. I'd say women who used to like man, but gave up now They like horses. I don't know man. I live right in the equestrian district and I see him every day and some of them are fucking high These are like spoiled little girls that date like rich guys that by the models and shit Yeah, you got to fuck those girls hard man. They write horses all day. They're used to they're not impressed by just like regular sex riding a giant animal all day. You must feel so feeble. Yeah, you know You know I'm saying they get on top of you like really this is it. This is all you got here next level of matter I always feel bad for the horses man. It's chains around their mouth. Yeah I'm like now man. Right. Yeah, I don't like it. It's gross. It's gross There's a lot of people in my neighborhood and they're like super self-righteous like you know slow down You can be like it's 28 miles and you know the part this speed limits 25 you're going 28 slow down Slow down just big big bulldyek on our fucking crazy animal It's a weird thing that you're allowed to just ride around animals in 2012 someone should come along you Really you just go to a farm somewhere you can't be just you know I don't care this is a questiony district. That's ridiculous. It's still burbank crazy fuck. We're doing riding a horse my neighborhood Soon we won't we won't eat animals either. I'm really that's about in vitro meatman Well, you're in just someone's gonna have to eat those fucking animals That's a problem because what happens then? What do we do? We do eat sterilize them? When we do to keep them from just being everywhere like in India What's it you know what is it like if you drive everywhere in his fucking cows or like rats in New York City Just infesting the landscape and we can't eat them Someone have to kill them bro. We'll go have to introduce We want to be we want to get some dinosaurs breed as many I mean that's an option What if we just let them go right if we let them go? We're not eating them anymore. We let them go. They're gonna fuck they're gonna fucking like buffalo buffalo The point just grow the tissue with it gonna be everywhere Man, I don't know. I think if we want to stay human I think they're gonna keep they're gonna keep breeding. I think we're gonna have to get predators We're gonna have to make some robot predators like those dog robot things that only just go out and jack cows Interesting they just do it to keep the population down who knows man. It's gonna be it's gonna be You know, I said something to our way New scenario. No, the new scenarios will come and we'll find new novel solutions to do it deal with them Do eat meat I eat meat not every day, but I'm a flexitarian a flexitarian Flexitarian flexible. I know I eat meat I just I try not to eat it every day Do you ever consider the idea that what you're doing is harmful to the energy of the universe that you're you know eating torture animals? Remember fuck with you you ever watch like food anchor. I try to have organic food But I still you know, that's like a cow that grows up in a hippie community and they get shot in the head I don't know still gets jacked. I would like to become vegetarian. It's just it's not the easiest thing to do Logistically, you know, yeah, you can't always find right now You're gonna get a swarm of hate mail from right now from sweaty little vegans vegetarians. They're warming up their little fingers right now Well, I'm a flexitarian. I mean not not Open-minded person eating your mind food twice a week is already really good. You're making it's a beginning That's decent No, no, yeah, I think animals are dumb and I think if they were smart they would be killing us I think we'd have issues. I think every animal is We're our empathy is big enough to alleviate suffering even even suffering if it's not completely I completely however the cycle of life requires predators and we have sort of completely hijacked that cycle of life with the idea of cities and civilization and big metal boxes We can drive through fucking safari and be 10 feet away from a lion killing a gazelle I mean we got a crazy Rangers men we're changing Species for good or for bad. I think more for good. I think I'm more impressed with it with us. I am it than I am disturbed by us I long shot much more impressed with us, but it's nice to just kind of to marvel at ourselves a little bit I think we have kind of a with a call the guilty cosmic complex where we feel like we're small and insignificant I think we have a big role to play a clean even bigger role if we pool our cognitive resources together I agree, but I also agree the big is delicious and so steak and Yeah, but you can grow bacon out of like stem cells You're gonna have to kill another animal to print out some bacon You're never gonna be able to recreate venison you're never gonna be able to recreate a spider-based venison. No venison is dear me Okay, you could totally recreate it. No, there's a delicious gamey wild flavor flavor One's in zeros. You think they'll be able to figure that out. Yeah, man It'll be like in the matrix when the guy's eating the steak and he's like I know this is not real I know it's made of like code. Yeah, he's like I don't care it tastes delicious And if what's it in his mouth so you're gonna be satisfied with that I think we also it's inevitable right it's inevitable Well, dude, I mean what are we tasting anyway except our brains interpretation of something going in through senses that are like Creating a software that goes in real time and tells us. Oh, this is what this feels like I'm glad I got to experience life with no answer machines. I'm glad I got to experience no cell phones And I was going up so you could see the contrast absolutely absolutely to make you appreciate how tired you are now I'm I appreciate how wired we are now, but I also appreciate old-school stuff. I appreciate I appreciate a good steak You know I like a good steak hardwood Cole's up toggled Hey man cooking. Hey man cooking with fire cooking with fire was a technology too. Yeah, it is yeah Yeah, I mean look what the appendix exists to it was an organ to break down fibers when we eat and all kinds of crazy shit Back in right wasn't it? Wasn't that what we lost its use and that's why a lot of people have to have a real if you ever gotten your your genome tested to see What I did twenty tall you are twenty three and me the good thing. Yeah, we're talking about What they say it's not completely. I mean, it's not like they can understand everything. Yeah, what's a monkey and as well Yeah, it's trying to don't know no technology. Yeah No, no, no, no, it's one of those exponential things where eventually they'll it'll be 100% tell you everything about everything Do you have to right now at least it tells you did you spit in the cup or something? Yeah, you said what do you do it? What do you do? It's in you this little tube and you said 23 and a dot com Yeah, 23 amazing Well, we will tell you if you have like a pre-condition of some sorts or if you have a likelihood of developing something like I blood pressure if you're genetic profile says you're gonna get parking soon or the percentages of a chance of developing something so For people who get stuff that's preventable, you know if they're like oh, I have a 70% chance of high blood pressure I can start addressing that now I've been told that I'm more likely to get it in another person so I can change my diet now Because some people are just genetically so lucky that they can eat shit nothing will ever happen to them those other People yeah, that's always the case until we all upgrade our genes But for everybody else This is a chance to see what some of their vulnerabilities might be and how they might address them So we start to hack our biology. How cool is this idea that we also was hacking our biology? We're upgrading ourselves by hacking in and getting back door Are we sure cut and fixing are we delaying the inevitable brilliant next stage of existence? Are we in this life? Maybe maybe something maybe something after this stage is way better and that's the natural progress The natural progress is to move from this to the next well that could only be the case This is a dream This is a simulation and we're eventually waking up from the simulation if this is a lucid dream If this is limbo from inception You know that you spend 80 years in limbo and you get old before you wake up and become a young man again But if that's the case great look awesome. I fucking hope so man. I'm just not fully convinced So I'm gonna fight for my survival as Passionately as I can now because I don't have the evidence that there's anything else so with no evidence It's pretty hopeless. There's a fair is pretty vivid. It might be the big sleep Eternity on both ends. Why can't any of the universe is eternal? Why can't we be that's like well? I think consciousness probably goes to sleep forever But I think you become a part of is it maybe consciousness is really a tool to create action Maybe it's a tool to move things forward. No, there's no doubt that it is But it's a tool that found out that it enjoys it so it wants to persist it likes blow dry and joys itself No, it's enjoy itself. We're self-referential. It's that recursive feedback loop We know that we know that we know and therefore consciousness if it was a fluke or if it was by like emergent design It has decided that it likes itself sure it likes like you know It likes free time it likes to make art and sing songs not everything that it does is to build things and to be utilitarian and functional Some things are pure pleasure like the robots and blade runner pleasure of being like being alive as well There you go So that could do what it is right. Yeah, what's your power member really liked it? Yeah, he's bummed down Yeah, crazy Kangaroos Kangaroos who eat a flower that came from another planet I'm telling you my super intelligent kangaroos. Would that be the ship of Kangaroos start yelling at you for fucking polluting Kangaroos start talking English like really quick with whether a couple of years and they were Catholic school girl It's amazing about kangaroos is that they continue to raise They have that thing, you know the pouch They put their little babies, but it's almost like when the baby's born it's almost like not ready to be born So they come in there and anyway that's kind of like well the living a terrible environment Yeah, I mean they have to protect that fucking thing They live in with his crocodiles everywhere. Right. Kangaroos are that's a bad spot Australia's shady fucking spot the most venomous snakes. Oh, they got all kinds of shit to kill you and most of the country You can't live in most of the country nobody lives in well they live around the coast I'm being more more more more more more people moving to cities man most of the population lives in cities and we'll continue to live in they found a reef of ancient Bio ancient like a simple organism shit. Yeah, that is like some it's the 650 fucking million years old some insane So it predated the the idea of life on this planet and they found it in Australia Yeah, Australia's it's a crazy spot. It would be fun to go Oh, yeah, I've been a few times. I've been a city Sydney twice great people really really nice people man Yeah, they have no ozone over there man. They got real cancer problems like all over there billboards are these pictures They have like these skin cancer campaigns So there's photos of people with big giant stitched up scars I'll talk about getting because everyone's getting chunks taken out of them Like you go out there in the you know in the in the sun with no sunscreen on you get fucked up Bored to wear sunscreen. Yeah, it's another level Sun with no ozone layer This chain hole in the ozone alone long to get there. I like 17 hours or something not quite I think of 15 Something like that. Yeah, it's a lot. Let it go But you know what if you if you can deal with that just one day I mean, you know what you do is man get a bunch of podcasts get a bunch of podcasts get a few movies on your iPad and just Zone out and just goes in and say this is what I'm doing and don't freak out and don't feel like fuck I got to get up move around just deal with it. You know a big deal. All right, and then once you get there Holy shit, it's a beautiful beautiful. There's countries. It's so gorgeous It's so amazing when you think that the people from England Cause that you know as a prison colony at one point in time, you know like what are what a silly idea And now all their actors win all the awards. Yeah, I wonder why they're so good Yeah, Australian and British actors man to make good stand-ups too There's a few Jim Jeffries really funny stand-up from Australia yeah, and there's a couple of Americans that do really well over there like Eddie if an orange barker They go over there and they're the orange barkers fucking enormous over there. Probably yeah, yeah And they just like really when I was in Australia. I was talking to people like what do you do? I'm like I'm a comedian like you know, oh, it's baka like immediately. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. It's uh It's so close to like it's nothing like America But you could totally hang out there like you could live there You wouldn't have to learn a language people are very friendly. You'd have no problems. It feels slightly alternate universe Yes, because they speak English, but it's just another another reality It's so far away that they drive on the other side of the road right that freaks you out Totally that whole England thing is a trip. I wasn't one really man. It's like why are you on this? I traveling is so cool though for shifting people's sense of like reality Yeah, expanding your consciousness because you're immersed in a sort of mirror world. Yeah, we're it's like well most things are kind of the same But they're a little off. Yeah, so it's like reality has shifted a little bit Well, it's cool to see like a culture like Australia where you know socially You know, it's really kind of like parallel to America like really similar I mean not exact but but really similar like if you go over there and you meet an Australian guy who's your age chances are you're gonna have a lot of things to talk about in common It won't be very it'd be different but not alien at all Yeah, so it's kind of interesting that that is happening on the other side of the planet, right? There's like some some sort of a you know, you're there your modern civilization Yeah, and they're like these people live here and they dream here and they wake up and they go to work That's great. They've been living their entire lives with a whole different set of priorities They have no bearing in my existence and then I didn't know about it until it came here What really makes your trip out is when you watch their TV shows and They've been living their entire lives with a whole different set of priorities that have no bearing in my existence And that I didn't know about it till it came here It would really make sure trip out is when you watch their TV shows and they have like really popular TV shows You fucking never heard about it And the guy comes out and the girl comes out. You know who the fuck are these people? Right? Everybody goes crazy. Everybody goes crazy. Number one show in Australia, my right. I can't believe they're really on right now Right. Everybody'll sit down and get drunk. It's amazing. It gives you perspective also It hinges you from your reality. Yeah, it hinges you a little bit The one thing that I consistently get when I go to these places is how uptight America is You know when you go and you especially in Australia, they're so fun and they're so easy to hang out with and so generally friendly It makes you feel like why what is this what's responsible for this level of tension in America? Yeah, I don't know not everywhere by the way of course. There's a lot of cool people in America I'm gonna be wrong. I get a lot of douchebag dummy tweets like what you fucking go move deaf guys Dude, you're American. It's not that I hate America stupid. It's love America. I think America should be awesome I mean it is awesome, but it should be better than what it is It's possible for us to improve and what holds us back is fuckheads like you that's what holds us back We need to there should be no reason why the cutting edge should be uptight about things particularly like social issues We need to like completely legalize gay marriage everywhere. We need to legalize Santoram because he disagrees Rick Santoram had did have a really interesting point though I got it meant I mean I am always a hundred percent in support of gay marriage I'm you know, I think she'll be able to do whatever fuck you want to do. It's not I don't know it's not hurting me. It's not a scam and it's not hurting me It's not like you're trying to steal money. It's not hurting so I'm completely in support of that But he had a really interesting point that Rick Sam Torm because he was talking about marriage has always been for over a thousand years has been defined as a man and a woman now All of a sudden you're calling it marriage, but it's a man and a man can it be a man and two men And I was like oh shit like he just flipped it on its head like you really did it was a really good point Because I mean I was like well, yeah, well, why can't it be two men? Why can't why can't two men get married to a guy? Why can't everybody just bang each other? Why not why not why not yeah? But but he was in the women in the audience were saying no, that's a different scenario You're talking about a couple that's in love and he's like well, no, what if these people are all in love? There's three of them what if they are you know, can it be two women in a man? Can it be two men and women and then you know, he just fucked them up man He just fucked them up. There's nothing they could say then because you know, he's really right like first of all as a personal freedom Issue, I'd feel like you should be able to do whatever you want if it's not hurting me Clearly get pulled up a clearly gay marriage is not hurting me So do whatever the fuck you want, but if you want to call it marriage like maybe they should call it Maybe should be something different maybe it's marriage, but it's gay marriage. Oh, we're gay married no Like me and my partner are gay married you wouldn't be able to say regular married. Oh, we're triple married. Oh, there's three of you Yeah, we get to you. What would you call that if you made that legal? What would you call that domestic partnership? It's a massive problem domestic partners. What if they want to call them married? This is my whatever they want to know, but you know, and then they get all the benefits of society And they want to like do tax stuff together and all those things that people want why not Corporations can have like hundreds of employees or thousands of employees Maybe marriages should be able to as well. So 100,000 people in America So you're you're down with like they can be many nation-states more Mary. Oh, I'll polygamy. I got a time Max know that's different because those are getting my minors involved I'm gonna coercing people and imposing reality tunnels and I got a time access to other media like different I got a time magazine at home and this is a guy in the cover as one of those last holdout old-man Mormon dude who has a gang of wives and Still rocking it is one dude nine wives and he's got 46 children What the fuck what they'll be throwing you know what the fuck man? That's not good. Yeah, that's crazy You know that a lot of those guys we talked about this before who is it when we brought up this that they went to Mexico That a lot of Mormons were traveling to Mexico and they were having problems with the cartels They established these polygamous communities down in Mexico. Oh wow And now they have problems with the drug cartels and some of those in the assassination recently remember that I remember who brought it up one of our guests brought it up. Oh wow. I had no idea that was even going down right They've set up these alternative communities down in Mexico. Yeah Do you ever think about that like what if somebody just decided to like turn coast to Rika into goddamn paradise? Everybody says there's trying to do it worlds the world's all fucked up everywhere else But here's the deal we have a limited government. We were gonna establish the best schools possible libertarian Yeah, social you know care possible best health care the best community centers where we you know We we have people who are you know set up to take care of straight children and yeah Really create a society they're trying to do it. There's a guy called Patrick Friedman who had this thing called the seestetting institute Which is an organization that and they're backed by like Peter Thiel and everything That's a giant island. Yeah to make these artificial man-made islands where we can do practice runs of futuristic versions of Governance and they can be in international waters But now they're doing something with a central American nation where the nation has given them a chunk of land to let them set up their own Autonomous zone where was this where's in central America? I know it was Nicaragua or Guatemala or one of those But they're gonna they're gonna try it has been all these articles about it and they're gonna test out Futuristic cutting edge forms of government. See the only thing I worry about is one of the beautiful things about doing things in America Even though you're under the shadow of the military and double complexes and it's fairly safe Yes, you know it's fairly safe. Yes. Yes. You can't you you know unless you're I mean Where are you gonna recreate that? We're gonna recreate that you're not gonna need an open waters because if you do an international waters What are these Somali pirate dudes you hear about that shit every day? Yeah? Yeah? Yeah? What are you gonna do? They got a bunch of peace I think we spot out there. Yeah, a big concrete floating jungle would pull the security guard who patrols the perimeter They shoot Paul in the head fucking take over God damn it Jason. So we got to be ready for war. Yeah. No, it looks I mean I think this is obviously logistical things that have to be addressed, but it's a very ambitious idea It's very ambitious. You would have to have guns a Motibrovely we have to have laser beams right get that trash pile and live in the middle of it That's not about the other ones getting near that thing. Yeah, you hear people coming to them where you're gonna get your water from Your water yeah from the ocean desalomization course it's gonna be Is that what they're trying to do Dean came in who invented a lot of these water purification systems man that you can put in like urine bacteria Infection like poison almost into the water and it comes out like ready to drink Wow Have this new unit that they're gonna be taken to like rural parts around the world To these little villages and that's like the number one cause of disease and illness and 30 water, right? These things that give these small little self-powered devices and they last forever and it's like Dean came in and his water products water filtration stuff people should google how far he's a genius No, no, no, he already has like this new design. I wasn't gonna say that I was gonna say how far are they on the island things the artificial island I Don't know. I think funding they need funding to build it course so that was gonna pay for that like bitch Well, I think therapist how much internet age billionaires they would have to be a lot of money how much would it cost to build a fake island? I have no idea probably a lot of fucking money I was watching a documentary on the Japanese Airport that they'd created and that is it's on artificial island and then artificial island they've created but they're slowly sinking into the sea So they have an elaborate system of lifts that as it sinks they raise it up to keep it level Wow, it's fucking nuts me what a marvel of engineering You know what a nearing it's just magnificent when you think about it It's incredible. I love looking at engineering and nature and comparing its engineering made by man and you see how they certain patterns They're aligned. I mean, and we're and we hear we are we're like, oh, you know, we thought of this But then it's like oh, but matches this pattern that nature came up with too And you realize is that a good idea is a good idea whether you came up with it blindly like nature or whether you came up with it consciously like man Good idea is a good idea. All right, if it works it works. That's that's what's amazing Have you ever seen when they take a colony of leaf cutter ants and they expose their entire underground structure? Yeah, by filling it with cement technology They have their own technology. Yeah, that's their extended phenotype It's really kind of a fucking disturbing thing to watch though because it's kind of Genocide you're like looking at me. They're actually cemented everybody in there. It is very sad I mean it's a I don't really give a fuck about ants But it's kind of crazy that they're willing to just cement the shit out of their houses just to find out how big the houses Yeah, if you haven't seen it folks just Google it what is it Brian leaf cutter ants just pull that video up because it's astounding to look at just pull up leaf cutter ant colony exposed and these these scientists they they found out that not only do they have these intricate structures But they have vents set up so where they bring in like a funguses and things that are that are that are rotting Yeah, there's oh an ability for that the the the fucking the gases to rise out through the air It doesn't pollute their little tunnels. There's so much emergent intelligence in the design But you know what the most amazing part is there's no one in control. Yeah, it's all decentralized It's all a bunch of individual local interactions happening simultaneously that together exhibit emergent phenomenon Emergent complexity it's like be high of pie Wall Street be hives exhibit self organization That emerges when all these billions of bees are working together to create an intelligent behavior But no individual be itself is intelligent. Yeah, that's amazing Now they're saying that our neurons are the same that we're not like a singular consciousness But billions of non intelligent neurons that together create synchronous like transcendent effects that Consciousness emerges from the interactions of trillions of neurons individual local relationships happening in different parts of the brain And that's all that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. So our brains are like Our brains our neurons are like the ants in the ant colony and then us is the emergent behavior It's what comes out. Yeah I've always said that it's ridiculous to think that human beings Can ever be separate because that's the worst thing they could do to you in prison Yeah, the worst thing they could do to you in prison is separate you from the general population and put you in solitary Yeah, nobody can talk to you you're by yourself and that's crazy for people. Yeah, that's cutting your arm off Yes, it's alien to our goal and purpose on our desires on earth 100% Yeah, so it's obvious that we are engineered for a reason or at least for feedback. Yeah for interaction Yes interaction in feedback everything is feedback loops dude everything well That's why these kind of conversations are so exciting. Yes No, exactly you know you you you turn my brain into an area that you know might not have gone into like well Then we start Expanding in that area. Yeah, there's a book by Matt Ridley called the rational optimist and he coined the word idea sex and he says that ideas coming together in open liquid networks open channels of communications are akin to genetic Recombination in nature It's genes being in the primordial soup mixing and completing each other interacting and it's all a giant Out of any good ideas ideas are intermingling and having sex with one another But they're creating more change in at a rate that is unheard of by the gene pool if we could look at the interactions of human behavior and thought and Language if we could look at all that stuff as like numbers and and look at it as like energy and and something that could be quantified Instead of looking at his own product. Yeah, instead of looking at is something that we have done If we could just look at it entirely of its own we would see a completely different picture with it. Oh if we take the long view We're caterpillar man. We're caterpillar about to become a butterfly. That's what we're doing We're making some crazy fucking cocoon right now. We don't even know what we're doing. We just transform everything We know it's possible The caterpillars did it. Yeah caterpillars do it. You know it exists. It does it's not beyond the laws of physics for completely Have radical self transformation. You fucking blew my mind again, man You blew everybody's mind again this podcast essentially I got to think we should stop right there Because that's about three hours. Oh, that was our man. It's just isn't about three hours somewhere there. Yeah, two hours 40 minutes Yeah, something like that before thanks again brother. Thank you, man. You're very very stimulating talk to Thanks, it's one of those are you guys these conversations and it just you know you walk out of drive home Thanks for having me, man. And next yeah, well, you're you're so awesome at Like passionately infusing these ideas and other people's heads. Thanks brother You know you you have like a way of you know like when you get fired up about shit like everybody around is like oh Yeah, yeah, yeah, thanks man. It's infectious very infectious. Thanks brother people want to find you on Twitter It's Jason underscore Silva if they want to find you online It is this is Jason Silva calm and all of his upcoming lectures and all that is there anything that people can see like There are any places where the average person go and buy a ticket and watch you perform live The economist ideas festival happening in Berkeley on March 28th is a innovation and people can Google economist ideas And anyone can go to them you can buy tickets for that and work at Google Yes, and on April 20th when I speak at the National Arts Club They have a website you should be able to look it up I think it's about like dreaming unlimited or something like that and all your city Mation is on this is Jason Silva calm. Yeah, and I tweet about it all the time as the talks come up the PSFK conference in New York At Battery Park on March 30th you can buy tickets to I'm gonna speak at University of Pennsylvania April 2nd actually Be on this class on psychedelics and visionary arts and stuff do keep doing what you're doing. I love it It's very exciting. Thank you everybody for tuning into the podcast. Thanks for all the positive tweets messages and we love you too Thanks for everybody who already bought tickets for Atlanta April 20th It is the first show is pretty much sold out. It will be when I Record my next special so if you want to go there will be tickets to the second show That will be available sometime this week like I said probably somewhere around Wednesday And I got a lot of other shit going on in the future to Louisville, Kentucky that's soon when is that brand any ideas So January March 30th through April 1st is Louisville, Kentucky and then we're in our most of beaches actually before that March 23rd in 24th at her most of beats the comedy Magna club one of my favorite clubs ever and then 420 in Atlanta 420 is one I'm gonna do my special so cliche the so cliche as a corny pothead. I couldn't it couldn't resist Thank you to the flashlight for tuning in and saving our souls with their plastic vagina Does that work? No, I need to come up with a new commercial Thank you to the flashlight for being there for lonely boys being easy. Thank you for being yeah, but not that easy to clean It's a little complicated It's a little bit easy. It's yeah You got a you should at the end of it should be on your garbage disposal Just eats loads and then turns it into love and sends it out through the universe. It's really easy if you like to suck your own Come out of it so Brian So not necessary Jason Silva's here. He's a serious man. You don't need to do that in front of him You fucking freak thank you to honor.com. Oh and and I T. Oh yeah What did I say? Fleshlight enter in the co-neighbrogon 15% off you didn't know that you heard the first half of this fucking podcast Go to honor.com enter in the co-neighbrogon 10% there. It's over. It's done tomorrow We have Aubrey Mike Marcus formerly known as the artist formerly known as Chris who's on friend who changes fucking name That's how hard he tripped. He went to Peru and did ayahuasca and change his fucking name You know I have I have a friend who did that to my friend alive. Yeah, that ayahuasca Okay, fuck you up son and Aubrey just got back from Costa Rica where he went through a series of Ibogaine experiences. Hey, now his name is Optimus prime. Yeah, now he's Mr. Manhattan and We're gonna meet him tomorrow and he's gonna explain to us what the fuck is really going on with this crazy universe We're living everything that has not been covered today will be covered tomorrow and then on Wednesday we get Matt from Horters is clutter cleaner on Twitter and he's the guy who cleans up the crazy people's houses Really fascinated by that because I got a bit of a hoarder in me just a pinch you do as well. Yeah, yeah So we'll find out what that fucking psychosis all about Jason Silva you are the man sir Thank you everybody we love you dirty bitches. Oh two shows this weekend in Pasadena because I'm gear enough for my special freaks So this Friday and Saturday Friday night When we do it Friday nine o'clock Saturday 1030 ice house comedy yes, and it's the annex It's a small room. It always sells out in advance So if you want to get on the shit ice house comedy calm is that it yeah one Friday not at nine o'clock nine o'clock Friday 1030 on Saturday. That's it. It's over god bless America. She had