The Joe Rogan experience. And then that brings us to Lazar's depiction of how these things worked. That they somehow another Ben gravity, these things that he worked on, which is the model that's on the desk there. That's supposedly a detailed model of what that thing looked like that he worked on, the sport model, I think they called it. That's what he called it. Yeah. When you watch him talk and you hear him give his description of his time working there and what he saw and what he thinks those things are, what was your take on that? I thought it was curious and interesting. I mean, I'd been to Area 51, I didn't see any flying saucers or anything like that. What did you see? I saw defense department experiments being performed and training activities and that sort of thing, nothing that the taxpayer would object to. Of course not. But it's a big range. There's a lot of stuff going on out there and there's a lot of adjacent ranges if you look at the mass core where he was. That's what he said. Yeah. Which I found his explanations curious. Yeah. How so? The complexity of it and the fact that he talked about Laurentium for example and then decades later it turns out that apparently there is a more stable form of that than. That's element 115? Sounds right. Yeah. But it's called Laurentium. It sounds like something from Battlestar Galactica. We need to look at all this stuff. How do you do that? Yeah. Right. So now I'm a little skeptical about his claims. I have to say. Friend of mine claims to know the gal who is his supervisor when he worked out there and knows what he was actually doing and where he was located and claims that he was a guy who checked radiation on badges. That's it. Yeah. And so all the rest is fiction. According to that story. And this is a person that you know? Yeah. Maybe that person's full of shit. Maybe. I don't have the ground truth on this. Yeah. But I think he did falsify his educational records and he's been involved in some other things and it just doesn't talk about the MIT records. Yeah. Yeah. He explained that to me. He said that he was working on something for the government at and they sent him to MIT to learn something. I can't say too much. I'll tell you off air because he told me not to talk about it. But it makes more sense when you hear his description of it that essentially it wasn't documented that he was studying there because what he was doing was really a terrible thing, a terrible experiment they were working on when I explained to you, maybe it'll make more sense. Okay. Maybe not though. Maybe he's full of shit. Maybe he lied about that. What's interesting though is he's told the same exact story since the late 80s and it doesn't seem full of shit. Now some people are really good at lying. And I've been tricked before and I'm sure you have too. There's some people that are just sociopaths. They're really good. Yeah. They don't even like know their line. They're like convinced in their own head where they're spinning it. He's obviously very intelligent and he obviously knows a lot about science. He knows a lot about propulsion systems and he really did work at Los Alamos, which is interesting because he's actually on the employee roster and they tried to say that he didn't. The new people that were there, he knew the layout of the building when he went there with George Knapp. They went through the building. He knew exactly where everything was and he knew the people that worked there. So he really did work there apparently, allegedly. His story, what's interesting to me is that again, it's the same story over and over and over again. And then what's also interesting to me is that he knew and took friends to a place where they were testing these things out and he knew where it was and he knew when they were doing it and he brought his friends out there and that's when they got arrested. It's a very, I think there's some consistency there. That is hard to explain how he nowhere to go and what was going on. There are some possible answers to that. I've poked into this a bit. Supposedly there was a bar off base where the scientists and a lot of the aviators of people going hang out. He was a frequent that plays and picked up information. So I hear stories on both sides of this. I don't know what the ground truth is and I'm a made skeptical but hey, there's a lot of crazy stuff going on. I enjoyed his company. I went to dinner with him and Jeremy and I talked to him for several hours on the podcast and off the podcast. I don't know. I don't, but it's a weird one because he never made any money doing that. He never made any money telling that story. I'll tell you another story offline. We can exchange stories offline. I'm excited. I can't wait for this to be over now. Catch new episodes of the Joro experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joro experience.