The Jerogan experience. The big change in my life was when I learned how to breathe. I started to bring in more spiritual possibilities, more mental possibilities. Because what is interesting about the breathing aspect is the brain and the heart are the only organs who can give and receive information. The other organs leave or kidney. They don't cannot do that. But when you get upset with something mentally, you bring information to yourself, immediately your brain is responding. Your heart too, when you get depressed, immediately you feel in your heart and your heart show you, you said show you immediately connection. And what is amazing about that is the lung is the practical aspect within you who are able to control or help your brain and also help your heart. So through the proper breathing, you can control your heart beats. Through the proper breathing, you can control your mindset and get calmer, control your panic, control your courage, control everything you need in the mental aspect and also spiritual, hope, fate, visualizations. So all the elements in your brain, all the elements in your heart can be much better and guided, much better help it through the lungs. If you don't know how to involve your lungs in your brain, in your breathing, you're not able to favor your brain and your heart the way you're supposed to be. It's kind of amazing that everybody breathes, but a relatively small percentage of people know how to breathe correctly. Yes. You born, you got slept on your butt. And you think you live in wherever you breathe for life. It's not like that. The first learning you learn about breathing is to move the upper body, the upper part of your lungs. If you don't learn, if you don't practice, you're never going to use the diaphragmatic breathing, which involves the full capacity of your lungs. So the diaphragm, when you learn how to move your diaphragm efficiently, you fill up your lungs in a different way. So if I breathe right or wrong, either more or less oxygen, up to me, the way I use the diaphragm or not. So when I learn how to use that, I'm able to help my body and whatever needs, mental, spiritual or physical. When you, that famous scene in choke, when you're moving your stomach around or the drums beating, it's really crazy. I love people, people love that scene because you're using that control of your diaphragm. How did you learn how to do that? The Orlando County, he taught you to do that. Yes. And how long did it take before you could move your stomach like that? It's not as difficult to do that too. Yeah, it's not as difficult. You can learn this in no time. You just need the right distraction because it's all about, it's a quick learning. You know, it's just, you have to put some attention. Because when you learn how to breathe, you start adding oxygen, you cheer a life. You can stay seven days without food, five days without water, but five minutes without the air you're dead. So when you know how to hyperventilate, it's like double your life, three-poill your lifetime, because you're not getting tired as you want. When you say hyperventilate, when you mean by hyperventilate. I'm here, come. If I do this, I breathe. If I want to go dive, I need to hyperventilate. I need to, because I, I, I increase the circulation of oxygen in my body and I increase the bloods, the oxygen on the cells. So I do hyperventilation for a little while and I triple the amount of time I'm going to be under the water. Hmm. Another important thing for people to learn about breathing is the idea of inhale, the inhale is not the cause, it's the solution. So what I, what if I need a full lung, a full breath, I don't want to just do, if I want a full breath, I first need to, shh, now I have a full breath. Because if I just start from here, I already have 30% of air inside, which is not, we're not an empty enough. So in order for me to put it all in, 100% of good air inside, my liveness, my attention has to be on the exhale. Shh, now I'm ready to get there. The effort, the strength on the muscle, if I need to be, get a big biceps, I need to curl. If I need to have a strong breathing system, I need to exhale. The inhale is natural. Some people they feel tired, I need to, they go against the, and I guess the, the, the, the flow, because they try to bring in, which is already claustrophobic. More I need air, more like, oh my God. So my liveness, my focus is to take the bad gas out of me. The good gas coming naturally. Some people say, I need air, they need air, but they already full of bad gas. Mm. So and that's make a big confusion on there. On the right way to the gas coming out. So my organization and my brain is to put the bad gas out of me. So when I train, consistently, I, if I'm not effective on the exhale, I'm not going to be effective on inhale. And the liveness of my, my muscle system is the contraction. The contraction is the diaphragmatic breathing, this contraction. If I do a curl for getting strong biceps, that's the contraction. And I do this, I relax, contract. So contract, relax. So and that's giving me a different edge to understand clear everything around me. What's the entire episode for free only on Spotify?