Joe Roman fine. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night. All day. Good to see you again. You've back in the world of crazy people and animals. I watched episode one today. Oh, God. First one, where the fuck do you find these people? You live in that world. Like you, you're in the world of reptiles. We should just explain. It's a docuseries. It's on HBO. It's called Monsters of God. And it's all about the reptile trade, which may or may not be responsible for Florida having 500,000 pounds. Yeah. It's debatable, right? Like it seems like it was partially pet owners who let them go. And partially there was some sort of a reptile research facility or something like that. Well, there's different theories. There was a hurricane theory. There was the people letting go go. I think the more reasonable one, because I had a Burmese python in the 70s when I was a teenager. I have a photo of them around my neck. What happened to it? People buy them when they're this big. And then when they're 15 feet, they let them go. Because what are you? Is that what you did? I did not let it go. But I don't know. What did you do? I have no idea what happened to it, to be honest. I had a lot weird. I know. You had a monster. And it just, you don't know what happened to your monster. I think when I went to college briefly, I gave it to someone and then I don't know what happened to it. When I gave my home anagerie way to people, when I went to college, I wrapped holes in my room. Is there an extra level of responsibility when you're giving away monsters? You know what I mean? Like if you have a chihuahua and you said, and your friends like, I'll take her, I love her. That's, you know, you don't really have to worry about your, you have a fucking python. You're giving away a python. You gotta worry about your pajuahua because your, the pythons in the Everglades, you're gonna eat your chihuahua when it gets away. Well, certainly you worry about that. But I mean, you don't worry about your chihuahua being a monster. I'm kidding. Yeah. I mean, if you have a 15 foot python, that can eat a lot of things. And it kind of needs to eat a lot of things. Yeah, Burby's pythons did really well in South Florida. Guana's did really well in Florida. You know, they weren't there in the beginning. That's a good way to put it did really well. And the other way to put it is invasest species that's destroying the ecosystem. Well, they're like us. Joe, they're like us. We came here and we took over. Yeah, I guess in a lot of ways. So why did you choose this particular subject for this new docuseries? I'm not gonna let Jeremy talk. I'll just give you a lot of it starts with me. Yeah, Jeremy. Jeremy, good blame later. Yeah. We got to Jim crazy, which is one of my favorites. So fucking insane. That world is so insane. Well, episode one is kind of setting the table. It gets better. Joe gets more off the charts when you were a man when you went to two and three and four. But I'm five. Yeah, it all started. But first of all, I'm a reptile guy. I've been keeping reptiles and studying reptiles for over, you know, I'm an old guy older than you are. So, you know, I kept them for, I don't know, 60 years. You know, plus I've kept reptiles since my parents gave me a tortoise when I was six. And I was catching rattlesnakes in my lunchbox and horn lizards. And you got horn lizards in Texas here that are really cool and rattlesnakes. Um, I didn't bid by rattlesnakes. It's not fun. You're a big, fine rattlesnake. Yeah, but that's another story. More times than one. No, I got bit ones because I learned my lesson after the first one. What happened? It wasn't good. Don't get bit on my foot. On my foot. Did you experience necrosis? Necrosis rather? You know, so normally you would get necrosis. Necrosis where you did fish, your finger would rot. And then there's the guy, you know, the doctor that I went to at a hospital, you know, in the motion. Pull up to the microphone. The doctor, you know, in the emergency room said, the last guy in here that got bit by a rattlesnake, lost his toe or something or lost his digits. And he said, good thing you didn't get bit on a finger because the necrosis can rot away your finger. And he said, good thing you got bit on the middle of the foot. You're going to be okay. But there's type of rattlesnake I got bit by. There's the most venomous rattlesnake in the country is called a tiger rattlesnake. But it's not the most dangerous. Most dangerous is probably a Mojave rattlesnake or an Eastern dime of background. But you have Western Diamondbacks here. But I got bit by rattlesnake that had both hematoxin and neurotoxin. So the necrosis was less evident with me. It was more like a cobra where I was starting to stop breathing. And I felt like somebody put sandbags on my chest an hour into it. But the first thing you sense is obviously the, it feels like someone jabbed me with an exacto knife. I looked down and the rattlesnake was retracting into a burrow. I looked at my foot. But then you taste a metallic taste in about 15 minutes, 15 minutes and you realize, oh, this wasn't a dry bite. But it's not fun. I got a lot of anivinum. They make a different anivinum today. I got bit 25 years ago. And how long does it take you to recover from something like that? You know, the most painful part was the serum sickness from the anivinum. The lose stop breathing thing. I remember I was on a gurney and I just felt like I was going to stop breathing. But weirdly not that painful. But like you, but yet you feel like you're going to die and stop breathing. But the serum sickness is just unbelievably intense for weeks. And you just have the most insane fever and you get these red blotches all of you. But they make a different serum. Now that that one was made out of horse antibodies. They put into you. And my body didn't like those horse antibodies. Oh, God. Yeah. So also maybe don't wear Birkenstocks when you hike. That's probably the river sandals. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because I got bit, most people got bit fucking around with a rattlesnake. I was, what is this, Jimmy? Dad, they used all of the end to venom at the hospital. And I have to go get more from another house. Ran out of antivenom after using a whopping 36 vials. Holy fuck, man. Oh, yeah. Yikes. They're fucking scary, man. I've had dogs bit. I had this one dog. He got bit twice. There's real problems. Face would swell up. I had to bring him to the vet. But luckily they have antivenom for dogs. It works pretty well. Yeah. He was kind of out of it for a few days. Then he came back. How fast they were response? Not bad. Not bad. It was funny. Because he got bit once. He was crazy, dog. He was always killing blizzards, like those is thing. Like anything in the backyard he would kill. And he got bit by the rattlesnake. And I knew it. Because I was out there. I heard him, I heard the commotion. I saw the snake. I knew what it was. So I got him to the veterinarian immediately. They got him in. His face swell up. But they got him the antivenom, and he was good. And then he got bit again, like maybe a year later. And I brought him to the vet because I saw him get bit by rattlesnake. And the vet was like, well, I don't see any swelling. And I don't see a hole. But he had developed a resistance to it because he had gotten bit once. And so then I got him home. And I also was faced our swelling up. My a fuck. And I bring him back to the vet. And then he had to get the antivenom. But a good sized dog. Yeah, he was about a 90 pound dog. And that was a Western diver back rattles. I could get another. California. I don't know. Oh, it was in California. It was in California. Oh, so it was in out here. Oh, it was what did me that probably. Southern Pacific rattlesnake. Yeah. OK. Yeah. We had a problem in my California house. One of the houses that I used to live in, it was a lot of it. It was very cannyony. Yeah. It was a lot of stuff. Well, that's a bobcat. That's the same steak that bit me. Yeah. Spooky man. We were running once. We were running the trail. And in mid-stride, I realized that the log that I thought was across the road was a giant rattlesnake. It was fucking big, man. Like the biggest one I had ever seen out in the wild. And the dogs didn't notice it. They ran right over it. And then I ran over it. I was like, oh, fuck, man. And then I'm trying to figure out what to do. Because I know we're going to have to come back this way when we go back up the hill. So I'm throwing rocks at it, trying to get it to run away. Now, I've handled a lot of rattlesnakes in my life. Ang cobras and other snakes. And to get bit that way is very unusual. Usually people are being jerks and idiots and can handle a snake and it bites them. Where were you? Were you just walking? I was hiking in the mountains in North of LA just a bit. And I was actually looking for snakes, as I know this snake. And I didn't see the snakes. The snakes saw me first. And I was bushwacking. I was on auto trail. I didn't see it. And it made my foot. So you have this lifetime experience with reptiles and snakes. And so you just decide, you must have interacted with a lot of these really crazy people. And just decided this is the next. Takes one to no one. Yeah, be careful. The next point of focus. It's everywhere. I'll start it. No, no, listen. I was a closet, a reptile guy living in New York City, hanging out with Madonna, cool people in the 80s and 90s. I had a nightclub. And I had friends with lots of artists, Andy Warhol. And I never really talked about reptiles. I actually, Andy asked me, what am I going to do with my money? He interviewed me one time for Andy Warhol TV. And I said, I'm going to buy reptiles. I actually said a bit of a tortoise. I was on tortoises. But I was pretty closeted. But I still kept them in New York. And fast forward, when I decided to try to do a film about it, I had been traveling all over the world, a Madagascar and Sulawesi and different parts of South America, trying to study reptiles and especially turtles and tortoises that were very rare. I started filming people, kind of notable people, Christopher Walken and Slash. And I don't know all kinds of people that I knew in New York City. And I would just ask them to hold a turtle or tortoise and say some words for like PSA's. And I was doing that with these two guys, named the Safftey brothers. And fast forward, they now Josh has just had a film called Marty Supreme with Timothy Shalomay that was up for an Oscar. Little did I know that I was working with these kids that were going to be these new filmmakers. And we were making these films. And then we made a short film about reptiles. It's crazy called trophy hunter. It's very short. And we did that together. And then I said to them, hey, man, you guys will read this new book of the lizard king. It's about the reptile world. Let's do a talk about the reptile world. And I'd already told Fisher, Stevens, a friend of mine, hey, let's do a talk about this book, the lizard king. And he said to me, how are you going to do that doc without getting killed? Eric, you know, he won an Oscar for the cove. I thought, you know, I'm going to get these good guys and do a doc about reptiles. So anyway, we started in 2000. Why do you think you're going to be killed? He read the lizard king. And he said, you know, you're going to do a story about this guy that went to prison for 100 years and this other guy that is the Pablo Escobar reptiles. And he just said, it's a dark world. I don't know how you're going to do this without getting killed. So what is about the lizard world of the reptile world that makes it so dark? Like why are those people do you think attracted to it? Well, not all of them are scary people. And I would say a lot of them maybe misunderstood a little bit. But there's, in the case of Mario, there was a crossover with drugs, smuggling drugs and animals into the country. But for background, you know what, what is different than these other films that we've done? This was an industry story that kind of looks back at the past century. You know, what most people don't know is illegal wildlife trafficking represents about a $20 billion dollar your industry. It's kind of under-reported actually. Only after guns, drugs, and human trafficking. And what's really interesting about that is there's a convergence of all of it, you know, wildlife trafficking, and also in both drugs. And trafficking times. Of guns. There's a lot of mixed-mixer of it. Whenever people are bringing in things illegally, they tend to be a risk-taking type. Of course. But you know, in the kind of pre-customs TSA days, when it's as intense as it's now, it's very easy to carry animals and carry wildlife. Yeah, that was something I didn't even think about until I was watching. I was like, oh, God, I remember those days where they didn't check your bags and they didn't even check your ID. You just had a ticket. Yeah. And you just get on the plane. So you just get on the plane with lizards. Now most people just strapped your body, right? The thing with what was so interesting about reptiles in this case within the trade is they're portable. They're nature with handles. You go, you see in the early episode of episode one, people traveling around the world, you know, finding where endangered animals put in their suitcase and bringing them back, putting them on a priceless and sounding them too consumer. And that was the kind of early days. I mean, the story, the lizard king, but many much, you know, in our series, it's handful of guys, mainly guys, you know, start a multibillion dollar industry. And you see this kind of innovation happened over the course of the series as, you know, as the years go on. But when we say multi-billion, I have to kind of contextualize that. It's when people say that the wildlife trade is multi-billion dollar industry. You got to remember it's a lot of its consumption, you know, the aging population is a lot of turtles, a lot of snakes, a lot of its traditional medicine, a lot of its skins, you know, plant material, alligator skin, bugs, crocodile skin bags, lizards, skin bags, snake skin bags. So it's, it's a lot more than just the exotic pet industry. But that's gotten enormous in Asia. They picked, they took a page out of our playbook about 25 years ago, you know, China is now a huge consumer of not just eating these reptiles, but keeping them as exotic pets. That didn't happen before 25, 30 years ago. Asia, Asia. Why is California have a ban on python skin? Is it, pythons are not endangered, right? Well, it depends on the type of python, but yeah, the python skinning business actually is where all the vermies, pythons came from in the 70s that I had as a kid. They would skin the pythons, take the eggs, incubate the eggs, sell the baby pythons to the United States and other consumer countries that wanted baby pythons. Most of the pythons that are skinned in Southeast Asia, and I've been to pythons, skinning places in Sumatra, blood pythons, reticulated pythons, Burmies, pythons, but mostly blood pythons, reticulated pythons are wild cod, and most of them are not endangered. But they're, it's, you know, they're less and less pythons out there, but they're not endangered, those pythons. Well, it's a shit ton and Florida, that's what I understand. I mean, this is giant problem in Florida where they're overgrown with pythons, and yet California, you can't sell pythons skins. It seems like there's a solution there. You know, people want pythons skins. Oh, look, a place that's overrun with pythons. Maybe you should get your pythons skin there. Yeah, the cooler pythons skins are not Burmies pythons, the ones in Florida. The cooler ones people like Nick Cage, and what was that film where he's wearing that pythons skin jacket is to reticulate a python that's wild and hard. That's wild and hard that's gold and black. The cooler pythons skins just happen not to be Burmies, pythons, which are the ones running rampant in Florida. Although they should make those trendy and use Burmies pythons, but they're not usually. You rarely see bird in there. There it is. That's a reticulated python. That's not a Burmies. That's the one people want. That's from Southeast Asia. That's not the one running wild in Florida. Is that that's illegal in California right now then, that jacket? Is that right? I believe so. I don't believe you can get it imported. I think let's try. I've read something about python being one of the things that they made illegal. Why California bans pythons skin? Bandates to 1970. Oh, aimed at protecting endangered and vulnerable species, particularly the Indian python, which was on the endangered species list, California chose to pay it all python products, rather than distinguished by species, created an extraordinarily broad statute banning all pythons imports. Oh, that's interesting. I thought it was fairly recent. Well, that's where the laws, I think, are really screwed up when they basically say, all pythons are bad to sell when the Indian rock python is endangered. And there are a few endangered pythons. But to say, all pythons cannot be used for the skin trade and sold in California because of one python out of many pythons. Welcome to California. I happen to live there. I know what it's like. I love Austin, by the way. I might buy a house next to you now. Austin rules, but California is just so over regulated everything, so particularly wildlife. One same thing we can Florida though with the green iguana. Eric, right? I mean, at the same time. Yeah. Same thing. How so? Regulation. I mean, again, there's four people. There's 45 types of iguanas in the world. Do you want to know that? No. Oh, yeah. There's a whole YouTube community of people hunt iguanas and cook them in exotic ways. They make iguanas stir-fry. In South Florida. Yeah. Yeah. And it looks good. I mean, I don't know anything about what it tastes like, but this guy made a stir-fry over rice, and they were eating it. And they were like, oh my god, this is sensational. Like, teriyaki. Look, very good. Everyone always says, crock, alligator, iguana, rattlesnake tastes like chicken. Yeah. But yeah, they eat the tail. I mean, I mean, I have to, you can imagine, I have a really messed up algorithm from being involved in this first level on that. I never came across. But the frozen, we know the first guy. Yeah, here's the guy. Yeah. They use the legs. They cooked the legs. Yeah, in the back of the tail. So there's the tail. So he's got it marinating. Is it blocked it? Then it looks like he's gonna, oh, look, he's got the whole thing. Oh, wow. Usually it's the back of the tail. Like, like crocodiles, you eat the back of the tail. But it's far out. I mean, there's a, there's a, wow, look at that. He's eating the whole thing. Yeah. In Mexico, I always see the make, you know, iguana tamales out of the back part of the iguana. So he put it in the camaro. Oh, wow. Yeah. And he's got a little sausies making here, some butter and spices, basting it. I mean, why not? If it tastes good and apparently it does taste good, according to all these guys that have seen on YouTube channels. Like, they are pretty honest about it. Like they bring it to the family, they let the family try it. I think, you know, that might be the only way out because they're everywhere in Florida. Like they, when it gets cold out, they fall out of trees. Yeah, right. Yeah, they fall out of trees. I love their news reports. They're fucking big too, man. They're massive. There's some channels with these guys hunt them and some of them are like four and a half, five feet long. This episode is brought to you by OnX Off-Road. Everyone wonder how to reach these epic mountain legs that are tucked away dispersed campsites. With OnX Off-Road, you'll find legal open trails around you and even better guided trails mapped by real off-roaders. Each one includes photos, terrain descriptions and difficulty ratings. So you'll know if your vehicle's capable before you go. Unlike other apps, OnX gives you turn-by-turn directions on the trail and their new dispersed camping layer shows where you can legally set up can. You'll also get private land boundaries, public land overlays and the ability to download maps for offline use so that you're never guessing even when you're off the grid. It's a powerful tool built for serious off-roaders. Try OnX Off-Road for 50% off. Go to OnXmaps.com slash Joe Rogan. The males get crazy and they get very orange and really big the male iguanas. They're so beautiful. They're such a cool looking lizard. There's a lot of really cool iguanas in our show. We feature what's called a Fiji Island iguano, very endangered iguana. That unfortunately people in the private sector in this country cannot own zoos, gonna own them. I don't know why private people can't own them, but the San Diego Zoo and this zoo and that zoo can have Fiji Island iguanas. But they in our show, they literally, this one guy says it's reptile magic. It's like reptile art, a Fiji Island iguana. You might wanna put it up there. It's really good. Just the beauty of it. Just the sheer beauty. It's like a term lemon highlight. Turquoise and green and it's cool. It's a very endangered iguana. So the Florida iguana problem was that all people's pets that got released? Probably. Well listen, also, again, going back to the show, but the central figure of the book is this guy named Mike Van Nostrum and his dad, Raven Nostrum. They run an enterprise called Strictly Reptiles in Hollywood, right? It's in Hollywood. Hollywood, Florida. Hollywood, Florida. Yeah. And they're sort of this like, I would call it more of a fulfillment center for wildlife all across. From the field, that's a factor. They are. In many way, there are this. So it's an Amazon, what you have to say. The S I want to tour this. Yeah, they were selling 5,000 iguanas a week. Well, green, they have iguanas. They got to that point. So the story goes, dad moves to Florida, starts a business, evolves. Jurassic Park comes out. Jurassic Park comes out, everyone wanted a pet dinosaur. The green iguana market went on fire. He was selling 5,000 a week. And I was in 90s kid. I had a iguana in my bedroom. Jeremy's a virgin, but he did have a little. I had a better one. That's that, unfortunately, passed away. The rock thing, you know, the heated rock, you know, that happens. But yeah, no, there's sort of, so the store heated rock thing? No, they have this rock thing where it sits on and it keeps it warm and then I think it kept on too long. I think he cooked this iguana. Michael. Yeah, sadly. It cooks this iguana. But I've learned a lot. But just, but filled with these unintended consequences, you know, I think this idea of a big movie coming out, the correlation to driving demand for pet sales. Thank God people can't buy a fucking velociraptor. You know, because people would have them. They'd have fences set up in their yard. Joe, you've had the colossus people on the show, I think. Oh, yeah. They want to bring back one of those and a woolly mammoth. Well, there's no chance that they can bring with current technology. They don't have dinosaur DNA. It's too old. I'm joking. But they're, I mean, I met the dire wolves. It's wild. They brought back the dire wolf. What does that mean? I mean, if you talk to Genesis, what is it? It is a bunch of different traits. Don't go down that rabbit hole. It's close to a dire wolf. I mean, I don't know what that means. Because like we decide what a dire wolf is, what a dire wolf is. But if you take a literal dire wolf DNA that's 7,000 years old and you add it to these gray wolves and this is what they did. And they created essentially a dire wolf. It's like people are arguing over semantics. Whatever it is, that's not a wolf. It's very different. It looks different than a regular wolf. Like a gray wolf. The stature is different. It has a mane. It's really crazy looking. They're white. They're stockier. They're built differently. Like you see it, like, oh, that's different. Well, like mane wolves in Argentina look very different than our wolf. So they're very different types of canines. Wild dogs and Africa look very different. Oh yeah. You know, then our, you know, so yeah. But yeah. I mean, one thing I just say about iguanage since we were on it is that, because I'm on an organization called the International iguana foundation. And we protect iguanas around the world. And people get confused and they go, oh, iguana, that's so common. They're falling out of trees in Florida. But there are a lot of really rare, cool iguanas. There's about 45 species. And there's pink iguanas in the Galapagos Islands. Landing iguanas is marine iguanas. There's a very rare high elevation pink iguana. There's another landing iguana in the Galapagos. There's a green iguana. But that lizard was fairly recently discovered. And there's some iguanas that were thought to be extinct, Joe, like the Jamaican iguana. And that was thought to be extinct forever. The Jamaican iguana, but they found a tiny population recently. So there's a lot of iguanas that are in trouble. And we should care about iguanas and they're not just green iguanas. Yeah, that's a marine iguana. And a regular Galapagos landing one. And then you see some of the pink form. Jamie, see if you can find a video on Florida people hunting iguanas. Sit Florida people hunting giant iguanas. Because some of them are so big. You just see them, you're like, oh my god. Are those bad to eat though, the big giant ones? Would you eat one? Have you been like a reptile pet guy? I've been on the side of that one. Yeah, that's a male. That's a male. That's one of the ways. When they got orange like that, yeah, that's a big male. I mean, these things are gigantic. Now that's a common green iguana. And the males lose their green and get that incredible yellow orange. Those are males. Isn't that crazy how many of them there are though? I mean, it is just over one with iguanas. I guess they have no natural predators, right? There's nothing that eats them there. Not once they get big like that, when they're little, some birds of prey and some snakes can eat baby iguanas. But not once they're like that. But they're pretty chill. I mean, they don't really do much harm. Well, don't they know that people's crops and people's houses? No, they do. They do do damage. They're not supposed to be in Florida. Let's put it that way. Glun is like water, typically. They like to be around water. The green iguanas. But you know, reptiles have a bad PR problem. And that's why we're here, Joe. We're trying to elevate the publicity of people loving reptiles and not killing them. This dude is all out there killing him. Who's this dude? Top shelf anglers on Instagram. He's like, you can do an expedition. Oh, so he's just a Florida guy that's enjoying that really gorgeous. Also, no, that now is a different. That's a call of Tina Sores. That's a type of central American Mexican rocky guana. That's not a green iguana. So Florida has a variety. Yeah, they have those as well. And they have Tagooze in Florida that come from South America, a different type of lizard that's invasive in Florida. And all of it is pets. Yeah, people letting me know. I had no idea that many people had a guana. That it could be this big of a problem. Pedic guanas were everywhere at one time. And does this really take good? That's also invasive in Florida. That's crazy. I used to sleep with one of those when I was at teenager. That's an egg with legs. It does. Look at the other face, right? I told you. And that lizard really loves the eggs. I used to feed my eggs. So I've seen them in the wild eating eggs, bird eggs, duck eggs. When I lived in the valley, there was a reptile store. And it was a place where I used to go buy goldfish because I used to have piranhas. And they used to have turtles too. And the turtles were way more vicious than the piranhas. It was a quad... When you put goldfish in with the turtles, turtles, it's... they're crazy, man. And they grab a hold of them in there. They're biting them. It's like very drastic park. Like they're watching a little bit of snapping turtles. Yeah, well, these are just little, you know, little green sliders. Sliders. Is that what they're called? But they had a crocodile monitor in that place. And I... Oh, yeah. I briefly thought like, maybe I could figure out a closure of crocodile monitor, feed it rabbits and shit. Don't get bit by a crocodile monitor. They're close to like a camo-dulcan bite. They have scapulft, they're serious. Getting bit by a crocodile monitor. It looked pretty vicious. I mean, it just looked like dinosaurs. It's like a forgotten thing of the path. There it is. Yeah. Is it crocodile monitor? Look at that face, man. I totally looks like a dinosaur. Well, there's Tommy, who's... Yeah, that's the guy who's hitting it. Yeah, he's hitting it. One of those. One of those. Oh, Tommy. Yeah. There, the weirdest fucking people. Because I kind of understand the chimp people more. Because the chimp people like a chimp is interacting with you. It's a mammal. It's a primate. It's intelligent. There's a lot going on. There's emotions and jealousy and chimp's... They're connecting with you. These things, they're just looking into the abyss until the chimp trips your head off. Yeah, well, I'm not advocating for people to have chimp. I just say I understand the appeal of the chimp. I think it's a crazy idea. Well, especially a baby chimp. I think if everybody's even remotely thinking about it, they should watch chimp crazy. Yes. But yeah, especially the babies. They're so cute. And then they eventually get to the point where they kill your neighbor. But it's just you don't want... I just get the appeal of it. The appeal of the reptile thing to me is just very strange. These people love them. Well, I loved... I used to keep snakes and lizards, but ultimately, they were my gateway drug. And then I ultimately got into tortoises because I like the tortoises coexisting in the garden. I like plants. Yeah. And so it didn't feel like they were in a cage and they kind of... Maybe I'm anthropomorphizing my tortoises, but I kind of felt like they were having a pretty good life in my garden. So for sure. I like keeping tortoises. They don't want to eat a rabbit, particularly. They want to eat some lettuce or some greens. So turtles and tortoises is what I gravitated to. And then I found out one day they're the most endangered group of animals on the planet, along with primates. If you measure it by how many turtles and tortoises there are in the world and how many are facing extinction, along with primates. So then I was like, okay, I want to do something to help them. And this show we're doing is really to teach people about the evolution of the reptile trade and to make people realize they're cool and they shouldn't be disposable pets. And also freak show. And freak show, of course. I can't really get a freak show. As I said, it takes one to no one. But it's different though. It's different though. This isn't some side hustle for animal love gone wrong. It's there's these people there's this. It was different though, is that this isn't some like side hustle for animal love gone wrong. It's these people, the reptile people, the hurt people are incredibly obsessive about living art, about these living things. They like the, it's like a baseball card. Like the skin. Were you used to hurt people? Yeah, could we hurt her? Her petology or people, her petology. Amphibian sand reptiles. Yeah, I'm sorry. Well, you know, you need to be coated. The hurt people, hurt people. Hurt people, people don't know. But, but it's, you know, it's, it's really a trade formed around scarcity. And, you know, this sort of desire and adventure people have going out to find the rarest of the rarer, you know, and bringing it back and selling it, trading it, keeping it. I'm in that country. You are in that country. I'm in that country. I'm in that country. I'm not the guy that just wants a little pet bearded dragon. I want the roles Royce or reptiles. But it's different than like, you know, an individual person that has an attachment to a chimpanzee that she saw with, you know, watching Tarzan when she was growing up and she wanted to have that in her life. So in other words, freaky people, freaky people, extreme obsessions. But it's about kind of, you know, psychology of people. And this, in this particular very niche way. Well, any time you're dealing with extreme animal people, it's about the psychology of the human being that's really invested in it, right? Yeah. Best in show. Yeah. For sure. And these are, these are very unusual people because it's a very unusual thing to be connected to, something that really doesn't give a fuck about you. Like we're really concerned about this pink iguana. That pink iguana doesn't give a fuck about people. If all the people on earth died, it would just keep going about its business and not shed a tear. Yeah. Especially things that can kill you in this way. Mm-hmm. Like a type hand or whatever. Someone playing with that. An inland type hand is a venomous snake from Australia that may be the most venomous snake in the world. But it's all relative because it's a black man. Of course, man. It's a lot of venomous stuff. Yeah. Spiders, box jellyfish, a lot of snakes that are very dangerous. Australian tiger snake, brown snake, inland type, and they're all things that equally can kill you. So it would say one's more dangerous than the other. They're all kill you. Is there anti venom for all of them? No, actually. So it's a good question. Some snakes, like Texas has a coral snake, for example. A very venomous, elapid type of snake like a cobra, not like a rattlesnake. And I think they have less and less anti venom for snakes that rarely bite people because like sea snakes, the coral snake, which is the red black and yellow one that you have in these Texas. When the dog gets bit by the one you were talking about, you were dog getting bit by rattlesnake. A lot of time the vet doesn't know because you can't even see the snake bite. So some snakes do not have any venom. Some really dangerous snakes. The coral snake's not a venom for them. I think I heard that maybe not anymore. I'm sure it's faded. So what happens if you get bit? Well, there may be some anti venom, but there's not a lot of it. Antivenom has gotten very expensive and it's very sophisticated now. And it's mostly for, you know, in the US for vipers, you know, for rattlesnakes. But I don't know a good question. That would be someone smarter than me would know about coral snake anive at them. But it's an elapid like a cobra. A friend of mine had two of them in her carport. Yeah. They took pictures of it and sent it to people and everyone's like, yeah, that's keep away from that. Just chilling in her carport. But they're generally not aggressive. Is that the deal? Yeah, there's a saying and it doesn't fit all because there's coral snakes that don't have this. But yellow against black is a friend of Jack. Yellow and black against red is anyway, I can't even say one of the dead or something. Yeah, you want to debit it. I'm getting it wrong, but there's a saying and it doesn't hold true for all coral snakes. Because there's some coral snakes outside of the US that don't have that same pattern. So if there's no anti venom and they take you to the hospital, what did they do? They stopped making the coral. I mean, they're so. They stopped making it. It was cause. Is that what it says? I think that's what I cost and effective. No longer. Just let people die. Cost effective is a crazy thing to say when it comes to fucking people. Well, I mean, I was I was right for a change. Capitalists, maybe the socialist are right. Cost effective is crazy. So what did they do? You know, I heard every rattlesake joke after I got bit and there's one that's these three guys are out hiking and someone gets bit here and they go to the doctor and the guy says you got to go back and suck it out of him and the guy just says to him, you're going to die. So maybe you die with the coral snake. Yeah. Just leave you dying. The bet the bet thing I was we would recently were looking at this the way of treating rattlesake mics not too long ago, by the way, these tell these Johnson and Johnson's sell these kits where you used to have one, right? You'd actually literally slice out and you suck out the second of the venom out of your out of your bite. Does it actually work? No, that was what was incredible about it. When you when we were young, they had these little rattlesake kits, you know, I'm a little older you've been. It was insane what they told people to do back then. They told you to cut yourself and then put a turn to kit and then suck the venom out, which is completely insane because one of rattlesake strikes, you know, they never hold on a rattlesake. They strike and let go immediately and then they track their prey and it's literally like a hyperdermic needle going into your body and the, you know, the venom is already just like when they inject you with something, it's already in you can't suck the whatever. So what should you do if you get bit by Ronald? Be mellow. In my case, I walked to my car. Luckily I wasn't too far away from my car and I was up in the mountains about an hour away from a hospital. I drove, well, I drove like a bad out of hell to the hospital actually, but you're supposed to be calm and get to a hospital. That's the kit. Incredible. And there was just bullshit, huh? Well, everything's taken out in the woods. Like we're fine. Everything you shouldn't do today. Everything you shouldn't do. And so you just stay mellow and get to the hospital. And if they don't have any anti venom, you just die. Well, in my case, they didn't have it in the hospital. They had to get see how we would patrol to bring it from another, from Ventura. And it took about 45 minutes and I thought it was going to die on the gurney. But yeah, you get to a hospital and you get an advantage of it's a bad bite. And if they don't have any venom, you die. Well, it depends on the kind of snake. Like water moccasins usually aren't lethal, but certain rattlesakes can kill you. And how much time do you have from the time you get bit where you must get the anti venom in you? I mean, in my case, I swear to God, I thought I was going to stop breathing about two hours into it. It just slowly feels like this pressure on your chest. Like you can't breathe. Yeah, like you're like you're, it felt like somebody put sandbags all over me. Like you have this pressure and you feel like you're going to stop breathing. Yeah. Oh, that's kind of bizarre. What's that guy, Ross Allen? He has the world record for the most. Is it cobra bites? No, I think you're talking about serpentarium. And that same guy Bill Haas. Bill Haas. He lived to like 100. But I know people that inject themselves with venom. I was in Myanmar and Burma one time in this guy had snake tattoos all over him. And he was a snake wrangler at the zoo in central Burma. And every tattoo he had put on his body, he had put some venom in it. So he could handle these really dangerous crates, which are like cobras. And he was this guy with all these snake tattoos, but he had invented himself. So you'd have antibodies. So he could handle these snakes. And if you got bit, he wouldn't die. But early roadside attractions in South, I mean, that's the part about Florida. It goes back. It's in the 50s and 60s. It had, you know, Miami Serpentarium was an amazing looking place. Had just giant cobra, you know, with sculpture basically. Here's a question. If they do that with allergies, where they give you like a little bit of the allergen developed resistance to it, could they do that with snakes? That's it. Is it going to snake prone area? Should you do that? No, but that's the idea. Why wouldn't you do that? There's a guy right now in the US that's doing it. I think they're doing a film about him injecting all these venomous snake venom syndrome, like a pin cushion. But no, I don't think people should do it. People do do it. Not a lot of people. But this guy does build up your antibodies. And you know that you're going to come in contact with snakes. Listen, wouldn't that be, is it bad for you to do? The country that I think has the most deadly snake bites is probably India, the country where there's the most deaths and in animation. The snake, they probably kills more people of the world as a puff out or an Africa, but it's many countries. But I think India has the highest. US, it's pretty low chance you're going to get killed by a snake. You're going to get killed driving your car or shooting someone with your gun. You know, it's highly unlikely that odds are very low that you're going to die from a snake bite. No matter where you live in the United States. I understand that. You're so well and good. But that doesn't comfort you if you get bit by a snake. Like, oh, what are the odds? Seacematically, you have to deal with it. By one of those kids. I think most people live, Joe. I think most people. I mean, there's a few people that died this year in California. But typically it's like only a few people a year dying in the country of snake bites. And is it generally because they just don't get to metable treatment at time? Or they're older or they get bit three times. Like not just once by the rattlesack. You know, we have more venom in them. Is it true that the young ones give you more venom than the old ones? No, young ones have a more condensed, more dangerous venom. But big snakes are much more dangerous because they can put far more venom into. If the little ones have a more potent venom, that they can't inject as much into. it's kind of people misunderstand that stat. Not that I'm a snake expert. I'm more of a turtle expert. And I am more of a freak expert. So I'm good at finding these crazy people to come. Do you get uncomfortable being around these people? That's a good question. Because there's a psychological aspect to particularly like chimp crazy. There's something about those people that makes me uneasy watching it on TV. Like you are so far gone. Like some of these people are so far gone in terms of like just being a normal, present, rational person. There's a courtship and sometimes that courtship takes years to get someone willing to be interviewed. It's generally the reptile world can be very guarded. People that have them don't want the feds coming and taking their rare reptiles. They don't want animal rights groups, pita coming and busting them. They don't want people coming because they're very valuable. Some reptiles are worth a lot of money. So they're very guarded and to get access to a lot of these people took a lot of time at times. And sometimes that relationship would go up and down. And there were times when people that I was interviewing really did not like me. There was something that happened. And then I would have to go there. And I'd be nervous because that person may have been someone who did a lot of time in prison and did some heavy things in his life. So yeah, there are times when you're just kind of like, you know, is this the time I'm going to go there? And he's going to really fuck me up. Why didn't they like you? Oh, you know, man, you know, like listen, I like this guy. He's done what he's done in the past. He was sentenced to 100 years in prison. He got out for whatever reason. But that guy, why did he go to jail for 100 years? Well, in Mario, Taborawi was sentenced to 100 plus years in prison. He got out early because he must have had some serious. What was the crime? Murder and drugs. And he got out early because he said he had information. He must have. He did 12 years. No one knows who. No one knows what. He only did 12 years from murder and drugs. But I like him. Oh, great. I was in the one murder. I was in his life back then. He's kind of a, he really actually does love animals. I mean, in his way. I was nervous sometimes going to his place a few times. Well, why was he mad at you? Fuck, do you remember all the times he was mad at me? He's probably mad at me right now as I'm speaking. Yeah, I definitely would be after a show problem. Yeah. Well, this is the next episode. There's an entire episode that talks about kind of the 80s in Miami and the sort of overlap between the drug trade and the legal wildlife trade and the reptile trade. And he's a central character in it. I think he's my aunt. Now he's kind of more tangential because it's really about this guy. Raven Nostrand guy from New Jersey, moved down to Florida, started a business that became strictly reptiles as I was referencing. But yeah, I mean, I don't think there was anything like particular, but he would get very particular, but very specific things. Like if you were, you could be right about a million things that he hated, but wrong about one thing that he cared about the most. And he would categorize you to be this person that is, you know, there's an expression honor among thieves and he weirdly has this kind of honorable sign. I'm a teamable. Yeah. And certain things I would say to him would make him really upset. But I have to say the only time I was ever shot at my life was in fucking Miami. I was shot at, you know, going to a payphone in the early 90s in a van trying to go to a nightclub with a bunch of people. And these guys were walking towards me and they started just blowing out the windows of the van. I remember I didn't go to the nightclub. I went back to my hotel. I woke up in the morning with that chopped car for glass all in my hair. I had long hair back then. I had hair back then. But Miami was, you know, it was pretty wild in the 80s and early 90s. Have good friend, my friends, Steve did his residency. He's an ophthalmologist, his residency in Miami in the 80s. And worked in emergency rooms. And he said it was fucking insane. It's just like so many gunshot wounds, so many drug deals gone bad, so many heists. He said it was like an insane place to work. The pressure. Whether you say that because I said to all my characters, I said, what's it like, you know, having been in and out of prison so many times he goes, bro, everyone in Florida has been in prison. And I was kind of like, well, what's it like, you know, everyone in Florida has been in prison. Sunny place with shady people, right? Have you seen cocaine cowboys? Yeah. Yeah. Phenomenal, right? And that story where you find out that the entire graduating class of the police academy either wound up murdered or in jail for corruption. Yeah. Have you seen bad lieutenant? Yes. I'm friends with Harvey. Oh, really? He's good in it, man. Oh, yeah. Not great, man. But there's parts of this story that are a little like bad lieutenant. You'll see in the end. You know, what you'll like about this second episode, about this period, it's from the point of view of this young at the time, you know, coming right out of college, young D agent, DEA agent, on the beat, chasing bad guys. And he was assigned this guy Mario to Brawie. The case that was a cold case, no one could ever touch him. And you see him kind of chase after him and, you know, understand the whole weaving of this story. But it's a really, you know, being around that guy was, you know, being, talk about our subjects in this animal world, you know, law enforcement. This guy sleeps with a gun every night and gets literally orgasmic with the thought of this guy coming to his house. There's like a hideaway guy that he put in prison for a hundred years that got out. He literally waits and you'll see a line in the show that it's kind of unbelievable what he says about that. Yeah, but just, you know, he lives in this kind of, we went to go to CM, he lives in this kind of very kind of, you know, country part of West Virginia. And he's good with guns, good with guns. And he would just, you know, he would brag about all the guns, you know, the bullets you can find from this, you know, left over from the Civil War in his backyard. You know, he was very, very good with the gun. We did a lot of shooting verite with him. And he was just a really, at the time, very generous with his time wanting to tell his story, but, you know, clearly killed a lot of people and would make some very soft references to that that would be very unnerving, you know, like, yeah, he was really great with, I've never shot a gun. He's having an against it, but I've never shot a gun. And I would talk to him about it. I'm interested in it. And he'd be like, yeah, I've had to use it a lot, you know, more than I'd like to admit. So, you know, you're in these places. It's, it's, but what's so peculiar about this guy, his name's Larry Loveless. He was a DEA agent in Florida back in those days. He put this guy in prison, you know, bringing, this guy was bringing a lot of drugs from, you know, he was Cuban and you'll see it in episode two. But he really just doesn't understand how the guy got out of prison. The fact that the very guy that put him in prison wouldn't know that, that they, like, whoever the powers that be that put got him out of prison after 12 years, he would think he would know, you know, but he's still to the state worried about retelling. Well, so this was, what's cool is that his dad was actually the person, he was like an HR person for kind of the Cuban, is at the time of the Cuban, uh, Babe Pigg's, you know, invasion, that kind of era. And he was responsible for taking care of all these kind of Cuban exiles during that time. He was being the one that was going to go into house to house and giving people checks. Um, so he had this kind of very interesting network of people and had this incredible access. And so what, what, what was been insinuated is that, you know, his dad had these relationships and knew where everyone was and knew all these people and had information that was useful to the government at the time. That's the idea. Dave information, no surprise. Or he helped bring down the real public s, sqabar or he knew a big drug lord that the government wanted and they made a deal. Who knows? But he could have been. There's lots of theories. It's, I didn't adjust it though. Like even this guy, you know, some, you know, we filmed two hundred people over how long 15 years really, the last six was in was more intense. More than two hundred people. And you never get everybody in. Yeah. And I remember meeting this guy Tony Baskaro, remember him? Yeah. This guy was part of, he flew planes for drugs. He got busted with like, I think, 600,000 pounds of weed at the time. He served the single largest sentence for marijuana smuggling crime. 40 years, 40 years, got out maybe five years ago. And could you imagine coming out of prison for the longest sentence and then going to Miami and you're seeing weed stores everywhere? Yeah. It's like it lies over these weed stores everywhere. It's like insane to me. That's fucked up. But that was at a time, look, Pablo Escobar, there were people around Pablo Escobar that got indicted that were trafficking ivory horns and stuff. Like it was very, there were one degree of separation for wildlife crime and drugs in that era. Why do you think there's that connection? Easy. It's the only one. I mean, look, I don't want to exaggerate. I think there's been connections, you know, you can put cocaine inside of a boat, constrictor who's going to open a box at customs or fish and wildlife service and look inside the boat constrictor. So there's some pretty ingenious ways to, meaning you put it in their stomach? Yeah. Like either like force feed that bow constrictor, like, you know, like you put them in those balloons, you put cocaine in or you even, and then you have to cut them open and get your cocaine. Yeah, you cut them open and get your cocaine. But even I remember in New York when the fish markets used to put drugs, you're so casually about that. But fish, fish markets used to put the drugs and fish and the fish markets were New York. Yeah, because no one wants to handle the fish and open up the fish and they shove all the drugs into the fish. So, you know, like smell, these dangerous animals are good, cover for drugs or even more simply, you know, trafficking wildlife. There was a legal version of that. So what they would do is take the crates and they'd pack them and they put the drugs at the bottom and they put, you know, another layer of animals and they put some, they'd mix in some, you know, look, like animals are really rare, but look, like the common animal, so they'd mix them together. And then they put something like, you know, spitting cobras up the top. No one was reaching into the crate when there was these like very dangerous animals. Many. So that's how they kind of got, they were able to, to prey on the lack of resources at these kind of major ports of entry and realize that fish and wildlife didn't really have any resources at the time. They had limited wildlife inspectors. They had to go through these, you know, volumes, volumes and crates and they, they play these games. Many Komodo dragons that made it into this country came in illegally in a crate and they would just put a little Komodo dragon in with some other monitor lizards and the inspectors couldn't tell the difference. And they'd go through and the Komodo dragon that bit Sharon Stone's husband, Sharon Stone's husband at the Los Angeles Zoo is one of those Komodo dragons. So somebody's private collection and they got released to the zoo? No, it was, it was a sting that's in our show where they were bringing in illegal animals coming from a guy in Malaysia who sort of the Pablo Escobar, the Kingpin globally of all the reptile animal trade, the guy that we finally accessed after COVID who his name is Anson Wong. And he was sort of the, you know, bad guy number one in the world for reptile and animal smuggling. And so he was sent in the interpol and all, you know, he did the longest, longest sentence in the US for a while. I crime ever at the time in the 90s. He was busted in Mexico, but, and then brought extradited in the US. But he was bringing in Komodo dragons and really rare reptiles. And the zoos were the beneficiary of those reptiles. Once they were confiscated. So the LA Zoo, San Diego Zoo, brought to a lot of these animals came from reptile smugglers. Wow. Very much the origins of collections. Yeah, for zoos. And I would also imagine the kind of people that are really into reptiles probably also do drugs. So they probably know a lot of people in that world. Yeah, it's like a cross section of versus metal. You got a python. So there's a lot of inked guys. There's a lot of like goth guys into hot snakes, which are the venomous. A lot of bikers. Hot snakes. Hot snakes. That's what they call them. Hot snakes are bad. The kind that can kill you. Yeah, they're called hot snakes. Interesting. But yeah, a lot of bad ass guys. And there was definitely drugs. Listen, I did drugs in my life. So way. Yes, come on. Agawan. I've done everything. I had nightclubs in New York City for many years. So I'm like, you know, embalmed. It's maybe live longer. Maybe that's what saved you when you get a bit by the rounds. I probably, but you got to think that the type of people that are going to be even interested in having a snake as a pet. It's a very unusual person. Oh, yes. Yeah. I don't know. Come on. You know people that have six kids have all pythons. You've got kids. They like a baby, a ball python. They're clean. You don't have to feed it every day like a rabbit or a dog. You can go on vacation, leave your ball python. They're a good pet. A lot of snakes. I don't think of them as a pet. I think of as a monster that you feed that allows you, you know, it's not big enough to eat you. So it allows you to feed it. And then you have to keep it in this box, which is kind of weird. Yeah. Well, that's what I like tortoises. You don't have to keep them in a cage or a box. Because does a snake, the experience is comfort because they're in a terrarium. Listen, there's a lot of myth out there that, oh, snakes can live in a little teeny like sweater box or shoe box. And you can put them in rocks like you see in snake stores and snake around the shoes. The truth is real snakes in the wild do not live in little boxes. They may go in the underground at a certain time of year at hibernate. They may, but they come out and they hang out like us and they move around. And most snakes do not live in a little teeny box. But yes, they can survive in a box. But there's all different kinds of snakes. There's raster snakes and indigo snakes and snakes that need to move fast and go places. And then there's some snakes like a ball python that can be in a more confined space, but you can't generally like when people keep them as pets, they keep them in some kind of aquarium. Right. Yeah. And they should they should give them more space. They should absolutely give them more space. I mean, part of what we're trying to do in this show is try to tell people, be responsible. Don't treat reptiles like disposable pets like a toy that you break one week and then you buy another one and you break it and the parents buy another one. You know, they're living creatures. The death toll when you import these animals is amazing. I mean, so much mortality. And we don't talk about mortality, whether it's zoos or people bringing in these reptiles or even myself over the years, you ask me what happened to that snake. Probably died. Probably was flushed down the toilet by someone's mom. You know, you know, like baby green turtles that you had as a kid, like what happened to most of us? How long does snakes look? Like how long does a python live? This episode is brought to you by visible. It's officially summer folks and boy, what a summer we are having. It feels like one of those good old fashioned summers we just want to enjoy every moment and keep up with the action. Your best companion this summer, visible wireless. Visible gives you unlimited 5G data and unlimited hotspot powered by Verizon for just $25 a month. So you can make this the summer of fun and savings. Visible is more than just a wireless plan. It's unlimited wireless design to always keep you connected with no contract to tie you down. Switch today at visible.com plan start at $25 a month or get our premium visible plus pro plan and save $10 on your first month when you use promo code Rogan terms apply see visible.com for plan features and network management details. So the longest lived animal terrestrial animal on the planet is a giant tortoise. They can live almost 200 years. I have tortoises that are over 100 years old. What about snakes? Snakes generally. Most snakes don't live more than 30 to 40 years. But there are a few that might lizards can live 70 years. Some of the big landing wanas can live a long time. Those ones in Florida. I don't know about green iguanas, but there are some that can live 50 to 70 years. Some of the big lizards tortoises live the longest. Some crocodilians give live a really long time. Snakes live the least. The less or time compared to most of the other reptiles. That was another thing that they found in Florida in the Everglades. They found Nile crocodiles. And they think that they might have a breeding population. There's suspicion. But it's basically from people having it in Miss pets. Yeah, they're nearly. I swam with Nile crocodiles. That's no joke. Why did you do that? I was in Madagascar. They have a form of Nile crocodile in Madagascar. They don't quite quite as big as the mainland crocs. And I was looking for turtles. And then I saw the croc Nile crocodiles. And as you know, saltwater crocodiles are the two crocs that really kill the most people, you know, that people come and wash their clothing next to the shore. You know, the croc comes up and grabs them. You know, you really got to watch it with Nile crocodiles. So if they're in Florida, they're much bigger than American crocodiles. Yeah, they have a shoot on site order for them. Or they did at least this article that I was reading is from a while back. I didn't know that. Wow. They found a couple of them. Yeah. Yeah. I know they've captured at least two of them. Well, the biggest reptile in the world in terms of weight, back to our size conversation is a saltwater crocodile. So it's neck and neck with a leather back sea turtle. They're both over 2,000 pounds. So you imagine a 2,000. The back sea turtle is that big. Yeah. I had no idea. That's great. I would have never imagined that a sea turtle would have the same body weight as a saltwater crocodile. They're neck and neck to over 2,000 pounds, both of them. That's a big, big turtle. Well, I know that there's legend about Congo crocodiles that there's crocodiles that people had supposedly seen, you know, back in the early 1900s and 1800s that they thought were 40 feet long. And the thing about crocodiles is I don't think they die of old age. I think they just stay alive until they die. I want to be a crocodile. And they keep getting bigger. That's the other thing. Depending upon their food source and how much I think in captivity, they wind up dying. But I think there's some, there's some thoughts as to why that happens. You know, how they're actually eating, whether they're getting fed. What's the difference between the way they live in the wild? But there's some accounts from back in the day where these guys were on a boat. And the crocodile was bigger than the boat they were on. Yeah. I mean, the thing about crocodileians, and I think there's about 27 different types. But once they get to a certain size, you know, they're vulnerable when they're little, right, like birds and fish and things can kill them and eat them. But once they get a certain size, you know, like you're saying, they're pretty much invincible. Nothing can kill them. You know, in some of them, develop a taste for people. Yeah, just movement in the water and just their, because they're an ambush predator. Yeah. Well, they hunt people. And they probably hunt people. My friend Jim Schockey, he got hired to go to Africa. I forget what country it was, but he got hired to kill these crocodiles. Because they were praying of people. And while he was there, someone got snatched up. While he was in camp. There's a, there's a, everybody there had like missing a leg, bite, taken out their calf. Everybody was all fucked up. I was good friends with Peter Beard and he would go to Kenya and Ethiopian call crocodiles. And there's a really incredible photo of him inside a crocodile that they killed. And he's like riding in his, you know, journal, but he's half his bodies in a huge Nile crocodile. But he would go and call them for probably similar reason. Yeah, once they start. in his, you know, journal, but he's half his bodies in a huge an al-clock at all. But he would go and call them for probably similar reason, essentially. Yeah, once they start targeting villagers, once they find that there's a place that they can hunt and get regular food, that they're all the time. They're so sneaky that, you know, what they developed was these people had put posts into the ground in the water. So into the area where they would wash their clothes and gather food, they essentially built like some sort of containment area where the crocs couldn't get through these poles. So with the crocs did was go around the poles and into the water. So they had figured it out. That's creepy. That's creepy. Well, they, they realized like, oh, the people go, like they must have been watching and realizing, oh, the people go into this area. So I got to go on the ground at night and then I'll go back on the water and then I'll catch these fuckers slipping. And they're patient. They can wait either. They can wait a long time before they eat anything. Yeah, they're not eat for a year. They're in croc. Yeah. Are they intelligent? Yeah. Well, they, they're one of the few reptiles that actually really does defend their babies. Like, you know, like a snake, snake doesn't do that. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. Wow. Wow. That's amazing. What a dinosaur man. What is that? A saltwater or a Nile? It says saltwater crocodiles. Yeah. Is it Australia? And Australia. Wow. Those things ran the whole world at one point in time. It's just weird. There's still creatures like that roaming around. You know, that's a throwback. And there's some really endangered crocodiles. You'll see in our show, I think even episode one, there's the zoo curator that says, Oh, we bought a few Philippine crocodiles from this dealer. I think it's in the first episode. And Philippine crocodiles today are super endangered. You know, like there's still some really, really rare ones. Not saltwater crocs and not Nile crocs, but there's some really endangered. Is that a thrill for these guys? Did they get something that they're not supposed to have? Is that part of it? Yeah, for sure. It's like a rare baseball card. No, it's like rare art. It's like having a, yeah. Yeah. And then there's a, I get excited by seeing something I never saw before. And birds. Yeah. Well, when I see a cool, like pink landing one, I've never seen one in the wild or anywhere. And I've been to the Galapagos. So yeah, it's a thrill. It's like, put in your backpack and take it home is probably not encouraged. I'd stuff it down my pants. No, I'd be too scared. Well, you wouldn't want to do that, right? Well, every since natural habitat, no, I wouldn't want to. You know, my mother gave me a good moral compass with that. She used to say to me when I was a kid, don't play God there. I cannot keep my, I'm just keeping things. And she'd tell me, you got to let it go at the end of the summer. So I was lucky to have that, because a lot of people didn't have that mother and I did. So I kind of, again, so I'd better judgment when I was a kid. I did bad things that my mother didn't like, but later in life, she was right. Keep it in the wild. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. Well, they're fascinating in the wild. It's just like, do appreciate them in the wild. I just, I'm perplex as to why people would, they would have their life revolve around taking care of reptiles. It just seems really odd. Well, people get into it and they get addicted, they buy more and more and more and then they get divorced and they get rid of them all or they get burnt out on it because after a while it's a lot of work taking care of a lot of reptiles. So it's kind of like, you know, people get really into and sometimes it's hard to sustain it. You know, but more trade than the other collectible culture trades more more trade more, you know, like I'll give you a crocodile. I'll tell trade. Yeah. What's going on here, Jamie? They're gold bladder. I've never seen this footage. That's a shark. Yeah. So it's stealing a shark that a guy caught. Wow. That must be American crocodile, right? It's Australia. Okay. A lot of sharks in Australia, that makes sense. Wow. Such a stole this guy's fish. Okay. Yeah. What's been your interest in wildlife? Oh man, I'm fascinated by wildlife. I'm just much more interested in mammals for whatever reason. I mean, I'm interested in these things. I've found them fascinating, but they're not as compelling to me for whatever reason. And I always wondered what that is. Like, you know, I did this thing on social media, once the social media hierarchy of dead animals. And I said like, fish, fillets of fish, no one cares. Dead fish, people care a little more, but not much. Dead turkey, not that big a deal. Dead deer. Okay. Now we're getting weird. You know, dead bear now people get mad at you. It's interesting. You know, I went to this thing called Safari, Club International in Vegas. It's the biggest trophy hunting convention. And I was filming undercover. Started out, you know, asking, can you taxidermy this and that? And then I kind of, you know, raised the bar and I said, you know, can you taxidermy a chimp for me? And then yeah, we can do a chimp. So what about an orangutan? Yeah, we could do an orangutan. Anyway, I was going around to different taxidermists in this giant convention. They had elephants and lions and all kinds of stuff. Eventually asked someone if you could taxidermy a human, you know, and then suddenly, I noticed all these guys starting to follow me. You know, and there was a big NRA booth and a lot of people with guns. And eventually they surrounded me. And I was trying to get rid of my, you know, camera gear and throw it in the garbage and stuff. But it was interesting where the line is and what you're allowed to well, it sounds like you're a fucking psychopath. You're asking if you could taxidermy a human. You don't think that's, they probably thought for sure you're a fed or someone or joke undercover. I mean, obviously it was kind of it was kind of a joke, but they literally started putting eyeballs on me and say who the fuck is this guy? Yeah. What did you? Yeah, but they had to take a fucking human and turn into a statue. People have shrunken heads. I know people with shrunken heads actually, you know, they collect them. But no, it's pretty macabre. But the fact that they would taxidermy a chimp and a orangutan and a gorilla. So who are these people that said they would do that? They're just just taxidermists that are in this convention that taxidermy. How would one even, so someone would have to smuggle it back? A lot of what happens is that a lot of the, you know, when zoo animals die, sometimes they send it to people that taxidermy. It's so I know people that get a lot of zoo carcasses and they, you know, taxidermy a chimp. I've seen it. But yeah, so when a zoo, a zoo has the option to sell the dead body and then someone turns it into a taxidermy statue. It's gone on for a long time. I had nothing against zoos, but that was one way to get really unusual animals. Like I have a friend a mid-guy. I know that's taxidermy number of comodo dragons that came from zoos because people don't have comodo dragons in the private sector. But I guess no harm, no foul. It's already dead. But I guess I make the point you're making. I'm just sort of saying it's interesting how fish, even though certain fish can live over 100 years, certain rock fish and longevity, that's incredible. We don't think of them in the same way as we think of these higher comodo. Right. We don't care at all. We don't care at all. Yeah. We don't seem to, you know, going fishing is much more common than going hunting. Now that I say what I just said, you know, maybe that's a little twisted. What do you mean about taxidermy co-person? Well, he is twisted. Yeah. I think I said that out of context. Whoa. You could buy this? Yeah. It says it's real. It's fair to look and see if it was fake. What? How was that legal? I'm not sure on the screen. I'm an example of a phone. Oh, there's our friend. It's only three grand. I mean, the guy that got rid of her side. Yeah. The guy that has the taxidermy, he's got a funny name for his museum. Yeah, he's got the comodo dragon. But now that I think about it, he had a number of taxidermy grilleers. Yeah. Now that I think about it. Now, do they say where they got this from? Does it say how they acquired this body? The document might be the fact that they have for the document. That's fucking weird. But to your point about, you know, this kind of societal reaction to you know, different wildlife issues. Yeah. Yeah. That's what we're super curious about. What drives people's obsessions around certain things? In this case, this happens to be part sport, part industry, part obsession with, you know, scarcity. But that is all in this case, leading more to disruptive extinction problems. You know, very few animal, more and more animals are threatened with extinction than ever before, particularly reptiles. Now one of every five are threatened with extinction and it's growing in an accelerated way, mainly because of things that we explore in our show. Pet trade, exotic, you know, smuggling, all of that. But you know, to get people to care about things that can harm you, believe it or not, you know, we have challenges with, you know, subject matter in the show that, you know, we'll get notes back and it's it's it might be too hardcore for people to see because it is a brutal volume based industry. And there's a lot of just what we try not to show the bloodsening and the cruelty of animals. We try to avoid that with tiger king and Jim crazy in the show because people turn the channel. So we try, we could, if we wanted to, we could do that. But we're just, but I'm more talking more about the point of like what, how do people respond to something through an interest and, you know, what turns among what turns them off? And what is it about us that has this connection to certain why they're turtle people? Why do you like turtle? Why do you like turtle? Why do you like people vilify reptiles? You like mammals? You say, why do you think people don't, aren't so keen on reptiles? Well, they're not like us, right? They're a different sort of predatory lizard thing. And I think in our mind, they harken back to the days where these things were a real problem for human beings. You know, I think, you know, crocodiles and alligators, like they they they enact like there's a visceral reaction that people have to them that I think is warranted. It's genetic probably. But you don't think, because we like to talk about the warm, cuddly, you know, charismatic animals like a Pan-Dibera or a qualabera or, you know, well, that I think is anthropomorphism that's done by Disney movies. Of course. Okay. Yeah. Because people in the pioneer days didn't think of bears that way. But I would argue that a bear, you know, a Kodiak bear, polar bear, and lion, is a lot more concerning than most reptiles. Yes. You know, so why we vilify reptiles and have that, you know, feeling about them is I think maybe more as to what you said about the anthropomorphism, you can't snake has no legs like us. They don't breastfeed their babies like a bear or like, like a mammal. They have a fork tongue. They have no ears. A snake is weird. They're nothing like us. So maybe we feel so removed from them and they're scary. Yeah. Even though they're really not that scary. We talked to this guy. We were, the Disney things so interesting to me because that, that was actually something I was kind of deep on. This guy, Carl Saffina, he's more of an anthropologist or a big behavioral. He's like animal behaviorist and sort of more in the groove of like, you know, animal welfare and animal behavior. Yeah. But this sort of creation of anthropomorphic characters through Disney. I mean, they were, you know, that could be tracked this sort of correlation to, you know, entry points into, you know, mainstream culture. You know, it's, you know, it's, they're easy. They're great devices for human emotion. But then there's a more perverse side of, you know, it creates these demands for pets. You know, zootopia. We would snakes like zootopia had a snake as a central character and it's going crazy in China. You know, that's a pop culture thing like, you know, but that's the, you know, that, so these well-intentioned things in these wanes, which we portray animals. Finding Nemo, everyone wanted a clownfish, Harry Potter, Harry Potter, everyone wanted a baby owl. I was in Asia after Harry Potter. They, I was like, why are there like 50 baby owls in this market? And they were Harry Potter birds. That's a byproduct of pop culture. Right. Yeah. You know, you know, Jurassic Park, everyone wants their little bearded dragon because they want a miniature dinosaur. So who knows what's going to happen after months is a god, they're all going to want snakes again. Hopefully you have some. Did Tiger King open up the door for that, you think? The people like look at that and find it appealing like that's Robin Misha. I think I have a look for my niche. I think a gay, the opposite of people like maybe questioning question. He's like, deliverance. It's a little bit of a gay way to talk to maybe question when you take a photo with a baby tiger at a roadside zoo. I think that was more more, you know, because it was so big and pop culture. I want to get me a tiger after tiger. Can't give me a little baby tiger. If you're going to play into this lane, it's like, look, everyone was shocked that you could buy, you could basically go in for free. Well, we've talked about it before on the podcast, but there's more tigers and captivity in Texas than all the wild of the world. Yeah. And people's private collections. Yeah. I think we're legend also as a plays a big role in the vilification of reptiles, particularly snakes, you know, something about that. I mean, you've complex and you know, the snake is bad. Serpent. The serpent. Yeah. More, I was more people dream of snakes in this country than any other thing combined. It's mostly negative dreams. It's not sharks. Snakes. There's a Google, like, my mayor snake dreams. Google did this sort of like, you know, infographic by country. And, you know, what is the most common dream that people have? And it's usually what snakes I have like someone chasing me or panic dreams. I never have a nightmare about a snake. We never hear of like a phobia directly attached to sharks. You know, you have a phobia, which is a fear of snakes, but you don't hear of a shark, a phobia or a rachnophobia. Right. Spiders. Yeah. People are freaked out by spiders. Oh, yeah. I think that's a genetic thing. I think there's a memory. Yeah. I think someone either was bit or no someone that was bit and that information got transferred down to their offspring. I'm pretty sure that because hosting fear factor, I got to see people with legitimate Iraq, Napobia and legitimate a phobia where it is like nothing else. Like they see it and they fucking freak out. Like it's irrational. It's like everything in their body saying you got to get out of here right now. Yeah. And it's not like everybody else. Everybody else who looked at it was like, oh, yikes. And then a few people, they had that genetic memory. I think. Yeah. It's just a hybrid. And it's cultural. It's cultural. Yeah. Like we have a lot of Mexican guys that work with us. And every year we do a snake course when the snakes start coming out in the spring and I show them how to put a rattlesnake. It's the only staff meeting he ever does. Yeah. Yeah. So only thing I care about, but I don't want people killing snakes that work for me. And I'm like, hey, you don't have to kill the snake. And they're so used to taking the machete and cutting the snakes head off. And we don't do that. We move the rattlesnake and we put them somewhere else. We move the go for snake that King snake. But they just had this, you know, some of them as you were just saying, just can't wrap their head around even touching the snake because they just it's instilled in them, you know, from their parents or from whatever their childhood that's their scared of snakes. It's hard to change. But with kids like I'm sure with your kids and your daughters like I see with little boys, you know, six and three, how their reaction and they're not fearful. Like, and it's partially because of the influence of the work that I'm doing. But, you know, I watch them interact. I see their friends. I see their cousins that are fearful. They have adverse reaction. I also think it's like, you know, your exposure to it. Yeah. You know, a lot. And you're right. Probably some genetic kind of definitely exposure to. I mean, if you grow up and you're used to being around different kinds of animals in the wildlife and different things, you probably would be more comfortable around unique animals. The dear person grows up entirely in the city. Yeah. Did your parents like animals? Did they dogs? We had dogs and cats. Normal stuff. I had a weird mom. I had a weird mom that likes snakes. And so, that played a role in it. And like salamanders. That explains why. She would take me in a pet store that actually steal the snakes and salamanders and steal them and put them in her purse and then take me out into the woods. We let them go. So that's the kind of other she didn't like seeing them in cages. Wow. But she didn't mind cleptomania. I got good at stealing for a while. It's not mom's like really in the snakes. That's an odd mom. She just wanted to free them. She didn't like seeing them in cages. Oh, I understand. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I didn't grow up around any of that. I didn't know anybody who had a snake as a pet. Nothing I can remember. Really in New Jersey. You're well, I was born in New Jersey, but I grew up all over the place. I lived in San Francisco until I was 11 and I lived in Florida from 11 to 13. I actually was around a lot of alligators during that time. There it is. Yeah. We were in Gainesville. And there's a place called Lake Alice there that had a lot of alligators. You see it all the time. When I was there, one lady got a fairly impressionable age. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was around them a lot. But they were, they were weird. Like they didn't do anything. They just laid on the shore. You could see them. And you could be fairly close. Even though like they could have clearly chased me and caught me because they could run like 30 miles an hour. They could have caught me if they wanted to. They didn't. They weren't really interested in people. Apparently they had plenty of food. And they were at that time, they were actually endangered. So alligators like they were telling people not to feed the marshmallows because people would throw marshmallows on the lake because they could watch the alligator come up and eat the marshmallows. They like marshmallows. And they said, hey, these are not good for alligators. Yeah. They're super worried about alligator diabetes or something. Whatever. Yeah. But they were concerned. They were getting out of the outer sugar rush. Yeah. They were concerned about giving the alligator non nutritious food. Which I thought was funny because they were saying that they were endangered. And it's amazing that in the 50s and 60s, they were really endangered. That was hard to find an alligator. And when you think about that now and how to believe, it's hard to believe in how the Endangered Species Act did help all the eagles, birds of prey actually work because of the E.T. But it brought back alligators. And now alligators like you can't even imagine they were endangered. They're like ubiquitous in Florida. They're everywhere. They literally say every pond has the potential to have an alligator. They're everywhere. They move around. They're very overpopulated. Yeah. What's interesting about this work in the show that spans so much time. You know, we had which you share in this curiosity. But we had great access to all of these great people in different industry. So you have heads of the zoo. You have DOJ, DEA, US Fish and Wildlife Service, the collectors, the bigger suppliers. And you have all aspects of this sort of industry. And what the show became, you know, as we were working through the edit is this kind of, you know, this real clear story of unintended consequences, which is the more you enforce. You have great laws that happen. But it triggers something else. And that triggers something else. And you see this kind of time after time after time again. And in some cases, it leads to some positive things like ESA or the Endangered Species Act. Or you have a pop culture event that drives sales of the, you know, animal that's, you know, going to be poached out of extinction. So it's a really interesting way of looking at this and analyzing it in a way. What you realize is you'll see Joe, if you continue watching that the pathology behind everyone, the law enforcement, they're going after their prize, right? They're going after their big trophy is the bad guy. The bad guy, you know, the dealer, the smuggler is going after the rarest reptile. The zoo's got very competitive with reptile houses in the 70s and 80s because they started realizing they were very popular. Some of the most popular things in zoo's are reptile houses. They wanted the Komodo dragon, the rare reptile. So, and the collector, like guys like me, that really dig reptile is wanted like the pink, you know, gloppicus landing one that no one has has or the this, the unattainable. So everyone kind of is going after each other. The reptile, the, you know, the, the feds are going after the bad guys. And it's a similar pathology and what you find out in the end of the series is there's a scene where law enforcement has something that you can't believe. And it's a little like doing a film about, you know, cocaine cowboys and the law enforcement has a garage full of heroin and cocaine that they're selling. So, it's, it's like it gets very gray and the psychology is similar between the only difference between the prisoner and the guard of the bars. Well, that's the sort of kind of it. And you'll see there's no clear ride and wrong and sometimes the laws don't work. So, it's messy and sometimes there should be laws where there aren't laws, you know, back to the marijuana law. Not sure the marijuana analogy like fucking, it, it, how twisted it is that someone goes to prison for 40 years of a pot. And now you can go to a weave shop every corner in Oklahoma, right? But it's a very messy, complex story that was hard to weave together. And I think it was the most challenging for us, certainly more challenging than Tiger. At the most proud, I think it's really deep and it's a good one. And we lived. And we lived for now. You guys spend a lot of time on these. Yeah, this is one of the things that I found shocking while you were just discussing this. You were saying it was like six years more. How many, when, so when did you plant the seed? Well, the seed was planted really in my head when I read this book, The Lizard King in 2008. And I tried to buy the rights from this author, Brian Christie, who wrote this incredible book, The Lizard King in 2008. So that's almost 20 years ago. I didn't start filming until 2014 with Josh Saffte. And that was the beginning. But Tiger King and other things got in the way. So yeah, maybe six years, if you were to condense that time. But when we saw a couple years ago, we were, you know, we were making many projects along this because, you know, you can't do them all, you know, it's a very unstructured way of working. You know, we don't have a certain amount of shoot days. It's kind of a flow. We like these longitudinally. We shoot multiple projects at the same time. You know, and we're lucky because a lot of our worlds are in certain places. So, you know, it's one stop shopping in Florida. There's a lot of interesting people, a lot of colorful people that are are hitting some of these themes that we're exploring in different works. So I think it's we're able to kind of do that. But the duration, the duration's great because like, you know, sometimes constraints are, no, I think it's great in some ways because if you're able to kind of balance other, other work because, you know, holding out for access to a really important person might not happen in the first go around it, you know, year later or two years later. What is the common factor that you guys, is it fucked up people like that you guys are looking for when you decide what kind of documentaries you're making? Not just like it would that would be off a too superficial. Like, too many fucked up people out there. Shut up people in connection with wildlife is the theme of the big three that you've got. And people that have a story that's somewhere hidden in there. So we cast a wide fucking net like we film shark people and taxidermis and the guy that reads the most long-telling the cap monkeys from medical research where we got COVID from. We're filming so many different subcultures of animal people and other people. And then you sort of hone in on something. And so the monkey mom thing became chimp crazy, you know, and we started seeing a story there. So it's not like we just go out and just lock into something and there's a story. We have to kind of find it. And I would say this is not a good recipe for people that want to make documentaries. Like anyone starting out in life to try to make docs, don't do what we do because it's not a good way to get rich. And it takes forever. And you may never have a story. And so it's like, that's what I'm getting at. It's like, it's like, we got lucky that Joe exotic tried to kill Kellobask and where we were filming. We got lucky in a sense that and we got lucky in a sense that Tanya kidnapped a chimpanzee. This is not a recipe for success. You know, we film film film. We do a lot of shit that no one ever sees. Joe, exotic DMs me all the time on Instagram. I was still. He wants to get out. You know, there's a way maybe we can get him out by the way. I'll tell you. I'll tell you after this. You want him to get out? You know, the government made a deal with him before the trial. They said, well, give you can do six years or you're going to have a trial. Six years. He's been in jail now for nine years or whatever it's been. He would be out right now if he made that deal. He thought he was going to get off. And I was like, Joe, I was on the phone with them every day at the time from prison. I said, take the deal. I don't know. I'm not into throwing people in prison and throwing away the key forever. Time isn't jail too. You know, we're good at that. For perjury. I think she doesn't deserve to be never four years. You know, for perjury. Well, she didn't need to kidnap another chimp. We tried to help her, but she didn't. She was her own worst enemy. Anyway, she's a good people are obsessed. Yeah. I think also what attracts the crime element is the sentencing is low for wildlife trafficking. Wildlife crime. Well, did they really consider that when they're getting involved? Like, oh, no big deal. Only do four years. They really think of that way back to it. They keep doing it. Yeah, but I think that's because they're obsessed. They're trying not to get caught. Then I don't think they're looking at it and bouncing out the low sentence rate and going, yeah, this is a good thing to get involved in. I think that involves a whole crime. I think it's a risk factor that's considered and especially in the sense of life. I think most of them, I think most of them think they're going to get away with it or they're smarter than the feds. But they have this sort of, you know, worst thinking about if there was something to happen. It's eight months and a camp. Right. You know, there are a lot of them go to prison multiple times while we were filming the show. During the filming, we were shocked at one of the lead guys in our film. Was under investigation being indicted. He didn't tell us. And then finally, he said, guys, I'm going to prison. And we don't cover it in the show because it was just too much. But we were like, why you've been filming with us for two years and you're going to prison now. And then you finally got out of prison. We filmed them more and he's got an ankle brace. And he'd been prison five years before that around an eight years before that. So there's a lot of what was he going to prison for? This time for smuggling turtles that were going out to Asia. Three striped mud turtles that we're no longer bringing wildlife into buy and collect. It's actually coming out of our country into China. Really? Yeah. What stuff are we exporting to China? Well, there was a lot of it's Eric, the one recently that happened. I just took it. I just took it a confiscation three weeks ago. A 303 toad box turtles that come out of the central part of the US Oklahoma, Missouri. And two weeks later, a guy was busted coming into Mexico with turtles. And I took those turtles from US official wildlife service. So animals are coming into the country out of Mexico, you know, different countries. And then we're exporting now, which is new in the last 10 years. A lot of native turtles and reptiles and other wildlife to Southeast Asia and Europe. And how are they getting there? Mostly, it's mostly Eric cargo carry on this particular confiscation three weeks ago. They busted the guys with more box turtles in their in their luggage once they got to Hong Kong in China. Like I said, China, Taiwan, Malaysia, Jakarta, the reptile industry is enormous for now keeping them as exotic pets enormous. I mean, it's, you know, in Asia, like the bird world, the birds are called the cut flowers of the wildlife trade in Asia. Because like we might have a bouquet or a plant in our house, they have a bird cage in Southeast Asia. And there's something like some insane statistic about how many people have a bird in their house. And when you go to the bird markets in Jakarta, it's just surreal or in Thailand. There's one in Bangkok called Chata Chat Market. These huge, you know, animal markets, you know, we talk about where COVID came from, but the scale of these animal markets, you know, bush meat wildlife, it's on a scale that's beyond your imagination. So you're actually, what are they selling? They're selling reptiles, they're selling birds. No, no, these are for pets. Okay, birds are an ornamental in your house. You have a songbird. You have an owl, you have a whatever. You can't there are people that are so they just have like a wildlife mall. It's effectively like an enormous wildlife mall. And in that, within that mall, there's also seafood. And then there's the reptiles. And then there's the birds. It's like, messy. No wonder maybe COVID came from that. That is COVID. I didn't come from that. I don't know. I came from a fucking lab. I think you're maybe right. I have a friend, bless his heart. He's a good friend of mine. He said it was a sonotic disease. It didn't come from a lab. But now I'm beginning to think it might have come from. I think a lot of people were influenced to say that it was a natural spillover. Because they did want to admit that we were fucking around with gain of function research. I think the evidence now shows that they have pretty clearly. But also it seems like if you see these kind of lab, or excuse me, these markets, you would say, what does this right here, Jamie? The evidence now shows that it may have pretty clearly. But also it seems like if you see these kind of lab, or excuse me, these markets, you would say, what is this right here, Jamie? Chaudhocha. Which one is this? This is one of those markets in Jakarta. Oh, I've been to these markets in Jakarta. Yeah. And it's just a wildlife market. And so it's all pets. So what is it about Asia that has such a desire for animals? Those are the Harry Potter. Those are the Harry Potter elves. That footage is where it is. Like that is wealth. Same things in the US. That we're driving in the US. But it's also more common in Asia? Well, in China alone, there's over a billion people. So there's just more people. And the scale and the size of Asia and China is much bigger than the US and Europe combined. So they have a bigger market. And the climate's pretty good to keep exotic animals like Florida. It's like on steroids, the collectors in Asia. And why I think that the industry, the trafficking number, so underreported, is you have this. There's like one person, one person that is responsible for coordinating in the US, one person she's in Delaware, who's responsible for coordinating with US Fish and Wildlife to deal with these placements of confiscated wildlife. If they're able to even detect them, I think it was something like 10,000 animals in the last few years were coming through LAX. Basically the torrents, the border, and LAX. It's very- One little sample market. It's very understaffed, undermanned, to build a manage all the wildlife coming in and out of the country. There's not enough. Even with dogs and detection advancement, they're finding ways to get animals out. And then the sad truth is that they've been starved into hydrated or covering them as impossible. You've gotten lucky with rewilding animals back in New Jersey and stuff like that through a organization. But it's a harmful reality that it's actually still happening. We thought our stuff was happening. The percentage of wildlife that leaves the country, leaves the country, native wildlife to the US. It's 50% is kind of marine stuff, like coral, invertebrates, southern ocean. And the rest is mostly reptiles, mostly turtles. Mammals are very small. These days birds are very small. So for whatever reason, turtles and the US has the most out of any country in the world, we have more species of turtles and tortoises in any country in the world. We have 51 species in the US. Mexico, second. India, I think it's maybe third. Asia now really wants these turtles where you go up in New Jersey, another place is where we have these really cool turtles, spotted turtles, bog turtles, wood turtles, really beautiful colored eastern box turtles. Once they get to Asia, they're in the many thousands of dollars. The shipment that just went out that we received the confiscation from, it was about half a million dollars, just those turtles. Once they get to China. So it's big money and they use mules. And the people they got arrested or busted usually aren't the real ones that are organizing the whole thing. It's like drugs. Well, that's a good thing about this docuseries is that you guys are exposing this to people because I think most people would be completely unaware. No idea. Yeah. No idea. No idea where animals in the zoo came from. Is there an issue with people stealing eagles and trying to import them as pets? So raptors are really interesting. So that sector of the bird world, the bird world is so vast. There's the songbird people. There's the parent people, really high-end, highest-end of a cause that are so expensive. One highest-end of a cause like $60,000 to their 50,000 or whatever it is, 40,000. But raptors are increasingly popular in the Middle East. Golden eagles and all these really far out birds of prey. And in the US, we have really strict laws when it comes to birds of prey and owning them in falcory. Bobby Kennedy is a falconry guy. He loves falconry. But it's gotten more popular again around the world having big birds of prey. Because it's interesting. I have friends that live in Alaska. And Alaska eagles are really common. They're all over the place up there. They don't even think anything of them. Especially the guys who go salmon fishing, when they come back from salmon fishing, you literally have 30, 40 eagles just waiting on lawn for these boats to arrive. Because they know that they're going to throw the carcasses out. Bald eagles. Yeah. Snackgals. Yeah. I would imagine some people would want those as a pet. Especially in other countries. Yeah. In the US, only Native Americans can have like eagle parts, unless you have a permit, like its pretty hearts. Well, you know, like feathers for their addresses, like Native Americans can still do things with birds. If you have a stuffed eagle in your house, that's illegal. I think it's illegal. Did you ask those guys? Stuff you an eagle? Well, that would be interesting. Well, that's where we draw the lawns. By the way, I don't know if they actually have them, but we have this footage. I mean, imagine going in the confiscations for a metal ax. It's incredible. Oh, really? Yeah. It's incredible. You have like, you know, tiger, you know, just all this rare animal and transformed into so many objects at home. A table of rug, a pool cues. Well, I was reading about this that there was a place in China where people could go to eat endangered species. And they would have an endangered species menu. And they would have like a dinner every now and then, you know, like rarely. But it was by invitation only. And these like super weird, wealthy people would go out there. And they would eat a lot. If you're listening, invite us. We'd love to explore. It's funny. It's fucked up. You say that, but it's a big attack. It's funny you say that because we went to this big turtle show in China. And there's huge turtles who are like a car show. And there's girls like in Skippy outfits with banners, like a car show, but it's massive. And all these rare turtles are selling as pets. But then for lunch, they have these like dim sum tables that are around. And everyone's sort of turtle soup. And it's like how twisted is that? I feel like a reptile show in the US. And we've lots of reptiles shows in the US. And now at lunchtime, you're eating reptiles. Well, the eagle's China is a whole different thing. I think this is visibility products. You have this charismatic, symbolic thing. There's very, very few, a lot of protection around them. People want it. What are you talking about? Eagles? Just talking about what people want what they can have. That's the through line in this world. But eagle is especially for rarest eagles or like American alligators. They've bounced back since DDT and the book that what's her name did in this late 60s, 70s, Silent Spring. That was the book that really changed everything for eagles and birds of prey. It's a mirror. It's a third book. What was her name? Silent Spring, the author. She changed everything because no one listened to her about DDT and pesticides, which were making the eggs of birds of prey not viable. And they really took her. They took her. Yeah, Rachel Carson. Really took her. Rachel Carson was an unsung hero. People should know her name. And I forgot it for a minute. But she really is why you have bald eagles making that. What was it on the verge of extinction? Because of pesticides we were using because of DDT was doing this thing to the eggs where pelicans, birds of prey were disappearing at alarming rates because of spraying of DDT for agriculture for pesticides. And then we banned it and eagles and birds of prey came back. Yeah. Paragrins falcon's all of it. You bald eagles, gold nugels. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway. Yeah. Yeah. That's a weird animal, the bald eagle, that that's our pet. That's our national animal. Yeah. So it's strange. It's heartless raptor. It's a fishing eagle. Yeah. There are fishing eagles all over the world that are similar to bald eagles. It's a fishing eagle. That's what it is. It's just a such a cool one. Yeah. And there's something about watching them swing away with a salmon, their talons. Yeah. Well, I also photography's gotten so much better over there. It's right. I know they've probably had video or have a video. I mean, we live where we live. There was that eagle cab and there was a sick eagle bald eagle. And it became national. The California? Yeah, where we live. It became national news two weeks ago. Golden at bald eagle. Really? Yeah. And if you Google bald eagle, California, it's in the town we live in where they took it and they're bringing it back to help. But the amount of money that poured in to help that eagle was unbelievable. Wow. For this little place. Going back to how people care. It's remarkable. But people care more about eagles than had that been a turtle or a snake that was rescued. Well, that's the eagles America's bird. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, people have a tattooed on their back. Yeah. There's something about an eagle. It's just iconic. There's a lot of snake tattoos these days. But yeah. You're right. Yeah. But there's something about the eagle tattoos different. It's like America. But then the grizzly bear, such an adverse reaction, so controversial. They eat a lot of people. They've been there for a long way lately. There's a reason why the California state flag has a grizzly bear on it and there's no grizzly bears in California. We have a friend that's actually trying to bring it back. Good luck. We've been to this to you last time you were like, why or something? Let them naturally return. The reintroduction is always a disaster. The reintroduction of wolves in Colorado right now is a fucking disaster. Well, they're back. They've now migrated into California and they've been some wolves sightings, even down the South of the South of the South. Quite a few. A friend of mine filmed one. We showed it on the podcast to film one near Bakersfield. Exactly. A black wolf that was out in the field near Bakersfield. Yeah, they can go incredibly long distance. Reintroduction works in some places. It's getting better. I have a good friend that's reintroducing Jagoras back to Northern Argentina. They're doing a pretty good job. But yeah, it's tricky. You're like Condors. But it's a difference. In reintroducing animals to where there's agriculture and where there's a bunch of animals that are in pens and then they start eating them. No, don't do that. That's what Colorado's experiencing now. But I've worked with Ted Turner's group for many years in New Mexico and reintroduction programs and the guy that did the wolf rewilding of Grey Wolves is this guy named Mike Phillips, who works for Turner. And yeah, they have a real PR problem. You know, and Grizzlies are going to be a bigger PR problem. Yeah. And they're going to wrap their arms around that idea of bringing Grizzlies back to Calvary. Well, there's certain states where they're over-populated and there's a lot of argument that they should be re-listed and that people should be able to hunt them again like they do in Alaska. But the Native Americans in California do by and large want Grizzlies back and they have this new technology that might be able to keep them kind of in certain areas. It hasn't, they haven't figured out a full yet, but hopefully they keep them in a certain area. And I think that's a great idea of the way that I'm going to be in a Grizzlies migrating into LA like the wolves right now might not be a good idea. Well, you already have the mountain lions. There was a great video the other day. I don't know if you guys saw it of a mountain lion that goes backyard in Santa Monica. Yeah, that's not. Big cat. I have them in my backyard all the time. I think that's going to be divided by displacement from fires, right? It's also pets. We have to eat people's pets. Yeah. We have these heroes. We're talking about the Edomall the Tom. Yes. Jeremy, this woman down the street for me was walking her dog at three in the afternoon. The mountain lion grabbed her dog. She's literally on Ledera. She's walking her dog, a little dog. And the mountain lion just jumped and grabbed her. She's looking at the dog holding a leash and goes, I better let go of this leash. And she did. And she never saw a dog. I'm sort of saying this little particular suburban pocket of Santa Monica. It's not very common. Well, where I live, the Edomall. Some people say, because you don't see them. Where I live, the Edomall. The Edomall. We live the mountain lions or eating people's dogs from time to time. They do it all the time. We were talking about Marin County. I think it's Marin. Well, it's Bay Area, wherever it is, where they have these depredation tags, where they have to shoot problem mountain lions because they're eating pets. And they find out that that's half their diet. Half their diet is pets. Well, I see them on my cameras. They say, we have these motion detector cameras. We see them at three in the morning right in front of my house. I hear that fucker. I rarely see them with the bacon. They say that. That crazy. Well, you got one. You get to hit by a car and they build a bridge across the road. You know? It was kind of amazing. You've got a nice mountain lion in the lobby out there. That was from my friend Adam. He hunted that in Colorado. That was a depredation mountain lion. That mountain lion had picked a ranch and it was killing all the calves. They actually got to it right after it. It didn't even kill it. It was eating it while it was alive. And then they ran. They ran it off the dogs. They had to shoot this calf. It was just torn apart and still suffering alive. And then they killed it. Luckily where I am, we have a lot of deer. We find a deer carcass from time to time. That's a mountain lion kill. Oh, for sure. Yeah. But you know, back to our show, I wanted to just say one other thing about sort of the ending, which it was really fortuitous. I just want to bring it up even though you're not there yet. It's boiler alert. Well, it's not really this way. But I'll say this. I spent about 20 years working in Madagascar with some rare Madagascar. And I eventually, I was trying to save this tortoise in Madagascar. And I did a 60 minutes piece with Leslie Stahl, took her to Madagascar, a New Yorker piece on this tortoise. I failed. Everyone failed. The tortoise functionally went extinct in Madagascar. The poaching was so intense. And the tortoise had a very light. What is the pleasure of tortoise? A reptile that arguably has the most value in the pet trade over almost any other reptile in the world. Maybe something close, like a feed gel in the guan or maybe a commuted dragon. But it's, you know, some of them can be worth as much as 100 grand. And people in Madagascar are so poor in the, especially in the area where this animal comes from. And it only existed in a tiny part of northern Madagascar. That's it. So where are they going? Mostly to Asia. There's a direct flight out of Madagascar to Bangkok. And so, and their pets. Yeah. And some of those photos I mean. So is it possible to buy them in Asia and bring them back to Madagascar? Well, so this is where I'm going. Very hard to do that because of health screening. I took that photo over there with that little guy. I took some of these photos I even took actually. Oh, that's a guy that works for us. Anyway, I've been working with the species of tortoise for almost 20 years. And we were able to get some confiscated, plow your tortoises out of China and Taiwan. And we waited patiently for 15 years to try to breed them. And right when we finish this show, and this is a tortoise that's never been bred successfully in the Western world. No zoo institutions have tried to breed them and failed. We were lucky enough to get our first hatchling of this really endangered tortoise right when we finished the show. And so we filmed it and it made it into the end of the show. But it's a story about the reptile trade. And this was the story in the end of the show about a confiscated group of animals that came from the reptile trade, the rarest and most valuable tortoise in the world. And today we're trying to bring it back to Madagascar, which we're working on, which is happening as we talked to. And is the problem that if you bring them back to Madagascar, people are going to go to mascot and steal them again and then use them in the pet trade. So yes, to be blunt. And so it's somewhat symbolic at somewhat about showing Madagascar that we're not trying to profit and take their natural heritage and what they should have. So part of it is showing that we can go full circle, confiscate an animal that was in the illegal exotic reptile trade, breed it and then return it to Madagascar. But the part that no one wants to talk about that's really controversial is in this particular case, it's not like one thing fits all. I said this to the folks that are working with this tortoise in Madagascar to try to save it. Hey, the only way you're going to take pressure off of this tortoise is like drugs, is if you either legalize drugs or make this tortoise available for people around the world so they can have it. Because it breeds quite easily, breed them, try to have them in the private sector in institutions and zoos. They turn out not to be that difficult to breed, even though no one's ever bred them in the Western world in Europe or the US. Well, it takes a long time to reach maturity. Well, it's an animal that takes longer, twice as long as a human, or three times, they don't reach sexual maturity until they're about 30 years old, 40 years old. They can do it. You can raise them faster in captivity than the wild. So they are very slow to reproduce. They're not like rabbits, though the opposite. And they're so few of them. And so they're very, very, very, very valuable. The only way, ultimately, I think you can really take the pressure off to the poaching is to allow people to start to have them. That's a radiated tortoise, which we also bring. Oh, that is wild. The dremeline is a way to cure. So we, we, we, our organization is the group with D'oroll that did this dremeline to try to deface them like cutting off a rhino horn. So poachers wouldn't take them. So we were dremeling those tortoises shell to basically deface the tortoise. So poachers would not take the tortoises. It ultimately didn't work. So they're just taking them because they're beautiful. And if you fuck up their, their shell, they have the most. They have the highest dome shell of any tortoise in relation to the size. So they're wild. They have an incredible longevity well over 100 years. They live and they're gold. And so that dremeline that you did, that's, that's indicate that's the top of it right there. Yeah. Yeah. And that didn't help. We did that. You can see it over there. The center, that's called the vertebral scoots of the tortoise. And we dremeled them and we put MG for Madagascar and a number. And we were hoping that defacing the tortoise would make collectors not want to have them, but it didn't work in the end. Somebody told me, this is a good time to bring this up, that turtle shells, when you look at a turtle shell, it's almost representative of a calendar. And that there is around the outside edge of the turtle. There's like 28 different little squares. And then the center, there's 13. So it's basically like a 13 day, a 13 month, 28 day lunar calendar. Yeah. This is it. How weird is that? Yeah. That's really a junior calendar on a turtle's back. Yeah. You know, a lot of turtle facts. I did not know that one actually. I know that one. I know a lot of cultures like Asia and American Indians believe that the earth sits on a turtle. Yeah. Turtles all the way down. It's a turtle. Something's on. Yeah. I didn't know about that. That's interesting. Wow. And that weird. Yeah. That's interesting. Why? What is that all about? Like that's very strange that it coincides. It's like exact to what a lunar calendar is. Yeah. Very strange. Yeah. That's super interesting. I mean, turtles have been on planet Earth longer than dinosaurs. They've been here for over 200 million years. So they've been around a long time. So there's been people have been playing with turtles forever. So maybe they came up with a lot of things that relate to turtles. But it's odd that it syncs up with a 28 day lunar calendar. I know sports stadiums are in the beginning or things that were shaped like that. Like a geodesic dome came somewhat from the how turtles are designed. Like there was some architectural thing that came from turtles. Yeah. The geodesic like the structure of it to keep rigidity. Yeah. Yeah. And I know turtles, the first writing, the earliest writing was on the plaster on the bottom of a turtle shell in China. Maybe some of the earliest writing going back. Some really under a couple thousand years. So turtles have been used for all kinds of things for writing, for medicinal medicine, especially in Asia. It's gone back thousands of years using turtles for chi and for, you know, vitality and all these kinds of things. If you get sick, you make some turtles. There's a lot of weird stuff with that. There's a lot of stuff to do with the rhinol horn things. Yeah. The boners like, hey guys. Well, they really like, they really, they really put some flowers. Yeah. The aeroco bone script on the bottom of a turtle shell. Look at their cool that looks. Go back to that beautiful, right? Beautiful. 6,200 BC more than 6,600 to 6,200 BC. You know, go to the images again of the deriding on it. Look how cool that writing is. Oh, you love them. And this one's beautiful. Yeah. Right. That one's beautiful. That's wild. And I think it was some of the earliest writing was on turtle shells. Like, well, it sounds like it. If it's 6,000 BC, 6,000 BC, I mean, that's that predates ancient Babylonia, or at least what we know about it. So turtles have been used in wild Native American culture forever. Yeah. Yeah. Goodbye for a lot of extinction events. That's an oxygen. It's an, but an turtle shell. Yeah. Box scapula. I mean, there are turtle farms in China that you cannot believe. They're breeding these turtles, mostly Asian box turtles, Chinese box turtles. And these people are multi, multi millionaires. And they sell one turtle for as much as like $20,000. One turtle and the wild caught turtles are more valuable than the farm turtles. But there's turtle farms that are breeding. They're called a golden coin turtles. It's a Chinese Asian turtle that can fetch huge amounts of money. Why is the wild one worth more? It's like wild rhino horn is worth more because they think the wild rhino eats things that are medicinal versus just a captive rhino that's eating hay. And it's the stuff they eat that goes into the horn, which makes sense. Like your fingernail, it's keratin. So the wild rhino horn is going to have more good stuff for you. And of course, they'll probably grate some fire in it to make you really believe that it gives you a kind of erection. You know, they'll cheat. But no, it's does. No, so the wild one actually works. Well, they do grate the fire in the rhino horn sometimes. But the wild turtle is just eating things and has more cheese than the farm turtle, but they have these enormous turtle farms. Like, you know, 15 story buildings that are all turtles. Jim, I don't see this. So, wild turtle farms in China, China, so turtle farms. And this is all just for pets. No, this is for consumption. This is, you'll pay 20 grand. Now there's total. Limit 20 grand for consumption. For consumption, for like a golden coin turtle, if it's a wild one, like big money. They want to eat it. Yeah, but then in China, you can also pay $100,000 for a unon box turtle. A unon box turtle can be $100,000. So these are these turtle farms. Yeah, but this is all for like turtle soup. Yeah, but these are soft shell turtles in this image that you're looking at. I'm talking about things like golden coin turtles, much more valuable turtles for consumption than these soft shell. Why are they worth more? Is it just because it's rare? Oh, this guy. I know this guy. Garden State Turtle. I know that guy in New Jersey. He's a good guy, Chris Leon. Well, that's a golden coin turtle. So we breed these in where we are, where we work with turtles. And we send these back to China from time to time. But why explain the why's it worth $20,000? For whatever reason, this turtle is called a golden coin turtle. Cora Trifosciata is a scientific name. And it is very coveted and apparently it has certain properties that can cure cancer and other diseases. And so this turtle is high on the list for consumption for medicinal reasons. But rare. Allegedly can cure cancer. Right? Yeah. Is there any false beliefs? But you can see 20 grand, 40 grand. 20 grand is highest 40 grand for a fucking turtle. Yeah. But then to eat it. Yeah. But then there's turtles. You can be 100,000 or 200. So is it just because it's difficult to acquire that it's like a status thing? I that it's worth 20 or $40,000. Well, they're they're very rare in the wild now, but they farm them, but they're very endangered. It's critically endangered turtle. We breed them, you know, at my facility, but you know, there's a lot of people in China. And if you want to save someone's life, you'll pay whatever it takes to save someone. So when they're buying it for $20,000 or buying it to try to save someone's life or someone's sick or they really want good health and their wealthy. Okay. So you could just get it just as like a prophylactic turtle. You eat it from medicine to make sure you don't get sick. Something like that. Sounds insane though that it's $20,000 for a turtle. But if you look up Yunnan-Bokst turtle, it was thought to be extinct for 50 years and they rediscovered it and a Yunnan-Bokst turtle today. If you could even get one would be hundreds of thousands of dollars. Another turtle similar to that. And is it eating those two? No, that one's so rare. There's so few of them. That one is people buy it as an exotic pet that's really rare. So this is kind of a it's a tricky situation because on one hand, if they're extinct in the wild and these people have them as pets, maybe you can recover them somehow or another. Yeah. That's not that's an American boxer. That's not a word. They're in a zoo first. So that's why that's a turtle that's being shipped to that's a US turtle from the East Coast that's being sold and and smuggled the China and other parts of Asia. Because look how beautiful our turtles are in the US. God has a pretty turtle. Oh, you do have a photo of a Yunnan-Bokst turtle. It's just not the one there. That bland thing is a Yunnan-Bokst turtle. Do you want to love it? Yeah. The one that's kind of great. Right there. No, no, that's a three-tie-bokst turtle. That one. That one. That one. That one can be where that can be where 200 thousand dollars. Do you get it right? What? That turtle was thought to be extinct for over half a century. That's a boring ass turtle. That other one. Your training on now. Well, it don't get me down the turtle. Yeah, but that one where your cursor was just over the one. Yeah, that right. No, the one to the left. Yeah, the right of it. That one. Yeah, that one's cool. Yeah, that's a male Eastern boxer. They always have red eyes. Yeah, it's so beautiful. Yeah, it's beautiful. That's solutions to the scarcity problem. That's a male Eastern boxer. You're describing, you know, Pat, Pat trade can commercializing aspects of it can reduce what's important about this conversation actually is people think of ivory, rhino horn, you know, whales. And they have no idea that a turtle pound for pound could be more valuable than a rhino horn possibly. I had no idea. Nobody knows this, but it's crazy what the money involved in these back to the, you know, because the infestations were getting and the trade in turtles going out of this country is in the millions and millions and millions and millions. And there are people in China and other parts of Asia that are getting very rich in the turtle trade. And we always think here about pangolin scales, rhino horn, you know, ivory and those things are important, but the turtle trade is really massive. And the reptile trade is massive. And there's a lot of money in it. And they're easy to transport because a turtle doesn't need to eat or drink. Just wrap them and socks, put them in a box, shove them all in there, put them in diapers, tape them up, ship them. They don't even need much air. They feel a little air, but they have a very low blood pressure, not like we have a higher blood pressure than reptiles. And they can live without water or food, as you know, for a very long time. So they're, you know, like wildlife nature with handles, you can just transport them transport them. And if they're really worth $20,000 to $40,000 to $40,000 in your bag. Yeah. And they really are. That is crazy. I would have never guessed. And I would never guess that it's for consumption. That's even more. Well, no, the turtles that are leaving this country going to China are for exproducts, for exotic pets. But the ones that are eating. Yeah, the ones that are. Yeah. Yeah. That it's worth $20,000. That's the same. Yeah. Yeah. At least. Is there a market for snake meat? Yeah. So if you've been to Taiwan or China, there's these snake bars where you can literally have a snake bleed out while it's alive, a cobra and put it in your drink. There's snakes. There's a snake. You want to talk about diarrhea. Yeah. Look at a diary. You get a snake blood. I was many years ago. Oh my god. I was in Myanmar and Burma at a snake place and they were just loading snakes up in these trucks like, you know, big trucks, just stacking snakes and they were heading into China. So the snake meat, the snake. Snake meat is big in China. Look, tiger penis, tiger, this tiger bones. Tiger up tiger, tiger parts. That's a tiger penis. Tiger penis. Tiger penis is a big delk seal over there. I think there, you know, there were more creative than we are. They eat a lot of stuff. That's a fact. Okay. But the tiger penis thing I was not aware of. That's a adult. I don't know what that does for you. Maybe that's another Viagra kind of thing. You know, there's tiger farms and they part them out and they sell into China. So there's tiger farms that are just for consumption. Yeah, tiger bone wine, tiger this, tiger bone wine. Sounds like it's for them. You know, but tigers, watch Amy. It's like a rhino horn type deal. I think they've given them. Right. Yeah. Believe to increase virility in enhanced male sexual performance. Dot, dot, dot. Tiger fallas. One tiger penis. But a turtle is worth more than a tiger guy. That's crazy. And but I didn't know that there was a market for tiger meat. And is it the all the meat of the tiger or just dicks? It's just some chop away the right. Joe, I've been to the turtle farms. I've been to the snake bars. I haven't gotten into the tiger penis. The future of Chinese medicine. Hey, is it guys doing a workshop? You should go to this workshop. What is this guy teaching? Yeah, he's on run right now. So don't get me started to talk about animal penises. My favorite movie is a kid was a movie called Birds Do At Beast. Do I don't even know if it still exists? But all it was was animals having sex from a praying man as like eating the hat off of the mail to a rhino. And it was a great move. But I don't even know if it still exists. But all it was was animals having sex from a praying maness, like eating the hat off of the mail to a rhino. And it was a great movie. Just sex. I did not know that there was a market for the meat. I don't know. What is that? Tiger dick? I would have thought it was like crazy looking. That looks like a nudibranch, a sea slope. It looks like a piece of sushi. I have left for that. That's what it is. No, it looks like a piece of sushi. It looks like it's a trick. It's a trick. It looks like something you get at sushi by scratch. So when they're having these tiger farms or they're farming the meat, how are they cooking tiger meat? Like what does it go into? Well, they said, is that really common over there? Even though I did tiger king, I'm not an expert on tigers. I do know a little bit more about reptiles. But I have a friend that did a movie called, I think it's called, what's it called, Carl Amand did a movie about the tiger industry in Vietnam and Cambodia and farming tigers. And I think it's called, oh God, I can't remember. But anyway, there's a whole tiger industry and people breeding tigers in parts of Asia for tiger parts. It's still illegal, but they definitely still do it. Yeah, it's not like that. Interesting. Consumption tiger meat is highly illegal, though an illicit black market persists, primarily fueled by commercial tiger farms. Despite strict domestic bans, thousands of tigers are bred in captivity across the country creating a complex web of illegal luxury consumption is a crazy word. That's a crazy phrase, luxury consumption of tiger meat, traditional beliefs and international conservation concerns. Well, it's what you just said earlier that started this conversation that people go to restaurants and eat exotic animals and bear gallbladder. Bear gallbladder, that's another thing that way, back to monsters that God look up Chinese giant salamander farms. Those are unbelievable. That's a salamander, this big that can eat, like a rat or a rabbit. It's a salamander that they eat in farming China. I've seen that online, I've seen them cook it. And that's a TikTok video. And that's a really rare animal. Those guys are really rare. So, oh really? And yet they're still cooking them and eating them? There's two types of giant salamanders. There's a Japanese giant salamander and a Chinese one. The Chinese one is massive. Can I see that? It's massive. And they're just- It's like the one I stumbled down that says it's AI. So it's incredible animal. It's an incredible animal. But they farm a lot of things that you would never think of. Yeah, turtles, salamanders. I just- The luxury consumption market, just seeing that phrase. It's like, what a weird culture. You have luxury consumption of highly illegal endangered species. And that's, well that was what a friend of mine who had been to China said that was what the whole rhino horn thing was. It wasn't even as much as they believed that it would do it. It was just that this guy had rhino horn. It's a status symbol. Very wealthy people. Guys got to rot. You want some rhino horn tea? Let's have a seat. Look at gentlemen. Come to buy wine cellar and in it, I got some rhino horn. I got a couple turtles that- That's good. What's difference between that and rare wine from 50 years ago? Well, first of all, an animal that I just wine. Yeah, you don't have tiger dick in your wine. What is the tiger bone wine? What is that about? I said wine, they soak in bones of tigers. Sure, it's a barrel. Is that what it is? I mean, they have sockey with vipers in them. There's a snake in Japan called a haboo. And I remember getting sockey in this really incredible snake was in my sockey. But, you know, like, look, we're hypocrites in this country. We eat tuna and they're endangered in Asia. They eat other things that are endangered. Yeah, and endangered? Well, certain species of tuna, I think are becoming pretty endangered. They're not what they were. They certainly don't, not the same numbers that they used to be at the turn of the century. Yeah, yeah. So I think it's easy to point fingers at other parts of the world when we've done a lot of things here. We had passenger pigeons that made the skies dark, and we shot every one of them. We had Carolina Parakeet. We almost got rid of our condors and bison. We've done a lot of damage, but there's a lot of damage to you and me. We should say people. People that lived here, it's not us. Well, why is our show called Monsters Are God? We're the Monsters, out the reptiles. We did a lot of damage. In the past, I'm just saying some of us. Some of us, yeah. It's a very small percentage of people. They're out there eating turtles. Well, you're a good guy, and I know that actually. Somehow, you didn't have that maybe the mother I had, but you must have had something good. But with that, my love of animals? Yeah, you got a good moral compass I've watched you. You know what's right and wrong. Well, certainly, eating tire deck. I think this is a better ways to go by your life. But the recovery stuff is real. There's a lot of cool stuff happening with species recovery. And in this case, the plough shirt tortoise is on its way back. I mean, you have to kind of still protect it for a while. That's expensive. That's expensive. You know, anti-poaching and security. It's a lot of work. I agree that it's important. But I am also fascinated by our desire to sort of manage nature. Because 90, whatever percent of any animal that's ever been alive ever has done, they're all extinct. Everything goes extinct. And a lot of our good intentions managing nature doesn't work often times. Oh, no. Do a terrible job. Yeah. Especially when we bring in Adam, we were talking about this yesterday with Hawaii. They brought in mongus to eat the rats. But mongus are dine. Dine all rats from our turtle. We know it's like each other. Yeah, Hawaii, it's funny you say Hawaii is kind of the poster child of all the states in the country of extinction. Second is California. But Hawaii really fucked up Hawaii with cats. Mongus is, we're more in the Caribbean, but also Hawaii. And mongus is Hawaii back to the Jamaican iguana. The Jamaican iguana was extinct. We thought it was extinct because of mongus. We've just recently found a small population, but it's a very rare iguana. Reading a very similar thing happened with the salamanders in China. They were not originally thought of as anything special until the mid 20th century when famine for people to find new stuff to eat, they started eating them and liked it. So they made it a lot of places to do that. Oh, and that's what led them to. Well, so that they were going to do some swimming back into the wild, because there were too many of them, which created a new problem. It says, there you go. They created a new species. So now you have hybrid salamanders, which is also like what we have that here in Austin. Oh, yeah. But it's the same story over and over again. What did these fuckers look at? Look at giant photos of giant salamanders. They are so massive. They're so massive. So size that thing. There's a bunch of videos of guys cooking them in walks outdoors. And so is that another thing where it's like one of those exotic things that you're not supposed to have? And that's why they're cooking it? Yeah. Because it looks like there's a funny one where dude singing. He's like wrapping over it. The guy's cooking it about a guy cooking a dragon. Is that how you cook a dragon? Yeah. Yeah. They're pretty impressive. But here's a weird desire that people have to eat something like incredibly exotic and rare. Whoa, look at that sucker. Yeah, that's a real one. Giant salamander cooked eight ways. And the, I don't know what that word is, giman, giman seafood china. You know, that was one creature we wanted to film and I never got to film for monsters a god because that also is a monster of god. So these guys are taking them. They're alive and they're going to bring them over and kill them and cook them. So this is an endangered animal that this guy's killing and cooking. Yeah. Wow. That's crazy. But they sort of know it. It's not by necessity. They know it's endangered. Yeah. And he's still boiling it up. So it's the fact that this luxury item that you get to eat this luxury item, looks like looks like it. And kind of crazy. A lot of meat looks delicious. Yeah. Would you eat it if you were there or would you feel bad? I don't, I wouldn't eat it, but I've been sort of there though. It's already dead. I've been in Southeast Asia with friends that ate dog, you know, and I just couldn't eat it, but I'm not very adventurous. I can't, I would only have the only way I eat it dogs if I try to bite one of my kids. You know, but if it's like dogs, it's different. But you know, we cattle in India, they don't eat cows and then other places eat horses and then they eat dogs. Sure. We have our own, yep, you know, sort of cultural norms about certain animals that we just can't wrap or have out of these. And the ways we just have fun with dogs being killed in Sulawesi by in huge numbers in Indonesia, just the way they kill them and then take these blow torches and burn the air off of them. And people buy them just like you're in a regular grocery store. The way they, you know, and it's just what's normal in one culture, those are snapping turtles, American snapping turtles. What's normal in one culture? So have these been imported into Asia? Yeah, they're big. And we still eat those by the way, in Norlians and the Southeast, we eat snapping turtles. I mean, we eat that we eat them in gumbo, but in Asia, they really love our American turtles. And snapping turtles are not endangered in America. No, but alligators snapping turtles are, well, those things are crazy looking. Yeah. And they have this, which you have in Texas or in the ocean. It's in, it's in, they're what? They're, they're an ambush predator. They have a little appendage on their top. Oh, the fishes are trying to get to them. Feeding is incredible. They got alligators. They're serving up alligators. Crocs. Crocs. Crocs. Crocs. Yeah, Crocs. Jesus Christ. Imagine just hanging out there, watching his buddies get butchered. You're good at finding gruesome stuff over there. I mean, a lot of them. You're going to really, there's a lot of them. It goes out a lot of people. So you know, you see you guys have a bunch of projects always kind of in the works. How do you go about choosing them? You just like find these very bizarre people and these very bizarre niche groups. And I think, you know, listen, I'm more aware of time as I got a whole there. So you got to choose carefully what you want to do because it takes time to make these projects. So you know, a lot of them, we hope there's some silver lining or something. We're positive about telling these stories and not just frivolous stories about freaky people. You know, but it helps to have some freaky people in a story to make people interested sometimes. But that's not the real goal. We're also doing projects. I have nothing to do with wildlife. You know, I did a documentary in the last 10 years about my mom and my parents. And you know, I don't know if anyone will ever see that and they both died. But I did that to keep them relevant. I had a crazy family, a gay father and a crazy mother who was into animals. And so, you know, everyone has a crazy family. But we did a story that we're working on about New York. And we're also doing some other animal stories. So not everything gets to see a light of day. Right. But these last three big ones that you guys did are all about people and their bizarre relationship with strange animals. Yeah. What else is next? I mean, we're doing a really interesting project right now that should come out next year, though. I think you'll like Joe. I have to say there are big carnivores in it again. And some really far out people that you know, and you may have known personally. I don't think I can tell you who they are, but they were very famous. And some of them. Anyway, but we're doing a project about that. And we're doing what it's. What it's. You are. I know. That was. Coffee. Yeah. Yeah. And then we're really interested in a few other topics that people don't really talk about. We always talk about the charismatic megafauna. And we're interested in some other groups of animals that we don't even think about. It's also I mean, this time we live in media. You know, there's so much stuff that gets made that no one sees. And it's a shame, especially, you know, some of this independent work, especially some of this documentary work. It takes many, many, many years. And many people are only really able to show to the people that know about the issues. And nothing happens, especially there's an impact aspect to it. So I think our formula is great. It happens to be, you know, these subcultures that are have a higher propensity of finding crazy people or people with far out beliefs more than anything. It's more beliefs that are more interesting that make us curious. So I think that's the sort of mixture of conservation storytelling plus far out beliefs. You know, in a niche that are able to zoom out and talk about themes of extinction or attachment or ego or crime, you know, maybe there's something to the overfishing thing to do. Because there's been a lot of time issue. It's a huge issue. There's been a lot done on it. But I think there hasn't been a doc on overfishing that's the spirit. The problem with a lot of those traditional documentaries, they tend to preach to the tennis boring. Well, they tend to preach to the converted not to unconverted. And you want to reach a bigger audience by somehow telling that story about overfishing in a way where you can get more people seeing it. They don't know the issue. And the other thing I would just say, overfishing is a big deal invertive. It's insects butterflies. And what's happening with insects is a big deal. We're losing a lot of really weird insects. And they haven't even been described yet. Marine fresh and even tropical fish is really interesting to us where to all the saltwater tropical fish come from. How do you get them? They dynamite the reefs in the Philippines. They don't breed easily. Saltwater tropical fish. Freshwater ones typically do. There's a lot of different groups of animals that we don't really think about and talk about that we kind of take for granted. And we think of them as disposable. We'll just put more tropical fish in our aquarium in a Vegas hotel. And imagining the extinction businesses are going to solve our problems. I think that's also interesting to us. It's just not a consciousness or smaller vertebrates and invertebrates. But I would just say one other thing that I think we do, you probably are aware of, that people think you have to be in a city to get the weird shit going on New York City, LA, whatever big cities. And what I've found is oftentimes is the places that you least expect it. Some weird, suburban landscape where you start turning over the rocks and you find and see that there's weirdness happening everywhere. And that is a theme in our stories. It's not gravitating to the big cities to find it. It's places where the guy next door to you, next door where you live, has a garage full of hot snakes and the cobra escapes one day and it's in your yard or whatever the fuck the story is. But it often is in places that you wouldn't expect it to be. Your friends, the carport. Yeah. Yeah. Well, listen guys, thank you again for being here. I really appreciate it. Thanks for all the work that you guys put in. You've really entertained the shit out of me over the years. And disturbed me as well. So it's available, monsters of God on when is it come out tomorrow? Tomorrow. So when this comes out, August 6th, August 6th. All right. Beautiful. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Bye, buddy.