Joe Roman Fong. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. Mike Maxwell. It's having a Joe Rogan. My man. Good to see you. It's good to be here for anybody who doesn't know. Mike Maxwell is an amazing artist and did not just that painting with Quentin Tarantino in front of it, which is pretty fucking cool. But also the JRE logo. Yeah. And then it's a go-go. Yeah. That was funny. How many years ago was that? Like 15 fucking years ago? Yeah. It has to be. I think you were on episode 10, maybe. Yeah. That's crazy. Yeah. And super fucking random, too. Like I get the question all the time. Like how the fuck did you do that? And for me, my whole art experience has just been like, make the work. And whatever the fuck happens afterwards is just all bonus. Well, if the work is great, that works. You know? It's like, yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah. You have to be discovered. Someone has to find you. But yeah, ultimately it's about talent. Yeah. And hard work, too. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Because that talent really doesn't kind of like artists so often or like people like, I wish I could draw. Like you're so lucky. Like God given talent. I'm like, bitch, I had to fucking work every day and have been grinding at this for 25, 26 years. There's no God given talent with art. There's some people have an openness or maybe an ability to see things differently than others. But when it comes to the actual technique and developing that fine hand eye coordination and the ability to draw exactly what you're looking for, that's work. That's work. Yeah, nothing came easy. Like I feel like there's some artist and like some creative people who, they have some like inert talent that's in there somewhere or it's like we have the right brain chemistry to like get started. But like I'm still improving. 20, 25, 26 years in, I'm still recognizing improvements. Yeah, I thought that particular one that we just posted a picture of. That was like one of your best ones. Yeah. That is fucking amazing. Well, I totally did like I probably put more time and effort into that piece than anything that made previously. Look at that thing. That is so sick. That is so sick. And it's like that is this show. Yeah, right. And what's funny, like that piece was really like, all the components were just separate drawings that I had been like compiling. Oh wow. And then it like eventually just kind of formed itself. Like sometimes I just let the work do what it needs to do. Sometimes it's almost like I feel disconnected from it. Yeah. And I had like there gets to a point after like all the like prep work where it's like the painting starts to paint itself. Like it tells me what it wants. Yeah. It's very strange. Like there'll be a moment where it's like I could feel something's not right. And then like I can't consciously think of, okay, well I need to do A, B, and C. But it's kind of like I sit and wait and something tells me. It's so crazy that you say it that way because so many people including authors in particular, they talk about the exact same kind of process. It's like something just comes to you. Yeah. I've done a little bit of writing and I've recognized that in writing too where like I'm telling a story. And then all of a sudden it's like the characters come to life. Yeah. And they start to dictate what's actually gonna happen. Yeah. Like it writes itself eventually. But you have to do all that beginning work. Like the prep work. Like you have to get the idea going. And then once you're a certain like path in, like it starts to, it starts to communicate with you. I always wondered why that's maybe that's why Stephen King wrote his best work when he was coaked up and drunk because he was out of his head. Yeah, I think he could get away from his own head. Yeah. I know that sounds ridiculous. Especially to sober people. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like they don't want to admit that there's a net positive effect of some people with drugs and writing. Hunter S. Thompson is a giant example. Yeah. He's one of my favorite authors. And it's a giant example. The guy was an inveterate drug user. Yeah. He was a fucking complete maniac. He was always drunk. And he wrote some shit that just to this day cuts to the core of our society. Yeah. He was one of my all time heroes. Like I started reading him when I was in high school. They've read almost everything, I think. I even like to hate rubes stuff. Yeah. Like a lot of people are like, like he was in his decline. But I remember when that was coming at like pretty early internet, right? Like no social media. But those little articles would pop up. And I still enjoy it. Like I love everything that he made. Well, he at the end was gone. He was really gone. And McCumber, so David McCumber, who is his editor, who also co-wrote a book with my friend Tony Anna Goney, that's one of the great pool books. It's called Playing Off the Rail. It's a really, if for anybody who's a fan of pool, the game, it's an amazing book about a guy who's named Tony Anna Goney, who was a world class player, who went on the road with a journalist and just gambled across the country. Yeah. And did it like a real pool hustler would in the most dangerous, dingiest places playing against high level guys for $10,000 sets. And 24-hour joints in New York City, it's an amazing book. When McCumber was Hunter's editor, too, a great point in time. And McCumber got him towards the end. Like there's video of, sitting in a five video of 100 Thompson and David McCumber having a conversation. Because Hunter was just- He must have been a fucking nightmare. Nightmare. Never got his stuff in on time. He famously would destroy the fax machine. Because he was supposed to fax his pages to Rolling Stone. I love that video when he's in the Rolling Stone's office. And John Winner is like, looks like the whole building is going to fucking burn down. Just panic. I mean, just try to imagine controlling a guy like that. He can't control himself, but out of that, sometimes something that no one else is capable of writing comes through. Yeah. And it was much less so at the end. It got away from him at the end, which it's going to do that. Cocaine and alcohol. You know, it's on the stage. At that level for that long. It's on sustainable. Everybody I know that has done a lot of Coke. At the end, there are a mess. It's neurological conditions. All sorts of weird shit happens. Yeah, you can't fry your brain. Are you frying? And these guys fry it. Well, it's the deficiency afterwards, right? So you've used up all the available dopamine that you have in your brain. And it's just like, well, fuck it. I had a friend who was a crack addict, who was also friends with my friend who ran a pool hall, but also was involved in recovery and was involved in helping people with recovery. So he was an astro effect? Well, he was helping people that were getting sober. And he wasn't trying to help my friend Johnny. My friend Johnny didn't want to help. He was like, fuck your help. I'm smoking crack. And he was explaining to me the whole dopamine thing. The dopamine and serotonin receptors just get cooked. And then you're so depressed that you need it just to feel normal. Yeah, you're always at a below baseline. Right. I kind of feel like I fall into that little category a little bit to where it's like, I'm just below baseline normal. And like a couple, like I don't get super excited for shit. But it'll be like something that I'm looking forward to will kind of just get me to baseline, right around normal. And I sometimes wondered like I used to do a lot of LSD when I was teenagers. And I wonder if I define a lot. I mean, we had we had one summer that me and my boys, it was like every two days, every like, you know, twice a week. How old? Yeah. 16. Oh, yeah. But also at the same time, maybe that has had some power in the sort of creative aspect too. Right. Even if it's just like looking at the world differently, which is just so common with psychedelics. Right. Just kind of gives you some perspective that's so far removed from our normal day to day reality. Right. Right. So it's like, I think for me, it's like, what more am I not seeing, you know, like what am I missing in my normal reality that maybe exists. But it could be total bullshit. Like, I don't know. It might not have done anything from my creativity. But you know, it seems to have a profound effect on a lot of people that have experiences and just they'll talk about like this one like, didn't Steve Jobs talk about it? One else LSD experience and just kind of shifted the way thought about things. Oh, here it is. It does tiny shorts. That's great. This is the document. The crazy network. Walk around with a gun. Can't even understand them. People really have to read it off to us. And they don't work for you. They're like, what's these? Do you know what are these things? They're just kind of turning up person. What do you want to do? I'm just going to do. No, I'm just going to go away. I made some little cab. We've got time. We're going to get serious limits here. You've been throwing me everything. Seable can I make you dirty. It's not. You've dirty stupid bastard. I've had a hole in the fist. He's bringing me an answer. We were an hour away from producing the first edition. I don't. I guess we'll get a good. I'll get a good computer. I'm a computer. I'll get a computer. I wonder what year this was. This came out in 88. It's probably like 87. When did people first start having computers? When did you have your first computer, Jay? You were young. I was later than that. I had like Windows, I think, was our first one. What year? Like 95? No. We had to do whatever Windows was before that. 3.8 or whatever it was. Whatever it was. What was Windows 95 came out? That's a big day. It was a big day. I remember. I do stuff. I got a mobile computer from CompUSA in 1994. Yeah, I think I was right around like 97. Big ass fucking thing too. But my friend Robbie knew what to buy. My friend Robbie, either he worked in computers or his brother worked in computers. So he took me to CompUSA. I had no idea. I'm like, what is this? My mom, she worked in a computer lab at the community college in San Diego. And she was like one of the first to start using Apple products. Everything was PC in this spot. And she knew something was getting ready to pop off. And she had the first iPhone, like early, like those fucking apples that, you know, it looked like a TV from the 80s. Just weighed 600 pounds. And actually got into graphic design early. And that's kind of how I started doing some, because I made art my whole life. But started doing some design, like learning how to actually use the fucking computer. And now, like I learned. I learned. And I was available back then. Photoshop and Illustrator were out, but it was like one and two. Wow. Yeah. And she was in there and taught me how to do it. And then like I still do graphic design, but it's like I still use the techniques from like 1999. It kind of shows you that there's a lot of like untapped comedic talent in the tech industry. Because memes were one of the first forms of new comedy that hit the internet. And it had to be by someone who knew how to work the old school photoshops. Yeah. So you had to have some technical understanding of the programs. You had to view it was probably people that were using them already. You know, they were graphic artists. And they were like, fuck this guy. Let's make a funny meme. Yeah. Before that, you had to do everything by hand. Yeah. It would be a lot of like cut and paste and like, yeah. And like different techniques. It was everything was by hand. When did memes like really funny memes first start appearing? I had to feel like it has to be like 2,000. 99, 2000. The internet meme. Oh, there we go. The internet meme. Oh, there we go. It was a concept 1972. Right. But internet. That was that book that he had, right. The selfish gene. What was it? Wasn't it in that? That dancing baby was coming up. Yeah. That's that I feel like that's the earliest. The dancing baby was the first. Yeah. From like a TV show. Oh, yeah. A terrible animated dancing baby. What year was that? Bro, that's the nightmaris. If you're in the woods, you see a dancing baby. It looks like that. The uncanny valley dancing baby. What the fuck. That would be so scary. Imagine if you soon had to punch it. You would have to punch it. Bro, you'd have to run. If you kick it, it grabs a hold of you and bites you like a woman. Yeah, but if it runs like fucking a hundred miles an hour. Oh, you're going to find out. At least you'll find out. Actually, if you run it's worse because then you're tired of it's probably right there. Watch you. You're just trying to catch your breath. Yeah. You see a little face behind your chest. A little face behind your chest. No, no, no. It stays just far enough from you that you think you have to run. If it's really trying to scare you, it doesn't want to jump on you. And once it gets really close for a long time, for a long time. So where's everything out? You want to wear it out. Like that's how you do it if you're chasing a person. You don't just run a bottom. That just spoils all the fun. Isn't that like the old school hunters too? Just like chasing a pack of deer for. Oh, yeah. That's why human beings can run so long. But that's a different thing. They're overheating them. That's called persistent hunting. Yeah. That's why there's so many amazing marathon runners come from that part of the world. Because like these guys have a history of literally running animals to their death. Right. Who had to figure that out too? Who's like, well, I got five miles in me. Yeah, let me just shit. I need 10. Let me just keep running until this deer stops running. Like how would you ever think that a deer you would eventually catch it? Yeah, especially if they're so fucking fast. They're so fucking fast. Like how would you think that one day that antelope was going to get tired? Like how would you have it in your head? Yeah. That it couldn't just take a break. It's going to be 300 yards ahead of you like that. They didn't even know the issue is the animals don't have sweat glands. So they overheat. Shit. Yeah. So we have sweat glands. And of course they weren't biologists. They also didn't know that either. Well that's why we're so weird, we're such a weird animal. And then our bodies really can kind of adapt to different climates and they self cool and regulate. Like some animals if they're outside of their climate range, they're fucked. Like they're in deep shit. you know, like Marshall over here. We're already buddy. Oh, oh, he's right here, he's right beside me. We have to, you know, if we're gonna exercise in Texas, we have to do it in the morning. Right. Or we have to jump at the pool. Cause you know, his body's adapted for cold. He's got this crazy wool coat anywhere that's over working with those. Yeah. It sucks. But for us, man, we can, we sweat. And they figured out, I guess, a long time ago, that these animals, if you just keep running after them, eventually they just can't do it anymore. And then they lay down and then you fucking stab them. Yeah, it's so fucking wild. But it made insane runners. Yeah, the only way you're gonna feed your children is if you run after that deer bro, you're gonna become a fucking runner. And now the evolutionary process is like, you go to the Olympics. Yeah. Yeah. Have you like this on the cover of Wedi's? It is, it really is interesting. Cause like that's before I started doing Jiu Jitsu, like that was what I was doing. I was running. But it just got fucking boring. Yeah. We got boring. And that's when I was like, okay, I gotta find something else. Cause yeah, that's what most people the problem they have with the gym. And Jiu Jitsu is the opposite of boring. Jiu Jitsu is, it's one of the most rewarding things in life. Because it's super hard to do. It's really good for your head. Like Jiu Jitsu people in general, like you get dickheads and all walks of life. Sure. And female dickheads do. But for lack of a better word. But you, you get the nicest people. Like for the most part, you get people of character. Yeah. Because you have to have character to stick it out. Yeah. To be doing Jiu Jitsu, if you've been doing Jiu Jitsu eight years, I can 99% sure I can hang out with you. Yeah. Like you're a dude who's gotta shit together. It's almost like we're like distant family members or something. 100%. Yeah. 100%. You recognize you've been through this thing. Yeah. And I started doing Jiu Jitsu in 96. So 96, those are Carlson Grace plays. I was 29, 29. Yeah. I started at 30. Yeah. I was like, Ramas. Yeah. Around the same time. And I started right after, it was kind of like a year or two after I first saw the UFC. You know, it was right around that time. Yeah. And so I started at Carlson Grace's place in LA that was right down the street from the comedy store. It was real close to the comedy store. And that was when Vitor Belfort was, he had just fought John Hess in Hawaii. Yeah. It was about to enter the UFC. And that was that first crew in California from Brazil too. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And we're in a little boost to Monte. You know, there was a whole ton of these guys that came from Brazil. I think Madero's was there too. Mario's Barry was there. I got to train with Mario's Barry dude when I was a white belt. That's why. I didn't have no idea who the fuck I was, because I wasn't anybody. I wasn't famous at all. Yeah. And he was the fucking nicest guy in the world, man. Yeah. He's, he, he, he, he, he, he, he explored Mario's Barry explaining to us how he got his triangle really good. He would make his girlfriend sitting his guard and he would just try and go, she would complain to Blake. Stop. Stop. Just let me do this. Let me, let me use your body to practice your triangles. I mean, because that's what it takes. It's kind of hard to do by yourself. I have a dummy, but I don't use it. I have one of them. I used to have a Gracie dummy back home in LA. Yeah. Every gym has one that just sits in the corner and nobody. You really want to do it with people. Yeah. So just, you know, the difference between the rolling and the drilling, the people that get really good, they put the, the shitty work in, you know, the long drilling sessions that boring ass shit. Yeah. You have to. Yeah. Because I teach now and like, what belt do you know? I'm a black belt. Oh, snap son. I met you. What were you? I was probably a purple belt. How did we meet shit? I don't even remember how we met because it was so long ago. Well, it's like, yeah, like I get, I get the question. I can't even answer that question. That's funny. Well, I, so my sister worked at the comedy store in La Hoya as a waitress. She's a, she's a nurse now. And you were doing a show at somewhere downtown at like the Balboa theater. Probably maybe. Yeah. And it was sold out. And I just hit her up and was like, hey, do you think you can give me tickets? Uh, because she knew everybody from the store in La Hoya. And Ari ended up getting a pair of tickets for me. And so I went to the show. Whatever. Whatever. No Ari already. My sister was friends. Oh, okay. Um, yeah, I didn't know anybody yet. And, uh, maybe two weeks later, she hits me up and was like, hey, can you do a poster for our marquee for it was Ari, um, Tony Hinchcliffe. And I think it was supposed to be Duncan Trousell, but maybe it was Duncan. But regardless, um, and from what I remember, you must have seen that poster at some point. That makes sense. Yeah, that makes sense. And then we did the, we did the Atlanta 420 show. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I feel like I met you before because I popped in on one of those, uh, those ice house chronicles from back in the day. Oh, those were fun. Look at that one, man. What a great one. Yeah, that was the 420 show. So that was 2012. Goddamn time flies. Yeah. And so that ended up becoming the, the graphic for the logo. We had the microphone. It's perfect. Duncan with the little hit acid on his tongue. Uh, it's the perfect logo. I mean, you fucking nailed it. Now it's everywhere. That's gotta be weird. It's, it's fucking strange. Um, it's like, almost like disconnected from it. Yeah. Like, like, of course it's grown. It's like it's, it's own thing. But every time I see it, like, I, like, I drew that by hand. Like I have the ink drawings. Phil, that's crazy. Yeah. It's pretty fucking wild. I, you know, I put stuff out into the world all the time. I have thousands of paintings, thousands of different fucking places. But I mean, more people see this image than guaranteed all the other ones. Well, more people see that image than anything else I've ever done. Yeah. That image is everywhere. Yeah. It's pretty wild. What a fucking weird trip, right? I mean, you, I, I went to the show on Tuesday and you were doing the, like, Q&A at the end. And somebody had asked you about, like, what your goals are. Yeah. And you were like, I, I don't have any. And I'm kind of in that same routine where like what I was saying, like, I do the work, zero expectations. Like what happens will happen. And I'm just along for the ride. Well, that's, I think as long as you put the actual energy into the work, I think, at least for me and you, that's the way to do it. I don't have like people, there's a lot of people out there with vision boards. I was talking to dude. Okay. He's got this vision board. He's got all these goals he wants for his company and goals he wants for his life and this now. Like I can't it. That probably works too. But for me, I just only, I feel like I only want to think about the process. I want to put all my energy into thinking about the process. Because that's the rewarding part for a creator, right? Like me and the studio by myself painting, I get that clear mind where it's like, I feel like I fucking meditate six hours a day, you know, just for more. Just for worse. At some point in the painting process, like the paintbrush turns into a mantra almost to where like everything in my mind, just like in Jiu Jitsu, like everything shuts off because we're in a hyper focused mode of accomplishing a task. Right. Right. And that's for me painting all the reward is that. It's those moments, even when I fucking hate it, because there's plenty of times when I'm like this motherfucking painting. Like I can't get it. Like I know where I want it to go, but it's like, well first you're going to have to take 35 fucking steps before you can get there. Right. And my, you know, like I know that like the finishing of painting is a little bit like a drug. I don't know if you ever experienced this, maybe like after getting off stage or something. But it's like there's a little like dopamine reward. What it's done when it's complete and done. You're like, oh, look at that. Yeah, it's like catching your breath. Yeah. Like I don't know it. I just feel like that withdrawing. Yeah. But a smaller scale obviously. I think it's the same thing with martial arts. Because you know, people always talk about martial arts as being a moving meditation. Yeah. You know, I think, I think, and if you thought about martial arts, like if you, if you were white belt and you thought about all the time that it's going to take before you become a black belt, you're like, oh my God. Yeah. I can't do this. But if you just think about the process, the process will get you there. Yeah. I have to just only be thinking about this idea, this process of improvement, of dialing it in. And people oftentimes refer to martial arts as a moving meditation. Because to do it right, you're kind of out of your own way. Well, yeah, you have to do any, did you do much striking? I did a year of Muay Thai. I got punched in the face a lot. I actually, I found my brain not functioning quite the same way. Oh, and I even hit. Yeah. I found myself like getting frustrated, which was stupid. Like, to be fair. Yeah. Well, like in the process of Muay Thai, like I had a coach and this was forever ago, who was kind of a prick. And just he had eight morning students who knew fucking dick and we were terrible, you know. Oh, and he wanted to be coach and pros, right? That's what it seemed like. Yeah, that's common. Very distant and like, like, phoning it in. Oh, and I recognize myself kind of getting frustrated with it. But when I was in Jiu Jitsu class, if somebody caught me in something, I found myself laughing. And just to where I was like, wow, that like I never got frustrated. I never got like down on myself. Because I mean, my whole first year, I don't think I tapped a single person my first year. And I like, I was in a tough gym, you know, it was a no-guera gym. So like the whole first year of them being open, it was just like the MMA guys were in there. It was like pros training for, you know, a year or six months. And then they opened it up to the public. Which is why I got them. And it was just, it was just ass weapons every day. I remember my first class like it was yesterday. Like I got, when we got to sparring, it was like, I got, like I just looked at another white belt. It was like, okay, let's try it. Neither of us knew what the fuck we were doing. The coach was like, hey, in like grabbed this purple belt, who's now he owns Delmar Jujitsu in San Diego. He came over his purple belt just, just fucking like vanilla gorilla and hit tossed me. Oh no. And I was like, what the fuck was that? Like I had no idea what had happened. I was on my back, you know, trying to catch my breath like, holy shit, what was that? And at that moment, like I knew I, like I thought I was tough. I got thought I had a little bit of toughness in me. And I was like, just a complete humbling experience, but also like encouraging. Like I feel like it was that singular hip toss. Like led me to be a black belt. Interesting. So because it was so overwhelming, you like, I need to learn that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I was that kind of like a weird face. So that was probably like around 2008 when shit seemed to be, it was like a little moment of like everything's going to shit. And like I had this weird feeling of like the financial crisis. This was one of the banks. Yeah. Everybody's money was weird in a mortgage class thing. And I felt like if shit hits the fan, like maybe I should know how to do something. Which is such a weird, yeah. Yeah. And it's a crazy thought. It's fairly abstract. To me, it wasn't like I was like super concerned or like really serious about it. But I had the thought of like if I needed to defend myself or if I need, and that's why I was running to it. Like if I need to fucking chase down a deer until it overheats. Right. And it ended up just being a little bit of a motivation. And then I just found the joy in it. I always said if I ever opened a jujitsu dream, I would call it fun jujitsu. No idea. That just because I mean, I was talking to Zach, your security guard at the comedy club. Like for me, I don't get into street fights. I haven't been in a street fight since I was a teenager. Yeah, me too. You can know. Like I've broken up fights more often than I've got into them. And one thing I do find that's really disconcerting when fights break out, I don't get nervous. That's how beautiful is that? I've had that because I remember when fights break out, your anxieties shoots up, your heart rate. I get weird if like someone close to me is with me and I'm worried about their danger. Yeah, but the fact that two people are fighting, I'm so used to it. It's weird. I stopped a bar fight a couple of years ago where a group of guys attacked this dude. One of them got a hold of him and he sunk in a guillotine. The guy I got taken down right away, a deep guillotine. Like all the way up over the shoulder, you know, then was not letting him tap was not letting him out. No, no, no, and I saw it all sort of kind of unfolding and I ran up there and I just whispered in his ear, if you do just who you should probably let go right now. That calm. He like looked at me, let go, dude was out cold. I actually grabbed the guy who was out cold and picked his feet. That's a great way to handle it the way you talk to him. Yeah, and he immediately looked at me like, okay, yeah, I hear what you're saying. That's how it goes. The guy who is out cold and picked his feet. That's a great way to handle it the way you talk to him. Yeah, and he immediately looked at me like, okay, yeah, I hear what you're saying. Oh, this could be the difference between nothing happens to you. You're just defending yourself and you're going to jail for a long time. Because this guy's dead. Yeah. Yeah. Especially if the guy's out, you're still holding onto it. Yeah. Oh, yeah. And it was quick. It was tight. He might not have known he was out, but I mean, he was probably so jumped up with a journal. Yeah. He's like, get his girlfriend with him. Yeah. The street fights are stupid. So dumb. And if I see them, I just get the fuck away. But what just weird that I've seen so many people beat people up. Yeah. I have seen like firsthand, there's probably a tiny percentage of people on earth that have seen more fist fights in person than me. Yeah. I can't imagine, especially at that close range. At close range with world class fighters. Because it's when you're in at a USC event, like those fights feel so much more intense and so much more like, dude, you've got a couple of people in your there. You've got to come with me to the apex. The apex is the place to see fights. Yeah. The apex center is the UFC's private little auditorium. It's tiny. It only seats like 100 people. Is that where they are doing the fights during COVID? Yeah. Dude, I saw Francis and Gond who versus Steve Bameo chick in a small cage with no audience. That's what it was. No sounds or sounds you don't hear. Bro, it was wild. Yeah. It was so different because Francis's punches and kicks without all the cheering. Yeah. To hear that sound. It's a different thing, man, because you're experiencing what that fighters experiencing. Not you're not getting the pain, but the thought, the force that you feel it different. Yeah. You feel like through the arena, you feel a small little broom. You feel it. And I remember concussion in the air. When he collapsed, when he hit him on the left hook and dropped him and then punched him when he was down, I was like, oh my God. It was so different than seeing it in an arena. It was so intimate. It's like, I always say that it's like the difference between going to see an acoustic concert and going to see a concert in a gigantic arena. Right. You know, you go see someone in a club doing an acoustic set, like Gary Clark Jr. Did an acoustic set. It's different. Wow. This is intimate. I always like the pre-limphites for the few fights that I've gone to. And it's interesting. I noticed myself getting nervous for the fighter walking, especially that first fight, like first pre-limph. Cause I can like 10 people in the room. Yeah. You can see that. Yeah. That walk out moment is so peculiar. Yes. Like, and I don't know if everybody else feels it, but it's like, I can almost feel their anxiety. Oh, how much? As they're walking out. And sometimes you don't feel that at all. you just feel this confidence, this crazy confidence that's fascinating too. The guys can get so good and work themselves into a headspace where they, they, like Iliya, Tarporia, he walks in there like he's already one. He celebrates the night before. He has a celebration. There are always friends and family. The night before the fight, he walks out that would get us not a doubt in the world. No doubt. I wonder how much of that comes from everything that he's done so far. like just a supreme confidence. Oh, it's definitely from that. But maybe with their before, I think he's touched by the universe. I think there's there's certain people that have a talent. Obviously hard work, obviously discipline, obviously intelligence, obviously great trainers. All those things are, yeah, you can't get past the technique that he has, but there's an understanding of what to do and how to do it and do it and an ability that's above and beyond. And I see this all the time where it's like two people who seem like they would be equal in skills or even just in knowledge, right? But one of them out can completely outshine the other. What you learned early on in martial arts that it's all hard work, but there's certain dudes that have physical attributes that are just freakish. They're freakish. The first thing that I ever my first introduction to real like high level martial arts was his guy named John Lee. And John Lee was the national light heavyweight champion in Taekwondo at the time. And he was training for the World Cup. And I was leaving with my friend Jimmy. We were coming home from a baseball game. We were coming home from Fenway Park. And we just passed by this Taekwondo school. And I was like, let's go up. We're waiting for the tea. The tea takes forever. It's a train. It's always packed. Baseball game at the same time. It's going to be a mob scene. Let it die down for a little bit. Let's go check out this Taekwondo class. And as we're walking up the stairs, I hear kajung kajung like this crazy noise, like a thump and then a rattle of chains. That's what I was hearing. And it was this dude practicing a spinning back kick on the back in his prime big long dude who had fucking ferocious power. He was just bending this bag in half. And I was 14. And I was like, holy shit. I think I was 15. It was the summer of my 15th birthday. But I changed my life. I was like, I need to learn how to do that. That's crazy. But then after a while, realize not everybody can do that. There's guys that are high level guys that can't do it. That guy had some weird gift. He had a weird power gift. Even sometimes it's just biology. Like how you're body is shaped. It's 100% biology. When it comes to power. There's like if you have tiny hands and slope shoulders and girl hips, good luck. You're not going to generate jon lead type power. And that's like I can't punch to save my life. But I got these long skinny ass arms like I'll dars the fuck out of here. Oh, they're perfect. Right. You just long arms and thin arms are perfect for it. You just because it's all leverage man. I think one of the best things, most inspirational things that can happen to you if you can handle it in jujitsu is getting mauled by a smaller person. Yeah. A person like quite a bit, it's 30 pounds lighter than you and just runs through you. And you're like, wow. Yeah. Like, okay, it's not about strength at all. It's about skill, knowledge technique timing timing timing is fucking everything. Timing's a lot. But you have to know what to do with the timing. Yeah. You have to have technique. You have to have technique. You're technique has to be sure because there's some guys like some guys little wrap something up, but it's like nine out of 10. Like you're going to squeeze it, maybe get the tap. But there's other guys they lock something and you're like, oh, there's no way out of this. Yeah, this is death. Yeah. Yeah. This is 10 out of 10. Yeah. Like an Eddie Bravo triangle and get locked in any problem trying to like, I'm not going to get out of this. This is tap time. That's I've been wondering. So I play lockdown a lot and maybe getting too technical is probably fucking boring. But that's okay. I have an extra muscle in my calf. Right. It's the I have the same muscle in my left calf. But my right one is twice the size. Just a little strand from making that little hook on the shin. Oh, you're just from playing lockdown. Wow. You know, you can exercise that. You know, there's a thing called a tip bar. Do you know what that is? Uh huh. This will be really good for jujitsu for especially for people who really love butterfly guard. And it's just good for overall knee stability. I learned about it through the knees over toes guy on Instagram. Have you ever done any of this? No, but I need to start looking into it. Look in yesterday. Really good for knee health and strengthening the knees. Yeah. A lot of amazing exercises. But one of the things that he recommends is a tip bar. And so what it is is it's like a thing that attaches to your shoe and you lift weights by lifting your foot upward by lifting your toes towards your knee, which is an exercise you very rarely get, but it's really good. Yeah, that's really good. And for butterfly guard, that would be it man, because you could get that motherfucker strong as shit with not just doing butterfly guard, but lifting for that you would for sure. I always thought like leg extensions to that would help in a big way, right? Yeah. You know, for the same kind of muscles, the forcing, like extending the leg. Yeah, because that's it feels awkward at first to try to elevate from that position. Yeah. Right. Like especially if you're knees are fucked. I'm kind of I'm 16 years in now. And I'm like, I'm avoiding the heavyweight roles. Right. Like I just have to like protect myself and still like I never want to stop either. So like I want to be able to get in there and and fuck around as much as possible. But yeah, you got to pick who you're roll with for sure. That's important, especially as you get older. You're doing TRT or anything like that. No, I wish. Why don't you do it? I have. Oh, you son of a bitch. What does that mean? What does that mean? My backspace. What does that mean? I just haven't had a chance, I suppose. Why you're in town? I'm going to hook you up with ways to well. How many more days are you here? I leave tonight. Oh shit. Yeah. What time tonight? Nine. Oh, yeah, we could do that. We could make it happen. We'll make it happen. I'll make calls. Right. Right before you take off. Yeah, the shit has gone gone pretty south. You should get at the very least if you don't do anything. You should get blood work. Good blood work. Find out where your hormone levels are at. Yeah. How was your diet? It's not bad. Like I eat pretty good. I actually cut out sugar this year. Like big impact humongous. Isn't it crazy? Humongous. You're poisoning yourself. Yeah. And it's just like like what I was saying, like being that like slightly lower than baseline. Like sugar gives you that little dopamine like fixed. That is like, uh, okay. Right. I had now. And so like I had a little soda habit, which I mean, there could be fucking worst things. So a lot worse. But maybe not though. You know, like sugar is pretty fucking bad for you. Well, it's just 15 pounds like like that. Like that. Yeah. Yeah. It's so stupid. It's so crazy how many people are just down in that stuff all day long. All day long. Yeah. And just eating you from the inside. You can see it in their body. Yeah. You can see it in their body. Oh, I'm sorry, buddy. I put my foot on marshmallow. I forgot he was there. I mean, you see it with kids. I mean, it's terrible for kids. It's so bad. It's so bad for everything. You know, but in moderation, it's okay. But the problem is repeat. Human beings are really bad with moderation of things that are literally designed to be addictive. Yeah. Yeah. And how much are in habit to where it's like, I build a routine and then I stick to that fucking routine. Yeah. And if that includes, you know, sugary drinks and a fuck, ice cream at night, whatever, like it's going to be there. I know. And especially if you're put in the work, if you're working hard and you're working out, you're like, I deserve it. I deserve it. Yeah. I'm like, it's a balance. This time, like I'll come home from the comedy club and it's late. Everyone's asleep and I'm like, fucking I'm eating cereal. Yeah. I didn't. I mean, you're an adult. You get the juice. Every now and then and I always feel terrible after I do it. I'm like, why did you do that? All those ideas that sound so great and you just build up a beautiful idea and then you get done and you're like, what the fuck? The only time I feel good is if I come home and I'll cook a steak. I do. I do like that. Like I'm going to actually take a whole hour to make myself a meal, even though it's 11, 13, nine, I'm tired. My say, a whole hour and make myself a meal and have the discipline to not eat any garbage before that. Because when you're tired, you make the worst dietary decisions. Yes, there's a part of you when you're tired. I forget what it's called. I forget what the, there's actually like a thing that happens where you are impulsively going to go towards things that are bad for you. Yeah. You're impulsively going to go towards potato chips and ice cream and candy and bullshit because you're fatigued. And there's convenience, right? Like it's not just that. If there was a fucking home cooked meal, like mashed potatoes, green beans, a beautiful like half chicken that was cooked on a on a grill or ice cream, you might take the ice cream if no one was around. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, you might, you might grab a kick cat bar. You know, that's for sure if there was a bowl of chips, just an inviting bowl of like ruffles. Yeah. Sitting there. I'm going to grab a couple of ruffles. That's our weird dopamine thing. Our brain rewards us somehow. And then it fucks with us later. But you know what the thing is? The reward is not worth it. It's not a good reward. Yeah. Like it's not like an orgasm. It's not like a completion of a project. It's not like the accomplishment of some great goal. The, the, the amount of whatever rush in your brain that you get from eating a shitty potato chips, not how much. Yeah. For what it does to you, but if I eat a bag of ruffles, I have to like shit for five hours. Yeah. For sure. I started, uh, it came from a time place where I was really poor. And I tried to figure out like what's the least amount of food I could eat in a day and still survive? Right. Right. Boy. And I, what I started to do was like do little fastings during the day. So like I'd wake up, get a coffee and not eat until like five. But then I started realizing that I felt good doing that. You know, like, like my body started feeling better. And my, now I, I pretty much do it regularly. Now, even though like I have money to get food, I would just, just wait, just wait. And I found myself actually getting, uh, pleasure from the pain of starvation. Like I started to, I started to like the feeling of being hungry. And yeah, at a, at a certain point. Um, but how hungry we're talking about? This is like a 24 hours in or how many hours in? No, it's like, so I would, I would basically eat one meal at like five, 30. Okay. So no food all day except, you know, I'd have some coffee with a little bit of half and half in. It's a, some fat and drinking water of course, or maybe like eat like a fluck of banana or something. And I just, like my body just felt great to where like before I, you know, I was probably eating something shitty in the morning feeling shitty. Yeah. Until noon, eat some other fucking shitty thing. You know, as a young person, you just do whatever the fuck. Well, your body will get adapted. I mean, that's why that whole intermittent fasting thing is interesting, right? Cause you're, you're making your body digest food all day long. Like if you're eating all day long, your body, you're, you're, you're, you're just an system never gets break. Well, I started thinking like even like, you know, back to chasing the fucking deer, like our bodies used to have to go hunt. Oh yeah. To get something to eat. So this idea of like waiting, you know, eight hours, six hours before eating anything from waking up, like it all, it started to feel natural forming. Well, it is natural as long as you're eating natural food. Yeah. That's the thing. Yeah. So if you're eating processed foods and a lot of bread and a lot of pasta and a lot of stuff that human beings have made, especially like our American bread, your, your body's a custom to a lot of sugar. Your body's accustomed to those complex carbohydrates, just pouring into your system all day long. And you're using those as a fuel source. If you're subsisting off of fat and protein and meat and like avocados and you're getting healthy food, your body is working off a lot of ketones. Your body is, it's making its own glucose through gluconeogenesis from the meat. And it's also running off of ketones from the fat. It's a way more efficient way of doing it. And when you do that, you don't get nearly as hungry. It's, you don't have that feeling, that awful feeling. When I was eating a lot of carbs and if I would go like four or five hours without eating, I would start getting fucking famished. You don't get famished when you eat only meat. It stops. You get hungry, but it's totally manageable. Yeah. It's the only one I love that the, the, the, the not requiring food. Like I can go sometimes I won't eat breakfast. Sometimes I'll work out. I won't eat breakfast. I'll come here. I'll be here all day. And the first meal I have is dinner. Yeah. And I'm fine. Yeah. I'm literally filing. It's not bothering me. And it's only because my body's adapted to not eat processed shit. Yeah. Cause it's different if you feel like you're going to throw up or pass out because you haven't fucking eaten. That's the power. People that are eating a lot of carbohydrates, a lot of bullshit. Yeah. Your body needs fuel. You get low blood sugar and you start feeling like shit. Yeah. And like you got to get something in you. Well I noticed as soon as I started doing that, like the stored fat, like in my, like little love handles or whatever, like immediately just, it was like the body's like, okay, I got to use this shit now. Yeah. And burn it up. Complete body change. And like, mentally, by felt so much better. Yeah. People that fast and I have never fasted for more than 24 hours, but people that fast for like three days, they all talk about how great they feel at the end. You feel euphoric and incredible and we give it so much energy. I'm like, that sounds nuts. It's only should be fucking done. Yeah. Cause I mean, I do get miserable sometimes of like, like I could just eat a fucking steak. I hold it off. I hold off the idea of fasting. Cause like, I make all these excuses for myself. Like, oh, I've got to do my show. I got to support and I can't be out of it. Yeah. And that's for me. I don't have any like stringent routine of like, I'm not allowed to fucking eat something. It's just the routine that I've got into now to where it's like, I just sit down and work. But that kind of probably helps a little bit too because of that mind state of like, I don't really, if when I'm in the mode of painting, like I don't have to go to the bathroom, I'm not hungry. Deagint coffee or anything. What are you doing there? Yeah. Yeah. Or like I'll get a quada espresso and then it just kind of lasts most of the day, you know, until like noon or whatever. And that, I mean, that keeps me kind of on the level, I suppose cause there is some fat in there and like the caffeine obviously helps. Yeah, it's a little something. Yeah. Yeah, caffeine helps a longer. But I think that what you're saying that the focus is probably the big thing that you're just so locked into what you're doing that you're not even, yeah, it's like I'm not even in my body anymore. Like the body is separated from the mind. Yeah. That thing that you were talking about earlier, that is such a weird thing, the where it feels like the whatever you're working on just sort of takes over. To me, it's something subconscious cause like the way I look at jujitsu or painting or any real art form as creative problem solving. So for me, all of those things like it tickles the same part of my brain to where the, like I'll ask myself questions. Like it intends to be like you have to ask yourself the right questions. Like I've had like I don't know how to use, how to fix a car to save my life. But I've had to fix some shit to where I'm like, hmm, what should I do here? Or like, you know, you'll just try something. But it's almost like a subconscious voice. Like I was saying how the painting will kind of tell me how to like where to go next to where I don't know an answer. But somehow I come up with it. Just by kind of asking my brain, you know, what should we do here? And it's always like fascinated me that I'll, it's like my brain comes up with solutions to these problems by, you know, running some computation of like, well, if we did this, this will happen. If we did that, this will happen. And I'll come up with ideas that are like I don't have that aren't conscious ideas or thoughts that seep in from some depths in my brain that it's like, I'm in, it's not my control. It's not like a, like a brag. Right, right, right. It's like some, some way of thinking that I can get solutions to problems that I don't know the solution to. Right. And you don't feel like those solutions are yours. No. Yeah. It comes from somewhere else. So I mean, I like to think of it as like some part of my subconscious or some part of the brain that I'm not accessing in conscious reality that is coming up with answers. But I'm amazed by it all the time. Like if you've ever had like like a light that wasn't working in your house, right? But if you like flip the switch three times and then like turn the fucking heater on somehow the light comes on, you know what I mean? Like you figure out these ways to to accomplish a task or figuring out a solution to a problem. And for me, I feel like with painting and jujitsu or now anything, like I remember I pinched a nerve in my neck, like bad to where it's like I couldn't even sit up. And I was like, how the fuck am I going to get out of bed? And just ended up like picking my leg up, hooking my arm behind my leg and doing like a jujitsu thing to like sit myself up because I couldn't like actually send myself up. And I was like, I've never done that before. That's so fucking strange. But like like my brain just told me to do that. Well, that makes sense though. You know how to use your body from jujitsu and this would be a good idea for the using your abs. Yeah. Yeah. But there's all kind of like like fixing the fucking car. Like I don't know what I'm doing. But this seems to be like my brain telling me, maybe try this, you know. And with all of these processes of you know, martial arts and painting, just some creative problem solving aspect of the brain that's almost separated from it. Yeah. And gets nurtured with use. Yeah. It builds like it gets strong. This is what Pressfield talks about when he talks about summoning the muse. You know, when he reads, did you ever read the book, the war of art? I haven't. I've got a copy. I'll give you a copy of it. I used to have a box of them on the desk in the old studio that I hand out to people. But it's a short read, but it's an amazing read on this concept of the muse and that like treating this thing like you're a professional, you're going to show up at this time and you're going to summon the muse and you're going to do it with sincerity. And if you do that and you show up every day at a work. Yeah. And it really does. That's what I do. Yeah. That's exactly, I mean, I live that. Yeah. Like I get up, get coffee. I go to the studio and I'm there until it's time to leave. And I go teach at night and then I repeat the whole process. Yeah. And it's joy. Like there isn't a lot of like I probably have a bit of a short attention span to where like things can get fucking boring, but obviously not painting. No, I leave after a long day and I feel myself feeling guilty that I'm not still there. Wow. You see, that's why I have a problem when people use that term ADHD. because I think about myself as a boy and I'm like, I know they would have fucking diagnosed me. If I had the wrong parents, I know they would have diagnosed me and they would have brought me to a doctor who would have put me on some fucking medication and it would have ruined whatever weird quality that I have that lets me focus on things intensely. Yeah. You know, they want to pretend that everybody has to be the same thing. Like everybody can't be the same thing. We're all wired different. I'm not wired normal. Yeah. I'm wired. I'm like, oh, God. Yeah. I know some people that are going, well, so what are you going to do about that Fred? They can have the boringest fucking conversations all day. I literally feel physical pain when I'm being bored. But if I find something that's really interesting, like really interesting, I can lock on. And when I lock on to that, I have no problem paying attention. And that's a fucking superpower. I think so. And I think they're fucking kids up, man. I think there's a lot of lazy parents who don't want to deal with this extraordinary child that has this weird thing that you have in harnessed. And you're putting that kid on fucking speed. They're putting them on a riddle and shit. That's they were trying to give me riddle and I was a kid. And you know, I wasn't a spazzy kid. I wasn't, it just I was bored as fuck by what like whatever they were trying to do in school. You're an artist. But no one can recognize that. It's almost like they want to pretend that that is not a real option for a human. But why are there so many artists? No, I know. What are you saying? How is that possible that you want everybody to fit into this fucking square peg? How is it possible that you're teaching a kid comes along and he's bouncing off the wall, but that motherfucker could play video games like an assassin. Okay. Okay. Clearly, there's something going on with the video games that you're not providing him in the real world and his ability to excel at video games shows he's extraordinary. It's just about focusing that. Yeah. When we take some little girl who just wants to talk to her friends and joke around in class and he fucking medicate her, she could have probably been an amazing artist. She maybe she would have found a subject that she just like some kind of a science subject. She locks onto and now all of a sudden that thing doesn't exist anymore. It's not like she scattered all of it. No, she's just bored. Yeah. What you're doing is boring. Yeah. You're class is fucking boring. You have uninspired teachers who are underpaid. No one gives a fuck about them. They're basically babysitters and you're bored. And because the teachers want to deal with you being bored, they tell the principal, the principal tells the doctor, the doctor recommends another doctor and then a little Billy is sitting there and his fucking doctor's office and then they pop him full of riddle and I had Henry Rollins on the podcast once and he's telling me they put him on riddle and when he was a little kid. Yeah. He said he was just fucking like. Well, they long like, damn, man. It's so nuts. Yeah, I remember seeing those kids too. Yeah. Just like fucking spun out. Spun out. And now they're all on Adderall, man. Yeah, and that's fucking me. Bro, there's a ton of young kids out there in the world that do not have a problem and they're on Adderall because it helps them concentrate and helps their scores for college. Yeah. 100%. I can't run T it. There are kids out there in high school right now that are popping Adderall all the time so that they could do better on tests so they could do better in college. And then they're taking Xanax to come down off the fucking Adderall like so terrible. So fucking terrible. It's fucking terrible. And you know, these pharmaceutical drug companies are just vampires. Yeah. This is what you need. This is what you need, Mike. Doing the fucking commercials like here. You want to be happy. Don't you want to dance in a wheat field with your child? Don't you want to go to the barbecue? You actually have everyone's at the barbecue there. Everybody's not happy. Don't you want to go to the barbecue? Yeah. First thing finding the thing that is actually going to bring you joy. My friend, Nisana Mod has a great bit about it. I don't want to give it up, but it's great. If you're seeing with the mothership, did you see him? I caught the very tail end of his set when I got there. He's got a great bit about great guy. He's great. He's got a funny dude too. He's been my friend since he was a door guy at the comedy store. So it's so interesting to see him from a very raw beginner to where he is now. I mean, you've gotten to see a lot of that, right? Yeah. I got to see with him with the R.E. and Joey and Duncan. All those guys. Yeah. Pretty wild. Oh, it's beautiful. But you've seen how the comedy scene has started to flourish here and kind of like build it like that little six street way there is pretty wild. Oh, dude, there's five full time comedy clubs. Yeah. Right there. I think I hung out with my buddy Roy yesterday. And I feel like I've met like four or five comics just like standing around, figuring out what we're going to do. It's the hub. And it's also this is the most important thing. It's the hub for development of young people. It gives young people a real pathway, a real possibility. And we set it up that way on purpose. Like this is the idea is like you cannot have a sustainable comedy community without new members. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I find a little Emmy in that like that's a little tougher in the like visual arts world is because we're so fucking isolated. We're not like hanging out at the same spots all the time. And it's like that's how things used to be like back in the day. Like the artists would all go to the same bar after they're done working for the day. like have an artist neighborhood. Yeah. Like I only had a bunch of neighborhoods where a lot of artists live together. Yeah. I mean, LA is a little bit different from besides New York than the rest of the art world. It's like if you're not in one of those two or three hubs, like you're kind of isolated, like outside of that realm. And we don't have that opportunity. I really like enjoy that aspect of the comedy community towards like you see everybody meeting up like they see each other every day. They hug. They talk over shit. They can like kind of workshop stuff with each other. Like having that ability is or like that community in that aspect. Oh, it's so nice. It's so nice. And so when you were there, it's like perfect setup like Shane Gillis was there. One white was there. I got to stop with Ron for a while. He's the best. Yeah. He's such a fucking character. Yeah. Tony was there. We have this beautiful community. But it's also like the young. It's a top one for a while. He's the best. Yeah. He's the best. He's such a fucking character. Yeah. So Tony was there. It's so we have this beautiful community. But it's also like the young people. The young people coming up. They're good, man. They're good and they're hungry and they're focused. And they realize that there's a real pathway. So because we set it up so we have two nights of open mic nights, which is really important. Yeah. You have to have chances for people to get on stage for the first time and just chances to just develop. Yeah. You just got a few minutes. You go up there, you tell a couple of jokes, try it again next week. Try it down the street. Try it over here. Try it over there. And if you want to do it, if you really want to do it, there's a bunch of people that are also doing it here. So there's a great community. And it's pretty fucking positive, man. Everybody's pretty. Instead of being cutthroat and backstabby, everybody's real supportive. Big difference from LA, right? Big difference. I noticed just the sort of like every interaction I had while I was here for just three days just felt so genuine. Not like somebody's trying to get something from you. They're regular folks out here. Everybody just seemed so laid back and chill. And they're their focus. Regular humans. What we were dealing with in Los Angeles was some amazing people. I miss, there's a lot of amazing people in LA. But the overall vibe of the city was a vibe of you were trying to stand out from everybody else and get famous. Yeah. You could feel it. Yeah. Because growing up in San Diego, I spent a lot of time in LA, I could sense the feeling of everybody. It felt like everybody was trying to do something. Yes. Like every single person you saw on the street was up to something. And then it got real weird when reality TV came along. Because you didn't have to have any talent. So it used to be you wanted to be an actor. And people didn't have any talent in acting. You couldn't convince them otherwise they thought they could do it. Everybody thought they could act. Because acting is essentially just talking. It's just pretending to talk when you know the words. So many people do it so badly, so bad. But they don't think they do. But it's a thing that you can't discern. In a way, it's a lot of it like comedy. Like you see you got like Ron White tell a story on stage. And it's so effortless and hilarious that you think, oh, he's not even trying. I can do that. I tell stories. My story should be too. And you think you could go do it because you don't understand what's actually happening. Yeah. It's just confusing. It's tricking you. Without whole routine, like the idea of like writing a monologue seems so obscure to me. Like I feel like I can be funny in a scenario where it's like people are talking and you have something to bounce off of. But to get up there and do a monologue by yourself, like that, it feels so alien to me. To you because you're smart. But to dumb dude, we see that. He's like, I could do comedy. And so there was all these people that were just looking at comedy and also looking at acting as a pathway to getting attention. And then it really got fucked with social media. So when I was leaving, like a year or two before I left, I was already thinking about leaving. I was like, I've got to get out of here. And then I remember I was at a stay house. And these people were there. And people were taking pictures of them. Like what is this? And someone said, I don't even think it was a TikTok influencer. I think it was a Vine influencer. Like this is a Vine influencer. I was like, what does that mean? Like what do they do? And it's like, oh, they dance. They dance around. And like people are here. I'm like, what are you talking about? Like this is nuts. So it became another way that you could get famous. You just get famous by doing pranks or being obnoxious or taking your clothes off and yelling and traffic. So everybody was just trying to get famous. When you get out of there, you come to a place like Austin. There's this relaxation. Because they're just people. Yeah. All that's gone. No one here is trying to get famous. It's very rare that someone's trying to get famous. And then if you can insert a comedy community there that really values the process and the results of the art, that's what we're really all about. We're really all about killing. All that other stuff comes. The reason why Shane Gillis is the number one comic in the world is because he works hard and he's really fucking funny. And the process yields an amazing result. And he's so sincere. Super sincere. But the point is like, he doesn't give a fuck about fame. Like he's not trying to get famous. I know him. Like it's just not something that happened. We were joking, right? You're a brofame sucks. Like we were in the dream room the other night talking about how much fame sucks in some ways. I'm like, ah, you can handle it. You'll be fine. You're going to handle it. Yeah, it's such a different experience. Like as a painter, nobody really fucking knows what you look like. They do not touch. They do not. Whoops. That's what I'm calling shit. Not much, luckily, but there's some sense of stress to that. I mean, I've even experienced this a little bit with hanging out with you a couple of times of people coming up. I'm like, fuck, this is so weird. Why do people act like this? Like around the side of the act? They get weird. But that's the thing also that people like about being famous. They want people to be uncomfortable around them. They want to be extraordinary without even trying. It's a weird thing, man. It's a weird thing that has existed with royalty. It's kind of the same thing. It's like this desire that people have to be exceptional and stand above everyone else for almost no reason. And the same thing in Hollywood was the thing that was holding the art form of comedy back to because it was this velvet prison that existed, that if you were a good boy or a good girl and you drew between the lines and you didn't say anything too crazy, you could get a sitcom or you could get a TV show. I mean, I've seen that show where people just like people who want to be actors take that comedy route. Yeah. You can also really good comics tone their shit down. They don't say what they actually think is funny anymore. Yeah. They say what they think they can get away with and still get a TV show. Well, that's something that I noticed at the show of like having everybody's phones in the fair day bags or whatever those are, like allows people to be a little bit more honest and it's direct or like really say what they want to say. And more importantly, it allows the audience to totally lock in. Yeah. Because for a lot of these people, it's the only two hours of their whole life where they're not going to be on their phone. No, I know. Other than sleeping, you know, when you're when you're locked in and you're at a live show, it's so fun. It's so good. It's the it's the correct move for everybody. It's a correct move because of course everyone is working on new material and you don't want to get released before it's done because new material takes forever. Yeah. Yeah. It's like it'll take months for a bit to and sometimes it sucks at first or you it's offensive. Like something's wrong with that. You got to I got to figure out a way that people are not mad because I that's not what I'm trying to say. And you could figure it out, but it just takes a bunch of different iterations. And if someone fucking videotapes it puts it up. Yeah. Like they did what Louis C.K. when he first came back, it screws up the whole process. It's like you're ruining that for literally millions of people because it's eventually going to get on Netflix and people are going to see it, but it's got to take time. It's not it's not a simple process. And we have to do it in front of people. That's the interesting thing about that art form too. Like you got to work shit out in front of humans. Yeah. It's not it's I'm sure what like the writing process in your head feels so much different. Yeah. There's the on stage writing process. There's the writing process in your head. And there's the idea process, which is the trickiest one. Because the most difficult thing with comedy really is coming up with a subject that's actually interesting to you. Yeah. Where you really find humor in it. And if those are the ones when I can really find humor in something, that's the ones that I dig into the most because I'm enjoying the shit out of the whole process of like, yeah, uncovering all the ridiculousness. It has to be something where I'm like, what? That's how it is with painting too. Like I'm entertaining myself first. Sure. And then hopefully that connects with people somewhere. Yeah. I think it's all together. I think tattooists are like that. Yeah. Musicians are like that. I think it's the meal melt almost sashii quote, once you understand the way broadly you see it in all things. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It is beautiful. Because I think you probably see it in the other things that you do. you see it in your art, you see it in Jiu Jitsu and there's people out there that they're seeing it and writing, they're seeing it in sculpture, whatever. There's a thing, whatever it is that allows you to get really good at the thing that you love. That thing takes over while you're doing it and you're almost not there anymore. You're almost like a passenger. Yeah. Yeah. And that's when you know you hit the good spot. Like if I'm a big Bukowski fan on his on his gravestone, it says don't try. that's the insignia and then it's like a pair of box and gloves. Another guy famous drunk. That's all of my favorite writers are self-destructive. I don't know why, but they are. Oh, I found this the other day about Hemingway. Hemingway always thought that the FBI was trying to get him apparently. Apparently they actually were. Really. Yeah, they actually were. He thought that he was here also in this to you, Jamie. You saw it? That's all I was like a meme going around there today. Oh, here it goes. The FBI investigated Ernest Hemingway for decades with surveillance beginning in the 1940s due to concerns about his activities in Cuba and his associations with individual suspected of communist ties. Well, initially, dismissed his paranoia. It was later revealed that Hemingway's fears were grounded in reality and the FBI did monitor him even topping his phones and intercepting his mail. The surveillance continued throughout his later years, including his time in the hospital and may have contributed to his mental anguish and suicide. Damn. Yeah, you can't fucking. What about booze? Who's he gonna drink every day? He's a very severe depression. 42 to 74, they studied him. What'd you learn? That's wild. That's that thing. There's a meme or somebody saying that you have to be aware of the artist because they associate with everybody. They're not just locked into an upper class society. They're like, even like where I was staying, like I made friends with like three or four homeless guys just out on the street that I just kept seeing around town from being around, you know, like we associate with everybody. There's no like hierarchy of class. Well, I think if you really want to be open, like really open, you have to encounter a lot of different kinds of humans. Yeah. You know, if you really like if you especially if you're a comic because you want to or a writer, if you want to understand people, you have to interact with them. Yeah, because especially as a writer, like you only have your own experience. If you just write your own experience, it's just going to come off as like every character is you. Exactly. I would put yourself in the head of somebody else. Yeah. Like you have to be open. Yeah, you have to be. And have like a certain form of empathy to even understand how somebody else feels. But that's why there's the contradiction of the star comedian. That's where things get weird. Like the star comedian because of your star and everybody's treated like, oh, cherry sign sounds like you're taking the pictures, like you're walking the red carpet and you're like, you got to be down with the people. You got to be in the nitty gritty. Yeah, you got to find some trenches. You got to figure out the trenches. Because if you don't, and I think if you think about like my favorite comedians, they were all self destructive too. Yeah. All of them. Richard Pryor, who lives himself on fire. Like he's about a self destructive. Tenison and cocaine and alcohol, Hicks, lots of drugs and then cigarettes till he got pancreatic cancer. They were all at least some way fighting some fucking thing inside their head. Yeah. It makes me wonder like how much of it is like maybe that empathy is too much. Maybe that maybe you feel too much. You know, and you got to kind of. No, so there's the there's just the stress of the job itself. Yeah. Like, especially when you find success, right? Cause you got to keep that. You got to also still be putting out new stuff. Yeah. So you got a chance to see me. This is all new stuff. All right. This is the stuff that didn't, it wasn't on my Netflix special. Yeah. So it's all in development. It's all like, and that process is it's fun. I love it. Don't get me wrong. Before I go on stage, I'm amped up. I'm pacing. I'm moving around. I'm listening to naz. I got some music playing. I'm getting my dance on. I'm having an espresso and fucking breathing. Like, huh. I want to get ready. I always feel a little awkward in the green rooms. Like, I don't want to be too like, I'll be like, hi. Okay. Listen, you're cool. You know, the hand of great. Some dudes that are a real problem. Yeah. Some dudes that start telling really terrible stories in the green room. And you're like, Oh my God, this is so boring. We've got to get them. But the green room is supposed to be just for comics. You know, and sometimes people will bring in people that aren't not supposed to be in the green room. And like, I was actually telling a story about that yesterday when we were all at the American comedy co in San Diego, when Doug was doing that, um, the Benson was doing the chronic con documentary. Do you remember that? Not really. If fucking long ass time ago. But some guy came in who, I don't know, like a fucking investor or like somebody, but she's cooped up, right? I don't know. He grabbed a bud light bottle as though it was a bomb. He was like, where's the weed? And like, like he was going to like smoke a bomb load out of this bud light beer bottle, drop the bottle, broke it everywhere. Like made a fucking scene. It was like, fuck is this guy? What is going on? Like just the like way that people lack so fucking strange when they feel like almost like they have to perform. But their performance is horrible. Well, I don't think it's that. I think that is that guy was on drugs, I think. But you know, also, I think they get it. They get anxious. They get anxious, right? Yeah. People just get weird. They don't know what to do. Yeah. We're fucking strange. There's a lot of fucking people that are barely keeping it together out there, dude. No. I think that's me, but just just barely hanging on. You know, no, you're fine. Yeah. You're fine. But I think every artist feels like that. Yeah. Every artist feels like it's one thing that they could do one day that's, you know, ruin their fucking life. They're always like that close. It's all just like this keeping it together thing that you have in your mind, you know? And you have to have, you have to have some process that you do that keeps you on the work and not on the self-destructive path. Yeah. Because if you're a person that like maybe has a drug issue and you're fighting that off and as long as you work all the time, like you're cool. But then if you wake up late that one day and you're like, I have to fucking one hit. I think good for just one little fucking, woo. Just a little tipsy. I could stop in the beginning. I was only doing it every now and then. Yeah. You know, I can just go back to just like moderation. I think it's good. You know, it really gives me a little pep up when I need it. And yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Maybe your doctor gives you a little at or all. Like the at or all is good, but two pills is better. Three pills is really, I get so productive. I think I'd get my company off the ground. If I could just really concentrate with these three pills. Yeah. And then then you then you're fucked and you're fucked. So it's like, it's this balance that we all have. And it's not just artists. It's just people in life. It's like dealing with insecurities. Whatever the insecurity is, you could fucking mask it with, you know, some drug or alcohol or whatever. Or you could lean into it and be like, okay, I feel this way by, by, except that, what can I do? I think the problem is the term insecurity. Because like good Lord, everything is insecure. Like the secure things, a lot of secure things are really boring. When you secure things that are awesome, you know, yeah, but there's a lot of that that's that's not what it is. It's uncertainty. Uncertainty is what freaks you out. The options that are possible, the things that the possible results, the variables, all the different things. Yeah, and that's going to ham cuff plenty of people. But you got to learn how to handle that. You know, I used to it when I was teaching, when I was teaching martial arts, I taught a lot of kids and I had a lot of kids compete in tournaments. I really loved doing that. I really loved it when they really got into it and they got better. And I could see them improving and then winning tournaments. It was amazing. But I remember I would some kids would really struggle with competition. And I would tell them, that's because you're smart. And I go, you see these people that are not worried about this? They don't know what can happen to them. Yeah. They're delusional. They think they're going to be okay no matter what, but you're smart. You know that this is dangerous. That's good. You just have, you got to use that. You got to just hang on to it, use it and then get in there and you'll be fine. Once it, once the fight starts, you're not going to be scared anymore, which is weird. Yeah. The one, the fight starts then it's just, it's just happening. And it's all automatic. And it's all your, you know, you have instincts and you have an understanding of the game, but you also have just just dialed in technique. That's all it is. It's all about the execution of all the things you've practiced. And it all just happens. But the lead up is so bad. The anxiety before when you're sitting in a locker room waiting for your time, you're like, fuck. And I would just tell them I would go just, you got to understand this sucks. But this is just something. If you just can accept that this is here, accept that it's here and recognize that this is a gift and this is here because you're smart. And the reason why you're worried about all these possibilities is because you're intelligent enough to recognize that that's the thing. Yeah. You're looking for the outcomes and then figuring out what that's kind of what I was talking about before, like predicting outcomes and figuring out solutions to problems that have yet to occur. Yeah. Like when you're thinking that far ahead, like that's, it's a different chess game. Yeah. And you in the dull minded nitwits out there that don't have any fear. There's a reason they don't have any fear because they don't have the capacity to comprehend all the possibilities. Yeah. So if some guys like does not fight at all, you've seen this a hundred times on videos online and he gets in someone's face and that guy's like, just crack some like that dull minded shithead. He is not the fearful one. He's not the, he's not the intelligent one. The intelligent people are fearful. You should be fearful. It's good. Yeah. It helps you. Yeah. Especially if you're about to do something difficult and you should do difficult shit because it teaches you about yourself. Yeah. And if you don't learn about yourself, you're always going to wonder. And that's the problem with like a lot of men in the world. A lot of chess, puffy, a lot of like fucking really arrogant, aggressive people. Like it's because they don't know themselves. Yeah. So they're trying to impose a version of themselves on other people to be respected. Yeah. You know, you find this in these fucking like business CEOs and execs who are like really aggressive and they weigh 80 pounds. Like this is what this is. It's like they're finding a way to try to figure out who the fuck they are. They don't even know themselves. And that's one of the things that like I fucking know myself. Like spend so much time with myself in like a clear sort of frame of thought. Knowing my limitations, knowing what I've accomplished when I was even more limited. Like if anything, that I think this whole process is different. The process between an artist and like say someone who wants to be famous or somebody who wants to be worshiped, someone who wants to be the head of a company or the president of the United States or somebody who wants to be beyond reproach. Nobody who wants to be president should ever be president. 100%. Yeah. Yeah. It should be. But then again, huh. Yeah. You know, if you got like some benepp, some truly benevolent dictator that we're all waiting for, waiting for like a benevolent leader who's just going to take control of it, but do it for the people, you know, Marcus Aurelius, someone who just really, really does have the people's best wishes in mind. Human greed is too fucking strong. It's too strong. And anybody that's willing to go through that process, that brutal process, you know, like all the stuff that's in the news today. I mean, there's still, there's possible legal ramifications of things that happened in the 2016 election that we're hearing about today. Yeah. It's like these people are gross. Like you, the whole thing. It's the opposite of the Austin comedy community. So like if we had to choose a president of the Austin comedy community, it wouldn't be that hard. Like whoever wins is great. You know, if Shane wins, great, if Duncan wins, great, who you're going to elect? Who cares? Everyone's cool. But the presidential world is like, no, no, no, no, no, no, you have the backings of enormous, enormous military industrial complex corporations, enormous amounts of money, Pentagon budgets beyond comprehension. It's going to be a trillion dollars this year. What does that even fucking mean? What does this mean? So like the ability to be at the helm of that, like there's going to be no cooperation with the left and the right. And and you're seeing what happens when one group gets in the power. What's the first thing they do? Like what they do when they got in the power? They immediately went after Trump. They hit him with a ton of different fucking legal charges. Most of them didn't make any sense. The fuck, all the crazy shit about overestimating his property and moral logo. Like that is the way they were using the laws. Like, oh my God, people are gross on both sides, on both fucking sides. That's the whole system is so fucking corrupted. And it's so obvious. Like we're at a stage where like we have enough information to see. Yeah. Like that how much greed and money just corrupts the system. But we, I don't think we really got to see it until Trump ran. I think you got to see it unveiled in a way when Trump ran that you never got to see before because also you got the rise of independent journalism that happens at the same time. Yeah. So if people that report report just on the facts, not like this CNN, fucking lean or the Fox News lean, but just like just reports on exactly what's happening and how it happened. That just didn't exist before. So you get an under if you're paying attention and you follow those people. And a lot more people are than ever before. You get a way different understanding of how gross this game is. And because the guy was so polarizing and because he was such an easy guy to turn into a Nazi, like you like you pointed to him. You're like, this is this is our fucking hand. Look out of the way he talks. Yeah. He's he's going to ruin the world. It's a threat to democracy. We could do anything. We can to stop him. So what do they do? They stop all the primaries. They they don't have real primaries anymore. They haven't had a real primary since 2012. They're rig them. They're rig it with Bernie Sanders. They rig it with RFK Jr. You know, they're just the whole business is gross. It's gross. I wish us as humans were all like together enough to just self govern. You would need you would need people to enter into politics at the highest level that didn't need the money and really were good people that really wanted to just change the tone of how everything is governed. And that's going to be so hard to do because the money is so nuts. And then you see the Nancy Pelosi thing. The new one. I she was being interviewed and then was like, I didn't want to talk about the answer. Put that on. And as a goober, he sneaks it in. She's like, I came here to talk about the anniversary of Medicaid. Like she cares about Medicaid. She's worth an estimated $400 million now. How? What's the salary? $70,000 a year? $170,000 a year. Yeah. Like that. $200,000 a year. Maybe. You know, but watching the panic in her face, realizing that Trump is now president and they're they're talking about literally going after her for insider trading and the undeniable evidence that they have had better results on the stock market than literally anyone ever. Yeah. And they have access to information about laws are going to be passed. Yeah. If that's not insider trading, what the fuck is? And that's what I mean. The, the, the, the greed, the level of greed is so strong that you should got that video. She might even have good intentions getting it off. Shut the fuck up. Shut the fuck up. Or anybody, any shot here, man, I feel like it's a system that demons that rops. Yes. The minute you get in, I think so. I think if you want to succeed, like what happens, maybe you have these idealistic, you know, perspectives on how politics works or what you can do in your contribution. And then you get in and you're like, oh, Jesus, yeah, it doesn't work that to survive. You know, like I've had candid conversations with Tulsi Gabbard about what it was like. And she's a person. She was like, try to be friends with everybody. She tries to reach across the aisle. And she's, she's got that whole aloha spirit. And she was like, it's crazy. Like, it's like the, the, the, just the amount of backstabbing that's going on. Like when she got into office, like first of all, you realize like you're not really in control of everything. Because there's another person who's in control of each individual department. And they'll stop whatever you're trying to do every step of the way. They get in the way of everything. And what are you going to replace everybody? And how you going to find qualified people to take those jobs as guys been at that fucking, he's been the czar of this commission for 25 years. Yeah. He knows like all the ties and all the financial agreements. Here let's watch this because it's so funny. Let me just read what he said. I'm sorry that we had some sort of technical issue. Nancy Pelosi became rich. I might have to read that. We're really talk about the 60th anniversary of Medicaid. That's what I agreed to come to talk about. But I want that means in the election. I wanted to give you a chance to respond. You used to have insider trading. What's your response to that? That's ridiculous. In fact, I very much support the stop the trading of members of Congress. Not that I think anybody's doing anything wrong if they are, they are prosecuted. And they go to jail. But because of the confidence that it's stills in the American people, don't worry about this. But I have no concern about the obvious investments that had been made over time. I'm not into it. My husband is, but it isn't anything to do with anything insider. But the president has his own exposure. So he's always projecting. He's always projecting. And let's not give him any more time on that. Please. It's going forward here. And I'm very proud of my family. And while he might make fun of us while somebody inspired by him breaks into our home and hits my husband and a deadly fashion hits my husband over the head. And he thinks that's a riot. I'd rather not go into some of my other complaints about him right now. Rather to talk about the 60th anniversary of Medicaid. Okay. Okay. First of all, what crazy projection? She immediately turned herself into a victim. She immediately went from, Jake Tapper's like, what's your response? This ridiculous. Nothing was inside her. I don't think we have $400 million, whatever. But what's really important is Trump inspired a man who broke first of all, how do you know that guy was a literal crazy person that broke into that house? Yeah. That was a weird fucking thing. It's too frantic. He had a hammer. He smashed the back window. He broke into the house. Paul thought that he could talk the guy down. It looked like Paul had a drink in his hand. So he's probably a little lit. Yeah. Probably a little more calm than he should have been. And then the cops are at the door. And the dude hits him in the head with a hammer. That guy was a crazy person. You're blaming Donald Trump for that. No. That's so nuts that you have gone from. You made an insane amount of money. A lot of people say you're inside a trading. What's your response? That's how my husband got hit in the hammer. The hammer. They're all in black. Black folks had deflection. It's funny. You know, it's because it's all because the president has a lot of exposure. Yeah. Because it's funny. Trump does the same shit with her. If he's on the hot seat, Nancy Pelosi, you know, it's a, they all have that natural deflection. Yeah, man. It's like, and it's like we all fucking accepted somehow. Like we might make fun of it or be like, because my bullshit meter goes off all the fucking time. Like you're fucking lying to me right now. I'm like, you can see it. There's a reason why that whole ability to trade stocks is still in position. And it's because they want it there. They make a shit ton of money. Did you know have all the insider information? They have to figure out at what point in time is just too dangerous. And who's willing to like make this a law? Who's willing to change this? And are the what politicians are going to sign our board for that? Because they're actually voting against their own self interests. Yeah. Right. If they all decide, like it's like they're playing chicken, like as long as they don't do it, as long as they don't do it, then they can still make a ton of money. But if you look at the numbers, like if you look at like, ooh. It's like they're playing chicken like as long as they don't do it yeah as long as they don't do it Then they can still make a ton of money But if you look at the numbers like if you look at like who's making money on the stock market It is not all Nancy Pelosi. It is red blue red blue red blue. It's pretty much down the middle Yeah, I mean as long as you could skirt the the legalities. Why would you not take information that you have gained and tried to You realize it to your improvement and you're hanging out with Harry the senator from fucking South Dakota or whatever And Harry's got a yacht like how did you get a yacht Harry like you know the Bobby's got his own private jet How'd you get your own jet Bob? You're a congressman like what are you doing and those people that are able to generate that kind of wealth And I think she's like the poster girl for it unfortunately, but it's not her like who's made the most Yeah, let's find that out in order to hear I don't know if this is officially the most But there's people that have made more than her. Yeah, I'm sure they have Where does it say though more than 20 million? Okay more than 20 members made almost double the S&P 500 average gain which is crazy Yeah So it's like 0.5% more of a percentage more. Okay, David Rauser Republican North Carolina Debbie Wasserman Schultz Democrat Florida Ron Wyden Democrat Oregon Roger Williams Republican Texas see that's the point. It's like it's not blue. It's not red It's just Corruption across the board. They're all doing it if you're making more than 50% that's bananas That's bananas. Yeah Like what is there hold on scroll it back down scroll down? Okay, look at this The Pelosi one and almost cult like following for her financial disclosures saw the value of her household's portfolio Rise by 71% in recent years Like that kind of trading is Super unusual yeah To make more than double the average gain of 24.9 so make more than 50% that's crazy Nobody does that no and how would you how do you explain that? How do you explain those decisions? Yeah when you look at the decisions like she dumped stock and then three months later Some big bill comes down the line that fucks that company Yeah, she buys stock and then three months later some big bill that comes down that you know They're funding for this new project. It's crazy More than a dozen US official sold stocks before Trump's tariff sent the market plunging of course they did Well, how about when Trump tweets out to buy remember that I was part of this That's crazy. Yeah, it's like hey, don't do that It's a crazy that he's in his own money, too How about that still like poor people are sitting here arguing about who's the better person? Like it's fucking wild like they're all corrupt and they're all fucking us Some less than others somewhere somewhere. I'm sorry. I'm sorry talk You know, and that's I think that's when you see like the South Park episode with Trump like I know we're not We're not in a fascist state yet You know what I mean, yeah, we're still okay exactly. We're still as South Park exists. We're okay. Yeah. Yeah I mean look it's all weird man because this system is completely fucked It's completely fucked and we don't want it to be and they wanted to stay the way it is and so there's this weird Thing where they have to get elected so to get elected they have to say the things that we want them to say Mm-hmm. So then we believe it every year like fucking Charlie Brown going to kick that football and lose pulls it away Can't yeah, but what we're just saying to me is that we're in this complete Shifting of the polls where the Republicans now are in favor of free speech Their Republicans want to end the wars they want to stop contributing to foreign countries They you know, they're they want comedy to be comedy again They don't want restrictions on people's behavior and thinking yeah, and the Democrats have developed this sort of like cult-like idea of what everyone should accept and what's normal and what's not normal and what needs to be what needs to be Elevated in our population and what needs to be ignored and it's just like god damn you guys are You're ruining it for everybody that thinks in a left way like everybody who's reasonable like a reasonable left-thinking person which is most artists by the way Yeah, of course and then you get to this point where you like no I can't go along with you on all these things. Yeah, you guys are you're just a bunch of fucking assholes who are using these subjects as a way Where you can behave Incredibly shitty incredibly uncharitable like vicious mean Oster sizing people from society. I don't want any part of you I'm only part of the way you guys think and behave and you to pretend that you're doing it for good You're doing it for you're gluing yourself to the wall for climate change the fuck you are Yeah, you're just a nut you're just a crazy and titled nut and you're fucking up society Yeah, this is not the way that people should be behaving and it can't believe it makes people go to the other and the Republicans are Smarter about it now in this day and age because they're like hey, we'll take in hey, it's fine Come over to us you could say whatever you want comment is back It's a big ebb and flow to me. It's like it's like some weird natural balance of like Things shift a little bit to the left. Yeah, you shift a little bit to the right But we got to hold the center if we motherfuckers could just figure out like we're so we have so much in common People just generally who would be considered more left or more right and it's just a few things Yeah, that really are the the basis of our Contention well the real problem is the team aspect of it. That's the it's fucking retarded. Yeah, you can say it Why do you know, I'm joking. Yeah, thank God you joking some people panic please edit that out. No no retards back It's just you know I think it's gonna take time But I think we're gonna eventually get to a place where we work it out and my best hopes of AI Is my best hopes because it could just ruin the whole world and take over everything and we could come slaves. Yeah, my best hopes are it gets to a point of efficiency and intelligence where corruption like that is impossible and It figures out a way to organize Government spending in a way that actually helps us because that's what we want to left and the right both want like our tax dollars Yeah, to be used to benefit the like everyone Yes, unless you're running a business and you can get an advantage and that's where it gets gross because those people can that's what I mean So much and I think AI is probably gonna recognize that it's gonna say listen you want to really fix this You have to stop this competitive advantage Well, it's our ape genes, right? We're we're just fucking more advanced apes. That's it. Yep, and we still have a You know a tribal mentality that's Mm-hmm encoded in our fucking DNA and we have to we have to elevate above that. Yep, and that just takes like a Avoiding greed. It's also. It's like what you do when you paint is You focus on creating this thing like this is what you're focused on what they're focused on is numbers in a bank account Mm-hmm and they're focused on getting those numbers in there and they're fucking obsessed with getting those numbers in there So all those other steps that they do like you're trying to figure out your painting you're trying to like brush techniques and different things You're trying different angles. Maybe shadowing it differently What they're doing is trying to figure out how to push this and push that and get this politician to make this legal and that We can make more money and then Nancy Pelosi's like we're gonna pass it Paul Put in put in the The wager because it's basically wagering right? You know, yeah, by the stocks it's gonna roll But if you have all the cards marked yeah, it is and it's um It's fucking it's a real unfortunate thing and how do you avoid that because you really you want corporations? You want them to make Apple fucking laptops and shit you want to Samsung TV you want these things right? So how do you? how do you motivate? How do you get people that are motivated to make the best products in the world and every year make them better and not have them think only about making money to the point where they're willing to bribe politicians so that they can Pollute a river in India. Yeah, and that's what's so different about artists. It's like we I suppose I would make paintings My whole life nobody bottom nobody gave a shit about them I would still make them and would give them away or put them in a fucking closet somewhere like we for me I saw Like art as a way that maybe I could get out of like the area that I was in like I could grow a little bit But at the at the same time like doing the work was what was important and what came with that was Secondary it was all just added bonus right right so like if I worked if I was selling fucking Wheels or car tires like I would only be thinking about them how much money can I make right? Especially if it's not if you're not like a wheel and car tire enthusiast is one thing Yeah, I know dudes who work on cars and they they fucking love it Especially builders. Yeah, like my friend Steve Stroke who's been on the podcast before who made my Nova That guy loves working on cars. Yeah, he loves it. I mean that is his art But he makes custom made cars and it's like to him is just like making a song It's just like making a painting. Yeah, but when you're only thinking about money, man Those are the people that are the hardest to hang out with like give her hangout with financial people Like you ever get stuck at a party in New York with a coke up financial guy. Have you seen this fucking Derek money bird fella? Oh, is it the jujitsu guy? Yeah, got his black belt three and a half years right, but he is is he legit because he's with legit people So I can't imagine Is a savage like all the respect Jake says he's legit. Yeah, I think Jake gave him his black belt with any's legit There's no way. I know Jake. There's no way Jake is his jujitsu is top of the food chain. Yeah, and I know Gordon is trained with them I know all these other people trained with dad. I know her was over there with him. I haven't heard anybody's anything negative So here's the thing someone who is like super rich, which apparently this guy is who trains with the best trainers in the world and Actually puts the time in every day. It's super easy to dismiss someone because they're rich super easy. Yeah Zuckerberg is a primary example that right? I know for a fact Zuckerberg trains really fucking hard. Yeah, and he goes with real guys and he brings in people like Dave Camarillo trains with them He's trained with a ton of people. Yeah, so he takes it very seriously. He has access to incredible trainers And he's an obsessive. He's a very competitive obsessive person. Sure. So you could say oh he's got $200 billion. He can't kick my ass That nerdy dude will fuck you up and it's because he is actually put in the time now He doesn't have the time that this Derek moneyberg guy has yeah If this guy's got if he's putting in like hours and hours every single day Which is what I heard that he was like literally training multiple hours a day every fucking day at jujitsu You can get to black belt level. I don't know if he is You know, but I know that if those guys say he is I believe them. That's I I told somebody is like let me just see I'm doing arm bar from closed guard. Let me just see how Sloppy that is and then I'll know for sure or not sloppy at all. Yeah, then exactly right Why doesn't he just like show some drilling? That's all it would take you don't even have to show me you're rolling Let me see some tight drills. Yeah, that's all I would yeah Let me see you go through but you know he doesn't have to but then again You kind of do have to if you project the fact that you're doing that Yeah, if you take some sort of like Braggadocious sort of like three three years seven months got my black belt Right, you should probably show something like hey, let me show you guys. Yeah, you know because when I start I was doing fucking to a day To a morning class night class and yeah, you know none of that came fucking fast for me But you might not have been the most naturally athletic guy true. Yeah, true But night classes and day classes are great, but one on one is the ultimate If you're a guy like him and you can get John Donner hurt a coach you you can get Gordon Ryan to coach you you can get all those Jake Shields all it me I've seen Photos and videos of him from training sessions. Yeah, the best guys in the world. Yeah, so if you can get and you're hiring them Yeah, it could be a cheat code or 100% of cheat code. Yeah, it's 100% if you do it. Yeah, you actually do the work It's 100% of cheat sure But that's the that's the thing like you have to actually be training like really hard It's not as simple as you know those guys you talked to those guys They give you the fucking secret handshake and now you're gonna do it. Yeah, right the only way to get good at your jizz It was hard work. That's it. Yeah, and I could never see somebody like Jake Shields like a fucking Giving out of belt that no wasn't deserved. No, no, no It's like when you hear Guy Ritchie is a black belt you go really and then you hear he's a hands-old Gracie black belt You go oh, yeah, okay. Yeah. He's legit. Yeah, yeah But it's not a lot of fake jujitsu black belts out there man Yeah, I feel like we used to see more of them back in the day. Oh, yeah, there'd be like those funny videos of like somebody just Oh, Eddie caught a couple of those. Yeah, there's a bunch of those videos where guy shows up at a school He's got a black belt on and then he rolls with people and he gets tortured Yeah, that was like before YouTube existed or any social media existed you kind of get away with it Yeah, well, I think people they they're crazy. There's certain people that are just completely schizophrenic and they just yeah They're in their head and they just You know, they're not even trying to like con people. It's just they've really truly believe in what their their mind is telling them Well, that might be possible But I think there's also a bunch of people that their whole life is a con It's like a series of lies from the beginning to the end. It's just they never live in the truth And so for them to put on a black belt is just the latest of yes I was reading about this guy that like said he was a doctor and like did surgery on people for years Yeah His people that are nuts man. There's a one out of three pilots in I think it's Pakistan Doesn't have a license That's what they have fake licenses. See that's true. I Know I saved the article, but I don't feel like going into my phone again But it was like Jesus Christ Like imagine you're on a plane and the guy doesn't really know how to fly like yeah, it's fucking horrifying Who's he how does he figure out how to land that fucking thing? I mean, you know to pull out the amount of intelligence to pull that off Like I probably could have got your fucking pilots license. Well A few successful flights you would think that the guy would just go ahead and get the license You're already doing the thing. That's like I see artists in art school. I'm like you're already making art Yeah, you know how the story from five years ago, so I don't know if it's changed almost one in three pilots in Pakistan have fake licenses My god, two hundred sixty two pilots in the country did not take the exam themselves and that paid someone else to sit in on their behalf They don't have flying experience He said Pakistan is eight hundred sixty active pilots serving in its domestic airlines including the country's Pakistan International airlines flagship as well as a number of foreign carriers. Oh my god How many crashes are they having? Oh, I mean if they're keeping them in the air right ambitious dudes. Yeah So sometimes you don't need a diploma on that up because of a crash. Oh, I'm so shit. Yeah, all right Whoopsies yeah, Jesus Christ. Oh my god. That's so great people are so nuts man if you let them be nuts. They will be nuts. Yeah, I think Yeah, you gotta like people don't want any regulations. You want anarchy like shy your mouth Shut up. I have this idea of like an altruistic Anarchism where it's like everybody just treats everybody kindly and the way that you would want to be treated that'll be great Yeah, but it's so it's worth the our fucking eight mind is There's too many of us that are fucking nuts. Yeah, and greedy and like just out for self and I get it like It makes sense like there's a lot of self preservation that comes with that But if we could all just kind of pull the thing is poor shit together self preservation Makes sense when you're surrounded by a bunch of people that are also selfish Right, that's part of the problem is like if you if you get lucky and you find a good crew Like early on in your life of people who are down with you They're your friends and they love you no matter what life is way easier This way easier and there's people out there that man. They don't fucking have that they don't they have a bunch of people around them That suck just like a form of competition at all times. I mean, I'm a lucky person I'm a very lucky person But I think the biggest luck that I have is the people that I've met in my friends. Yeah, because it makes your life so much better Well, I mean it shows like how much you you support Your friends too like like the idea that if we can all get lifted up Together Versus I'm gonna step on your shoulders and work my way to the fucking top probably but not only that but it also shows that this my way works You don't he doesn't hurt you to make other people successful or to help other people get more successful or to Just to tell people they're awesome and give them there as the kids call their flowers That's the kid I struggle with that one the young hip-hop kids like to say that give them their flowers But you know used to be given their props, but it's like that if you really love that person That's good for everybody. Yeah, it's good for you too Like the people that want to step on that person to elevate themselves like you're just ruining your own life You're you're missing the big picture. Yeah, it's not necessary It's not necessary even in a competitive environment even in something you're competing like your friends These people that you're competing with they help you yeah, they really did it's almost a necessity I think it's a necessity with comedy for sure. Yeah. No, I always say this a no great comedy exists in a vacuum I mean there's people that are talent that are in the middle of nowhere and some real small local scene and they could become a great comic one day But they're not going to on their own. Yeah, they have to be around great comics They can't just see them on YouTube. They've got to see like David tell live You know you got to see something like that where you're like whoa You know you got to see Colin Quinn live you got to see these people that are masters And see the thing that they do and get inspired by it. Yeah To start to learn it like understand the process because like that's the same thing for me like I Thought I was gonna be like like do the Sunday comics in the newspaper like as a kid like I didn't know I didn't know what people did to make money making art. Will you in a comic books at all? Not really but I like I was more leaning towards that kind of aspect of like This is how you can survive like actually pay your bills and Make art but you just wanted to make art this one to make art right and it took I became an assistant for a really well-known artist who You know ran a design firm did fine art did like ran that like was just like like at the top of his game and I didn't go to art school But I saw what he was doing and a couple other artists like in the same same area of like Okay, you're you're making paintings You're you're working with these companies to do some design that design money is going back into your art Practice like it was just being able to see how something exists and then knowing like okay I could do that Mm-hmm right we're already doing the same process, but here is the sort of market of it Here's how you survive and here's how you continue to grow and thrive. That's how you become professional How you become a professional, but yeah, I mean for if you're you know in fucking Wyoming somewhere you might not have these people Did you see be you might you're so disconnected from a community? You might not know and then you're like well I've got to give this this art thing up and you know Right get a job because I got to pay bills because you just don't actually have the awareness That there is a pathway and this is the failure of the school system because it never teaches kids that are artists or people that have Alternative ways of existing in society that there's ways to make a career. I got kicked out of the only art class I ever took This motherfucker we had to draw a shoe or something and I turned to mine into like a robot because I didn't like how the shoe was turning out And he said you have to draw a shoe or I'm failing you I'm gonna kick you out of the class you have to draw a shoe and I'm just kick me out there And I knew like it that you know like 15 16 that like art is what I decided is that no Nobody else can say what the fucking rules are like this is for me to do and now Forget his fucking I wish I knew that I remembered his name And tell him to fuck off right there's a lot of those guys that turn people off They had a high school art teacher turn me off to art too He was just a dick and then I found out that the most talented guy in the class is kid John Devore who I still contact every now And then we talk on email he was the most talented guy he gave that guy an F And I go no so it's like I hadn't communicated with John since I left our class But we did a bunch of stuff together. We did a bunch of drawings together. Yeah, and when do you ever draw no? Not really no I do sometimes with my daughter. One of my daughters is really talented I draw sometimes with her but for the most part. No, it's interesting. I did a little drawing on vacation We were drawing stuff together. Yeah, it was fun, but You don't just don't have the time to get obsessed with it. Sure. No, I'm obsessed with too many things and after I managed my I'm still late you just start golfing. I don't know no no no Putting no no no no putting his pool on an undulated Warp table. Oh, I understand. I get it. Listen. I know everybody that I know that I love who's into it is obsessed And that's part of the problem. Yeah, it's like I know what's coming And I know it's like a fucking multiple hour thing you got a dress like an asshole or stupid shoes You have to dress like an asshole And then I see all these fucking fights where people are fight other golf courses Do you see that drunken guy that got in with a with a hockey enforcer? Yeah through First of all the size of that guy the fact you're squaring up But you're just bluffing and you're squaring up with this fucking that's one of those spots where people think they're way Fucking tougher if they got a bag full of clubs then they actually are people get out of fucking control on what's just dudes But it's so dumb and it's drinking to the guy was clearly hammered and I think he made a video afterwards apologizing Yeah, good because he was just drunk. He's just drunk and he got stupid, but he got stupid with That's what I always tell people like don't get in fights one day You can get in fight with a guy who knows what he's doing and you're gonna get fucked up imagine that fucking fear Like when he got grabbed by that fucking hockey players got his jacket is just fucking hair when it was right hands What a nightmare. I hope he was like wow I really made a poor choice No, at that time he was just drunk as fuck and probably thinking I'm gonna get him back Yeah, I'm gonna get him back because I know what that fear feels like when somebody really fucking like you know in a gym scenario Yeah, something really grabs you and you're like oh fuck There is nothing I could do right now like I tap to big knobs Side control he squeezed me so fucking hard it felt like my ribs were gonna come out of my mouth Oh god, I mean, you know, I was like a blue belt and maybe he's still a white belt and I by tap to side control That's crazy. I started to think well what if he was fucking punching me too Well, he's way bigger. Yeah, it was fucking massive. Yeah, he's way bigger than you know The the the the amount of pressure if you're a really big person you put down in a small person It's really kind of bearable But even somebody who's like my same same weight or whatever like that when you really like I'm fucking wrapped up and like if This person wanted to they could end to me right now. Yeah, that was always the most I opening to me when I would roll with guys who are 30 40 pounds lighter than me They just fucked me up and immediately I was like I never want to act tough in public again ever But like that fear of like yeah, there's somebody I I got in there was a guy who was I was And then like a time period where I was partying a lot This guy was just being a dick to a bunch of people said something shitty to my friend And I'm trying to walk away and it just like my my brain was just like say something and I just like why you being a fucking dick like you know, and he puffed up and Started coming at me and like he like swipe something out of my hand and immediately my instincts kicked into jujitsu I grabbed he had like a like a like a flannel on I grabbed his collar like a lapel and I grabbed his wrist and just getting like immediately I was just gonna throw him and then Like the other voice in my head is like the guy had a dog actually who wasn't on leash And I was like if I throw this guy on his head right now and his dog runs in the street I'm a feel a little guilty, but I sensed in him that you don't like when a grappler like grabs your wrist like you feel it It feels different than somebody else. It's someone who knows what they're doing. Yeah, like immediately grab both and like Put the squeeze on them that I could read in his eyes like oh that wasn't normal And then I was like no no no like let go and then he like walked away talking shit That's good. Yeah, yeah, yeah, perfect and you know that that's really rare for me But it was like he had said something shitty to somebody but to have somebody grab you like that and the fear that can come with that Yeah, I would never want to experience that in real life. No like fucking Horrified Street fights are stupid. They're terrible and the people that know how to fight don't do them They don't want anything to do with it. You should just go to a gym Yeah, go to a gym if you have this desire did you see this video recently? That's what yesterday you guys make me think of it. What happened? This guy on top they're saying the guy in the bombs of white belt He gets choked out without the use of arms. It's all legs here Oh, this is so rude. Why is he doing this to a white belt? Well, I mean the training I guess I know but that's for the Go to you guys being experts. Yeah, oh, Eddie can do that very rude No, well, it's kind of rude. It's also that guy is just training He's just using that guy as a practice dummy Triangle it's kind of rude, but I mean what do you want to happen if you roll with a white belt? Do you want him to win? Well, you want to let him win? No like what do you do? Yeah, you tap them you tell him what to do along the way like you got to protect this arm the Psalms and a bad spot don't reach back like that because you open yourself up for the arm triangle You got to tell him t-rex keep your arms in tight. That's how I coach Yeah, you know what I'm training with somebody like I'm talking them through it I'll even I'll do the thing where I tell them what I'm gonna do before I do it Yeah, so that they can start to work out their defenses and like get an idea Because there's a black belt like you can beat everybody up like that kind of loses some of its Shine after a while. I think that guy was using that dude is just a training dummy He was like yeah, I could just work my Just working on his legs. Yeah, yeah, because if you can cinch up a triangle even on a white belt with no legs At least you get in reps in no yeah And it probably makes it like somewhat more difficult better than that dummy. I have collecting dust and mic Jim Yeah Exactly dummy that doesn't fight back at all just like slight reason you know what I do use though I use that Bubba dummy, you know that thing the punching dummy. It's like the rubber. Oh, yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, what's up? There's something good for that just target practice. It's good You can't kick it too hard because it falls over But if you will and kick the face you could slap the face Yeah, and there's something about those that just you want to kind of give them a little bit of the business. Yeah Bob We have one sitting right next to our our boxing ring in the gym and I always post up and it's really good for practicing certain kicks It's really good for question mark kicks because there's a shoulder element and you're with a question mark kick You're really trying to go over the shoulder. Yeah, like the globé fotosa Fito someone globé fotosa Fito so had the absolute best question mark kick of all time and his question mark kick would come down on you It would go over the shoulders and just chop down and like the that Bob dummy is great for practicing that It's like the best thing for practicing because the bag is so straight You know the bag kicking down like that. It's like it's you don't have a real target Yeah, you do with that Bob dummy because you're really trying to get the neck you're really trying to go over the top and get that neck Yeah, such a strange looking kick to oh yeah, it works though, man Yeah, that fucker works that works a lot because like you worry about that front kick to the guts So you'll do this, you know, or you think a low kick is coming and then it comes over the top and by the time it's you don't react It's you can't react in time. Yeah, I do like you're already planning to get kicked in the leg and by the time you figure it out It's in your foot Kick is coming and then it comes over the top and by the time it's you don't react it is you can't react in time Yeah, I do like you're already planning to get kicked in the leg and by the time you figure it out It's in your fucking ear exactly and the guys that are good with like Luke rock hold has a nasty one. Yeah guys that are good with it Like oh It's just so sneaky over the top. Yeah That's another imagine just running into some tie guy who you think you can throw around Just fucking blast you with a fucking knee not only that the trips They're so good at tying up in the clinician and dumping people if you're trained with like a guy who's really good at tripping you Yeah, as soon as you tie up whoops your leg is up, you know like mother fucker That's what I always want to throw like flying like ankle locks. Yeah Well, that's the difference between like Muay Thai and Jiu Jitsu because in Jiu Jitsu Okay, you threw me to the ground now. We're just just started. Yeah, and now I have a hold of your leg then the referee's not gonna stand us up I'm gonna break your knee. Yeah, like you dumb ass you threw me down with an inside control. I have an inside hook It's like fucking super power too. Yeah, I'm so glad I found it like I owe a lot to you I think Like the way you spoke of it like back then to like even just to get into the gym because that's the fucking hardest part like like crossing that door path and getting on the mat Like there's so many days where you're gonna be like I don't want to do that like I don't feel like but as soon as you get there It's like so worthwhile and so valuable. Yeah, you just gotta force yourself to do it And that's something I really owe to Eddie Eddie is crazy, you know like creative and abstracts He is super disciplined when it comes to his training. He was always like super super disciplined We would see it like my game is is very similar to like To eddies and like Lucas Letch Like that just Wherever you can get a hold of the leg like I pull I like to pull to quarter guard You know what I mean? It's like I like to play from there and like I I'm curious I want to know how many people have to lock down muscle in their fucking calf No, there has to be there, but I've never seen one and So if I tip our dog get that thing get that thing It's trying to get you put like a little plate on it and you lift you lift with your foot. Yeah legit man You could do tip bar raises where you just stand on your heels and lean against the wall Just lift your foot up. Yeah over and over and over again. That does it too. Yeah, but the tip bar thing you could do it with weight That's it right there. Look at that sucker. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I have that. I use that fucker every day I have both of them I've been one of my butterfly gaseen better to yeah, man Does this will have a big impact on it and you could also use it to do a leg extension? So you could do a leg extension and then you could lift the foot at the top if you wanted to so you could actually Emulate that's funny. You actually do it from your back now that I'm thinking about it You could put one of those in on each leg and you could lie down on your back and you could specifically Yeah, and specifically work butterfly guard There's so many cool ways to work out now. I know there's so many Amazing people that have like figured out ways to protect your knees and protect your back and you know and help your shoulder stability and Just they give it away. They give it away online like it's we have such an amazing resource available now for training I think about like if you're a young guy like there's these guys that are coming up that have only been doing just for sure Like Joseph Chan I've only been doing just for a short amount of time You know like less than seven years. I think and Dominating also what why because he's obsessed and because he has all this information online Yeah, you you can watch so many Instructionals. Yeah, there's so many videos of guys pulling things off you can rewind it watch it again rewind it Watch it again get together with your friend. Yeah, okay Put your no put your hand on the left knee Okay, and then when I push you pull and then watch that like oh shit that works And that takes so long if you're just doing it like in an organic like training way But the beauty like I like I came up with what a technique that I haven't seen Or haven't done before that like it can everything continues to evolve even as much as we've all trained the same shit for so long Like there's still new avenues to or if there's still room to be creative always like that's one of the cool things that Eddie will do So I'm gonna someone pull something off and they have a thing Eddie will go show me that show me that everybody check this out and they'll have the whole class gather round and then like Tell me what you're doing talk me through the thing What I like to do is I like to get mission control and then I shovel this arm through and then I grip it like this And like okay try that and everybody tries it and then you go do it on me You're like huh. Yeah. All right. Let me try do it on you Huh like do not so many try to get out of this and then they'll try to like workshop it Like would it be better with this would it be better with that like how did you get to this spot like why did you do have a pathway That you take to get to this you get to this spot all the time huh and that's so similar to your Comedian sort of community too like we have that option Why I think that's why I brought that to the comedy community because that was always the way it wasn't gems Yeah, and jujitsu and and kickboxing and tuck window and moy time like people teach you how to do stuff And it's so good for us as a like a culture too like the way to interact with people who you may never interact with in your day-to-day life ever yeah like to have that sort of community aspect Like I feel like that draws a lot of people in outside of all the other benefits Yes, there's a lot of community to it and it's and it's such a like vast array of different types of people from every culture from every sort of class level Yeah, and we all find a common Equality of course with a hierarchy of of experience But we're all in the same boat together Well, that's the same with yoga. It's the same with a lot of things Yeah, you know, it's just like you find a group of people that have also found this very productive very Beneficial thing we go and marshy Marsh just woke up I saw your new puppy. Oh, he's adorable. Jesus Christ. He's marshal's new buddy. Yeah, really fun together. Is it a cock or spaniel? No, it's a king Charles spaniel. Okay marshy. Give me a buddy Sure, everybody come say hi to everybody Come on that's a cutie He's tired long dad you guys go run in come on up not today today. Just just came here to hang out Golder retrievers are the absolute best dogs. They're just all love They're just they would just want to cuddle with you. Yeah, with you and they want to play But the whole thing is just like be with you. Yeah, they're just up past And they sweet to everybody I wish they lived like 150 years They live if you look well, he's on a really good diet. Yeah, we're putting them on the farmers dog now Changing his food. He was on the mave stuff, which is great, but it's on a raw food. Yeah That's how it's gonna ask you to do the raw made it giant difference. Yeah, giant difference in the way he looks the week His coat is yeah giant difference in his energy levels Yeah, you know Well, it's also it's like they're just like people man if you have a person and you feed them nothing but process food They're gonna be sick. Yeah, you can cereal every day. Yeah, I mean that stuff just sits on a counter Forever it sits on a shelf you go to the pet food store those bags are sitting there like any real food shouldn't be just sitting there Like that it's gonna rot. Yeah, so that means that food is nothing alive in it. You know You've got you gotta give them the fucking raw Mm-hmm. Well, like I said, you cut it with the with the dry. You don't need to Don't need to this the way they have these like with farmers dog and with the stuff that he's been eating mave It comes with it's like frozen like green beans and blueberries and potatoes And meat it's bad. That's food. Yeah, and it just changes everything man. They don't fart as much like it's so much better for them They have way more energy. It's like they're whole his whole body Composition changed. Yeah. I love it when people like actually fucking care like this Yeah, their pet isn't just a like a fucking decoration. No dogs are the best. Yeah, they're Your life will be more loving if you have dogs They're just always around. They're always cool. They're so consistent and they they have simple needs. Yeah They just want to be unless unconditionally loving yeah all the time unless you get a working dog And there's a lot of dummies out there that go and get a Belgian malamois and you not understand like okay Yeah, they're great dogs, but you have you have a responsibility now. Yeah, because you don't have a regular dog You have a super athlete Living with like a canine race car. Yeah, that's really what that is like you you can't just leave that in the yard You see those people that train those dogs. Oh, yeah, doing a little walking between their legs as they're walking in like yeah My friend just got one Have a tough one. He's sending me videos of the puppy and like oh my god. This thing is like bro They jump like 25 feet in the air bottle. They fly Run right up walls. Yeah, there's a bad. You know those fuckers chasing you. Yeah, it's hell. They're meat missiles This is I'll send this to you I sent it to I sent it to also to Jamie because I sent it to Brian Cowan because me and Brian Cowan are both retarded And we talk about dogs all day long We talk about like what's the coolest animal? But this video shows the difference between how a shepherd a German Shepherd which is also a great dog Approaches something to the difference to a Belgian melon wan does because yeah Have you seen it? Yeah, across the chairs and shit. Yeah, I sent it to you It's quick. It's not like the the shepherd runs around He's like I'm gonna find a way to get to that guy. I'm gonna go around this way The melon wan runs over the chairs Here's the shepherd so the shepherd he's going around He's got to find the guy and he gets to him. He bites him. Watch the melon wan Now let's do look Over every chair. It's like just so driven They're so driven and so athletic man and it's not that a German Shepherd's not athletic. Yeah, right But like in comparison look at what this fucker does man. Yeah, he just runs over these chairs They're in one second insane. They're so athletic so like a dog like that is not like Marshall Like Marshall looks cool just hang in here. Yeah, chill. You got a Belgian melon wan that motherfucker needs tasks It's just like it's basically like me. Yeah, like you have to work him out He's got to do things you can't just have him sitting in the house. He'll go fucking crazy Otherwise he's gonna be smoking crack back in the alleyway. He is ADHD in dog form. That's sort of Belgian melon wan is You can't put him on ritlin. You got to exercise that little guy. Yeah, you got to work that shit out Yeah, man. He needs and it's like if you have the time to do that they're incredible dogs But it's like you got to know what you're getting. You know if you want a dog they just chills get yourself a golden retriever You want a family dog? Yeah, can't yourself a go or a lab they're the best. They're just chill I had a Boston Terrier for a long time. Oh, they're sweet. I have been able to get another dog since since he died Like it was like too draining too emotionally draining like it's hard. Yeah, it was like a family member It's hard man. It's hard. It's still good sad thinking about my dogs. Yeah, they've died But you know there's loss in their life and you just got to appreciate them. Why they're here Yeah, I always love new ones too. I love everybody's dogs. Oh of Carl. Carl's here today He seems like a little calmer with Marshall today Growing boy. He's growing. He's getting it shit together. Yeah, he's just a puppy, right? He's also listening when you tell him stop now. He's listening Bulldogs are a special breed. Yeah, especially the English ones like they're just stubborn little pricks. Yeah Like they're gonna do what they want. I buy what was watching a lady try to walk her to like young English bulldogs this morning They were walking her like and they'll put that little you'll actually get it with the French bulldog when they put the brakes on And they're like we normally walk this way, but right now I'm going that way, bitch. Yeah, exactly. I'm the boss. Yeah, especially male dogs with their balls They'll they'll test you. He's never tested me once not once never never growled Never growl he's pretty fucking mele. He's the best he you know he barks at snowmen In my neighborhood this guy had a one of them inflatable snowman and I'm taking him for a walk He's a whoop He's not a guy The form of it whatever it was and it was one of them flatable one so it's kind of like moving around He's like yo what the fuck is that is that a bear? Like yeah, I would love to jump in a dog's brain when they have those moments right A snowman freak out. Yeah, probably looks like a fucking monster. Bro. It's so funny because you know because I'm relaxed and he's barking I'm like bro get trust me. Yeah, I would I'd be thanking you if that was a bad Back at you like are we gonna fight this fucking thing? You heard it's here. That's a fucking guy. Like no, it's just it's just an inflatable thing Yeah, you can put out of that he never barks. He'll bark if he wants to be let in. That's it He goes the door and just let out a little bark. Yeah, just let you know hey That's Jamie now we're talking before like it's very interesting how you start to communicate If your dogs and you start to understand what they need and like over enough time You have a silent communication which is very very peculiar And he knows the difference that you can go in for a hike and then come into the studio He knows the difference. Yeah, it's like you know when he if we go somewhere and he's gonna go run He's all amped up when he gets out of the car. He gets here and he's like hey everybody's cool How's it I do an air conditioning zone? He's ready to lie in his back and get pet. Yeah. Yeah, it's like he's He's the best. Yeah dogs are fucking amazing. We almost don't deserve them. Well, it's just such a weird thing that we've done Because hope is our they used to be wolves and you can't train wolves There's a reason why wolves aren't in the circus think about that Think about that you've got monkeys bears and tigers that you can train to do circus shows in front of everybody You can't train a wolf They won't listen but yet somehow we pulled it off the wolf into a dog that like literally listens to everything I say yeah, I gotta say so you see now buddy relax and I'll just set You know, all right, you ready to go? He's like I'm ready and he just gets up and goes like he's like how did that happen? And the fact that they have that like fucking super gene that they they could Transform in so many different variations right of the same thing through selection Yeah, that's what's weird like selective breeding where you could turn a dog into Carl Like you have enough time you can turn a mastiff into this tiny little thing You just need enough time in enough different select genes And finally this female is a little smaller It was breeder with a smaller male and this one has a shorter snout like how are they even how? What'd you do? How'd you get a chihuahua? Right from a wolf a wolf you know, they didn't even they weren't even sure of that until like I don't fucking 20 years ago Really they didn't know they thought they came from wild dogs and shit. Yeah, when they started sequencing the genome. They're like what? Yeah, it's exactly the same They kind of thought probably a lot of them came from wolves like Huskies and shit like that Yeah, like no all of them that sort of symbiosis is really interesting too Like how plants like we have that symbiosis with plants and like Like certain plants who have followed our Evolutionary line down the way or you know like we get connected to these I think sometimes we forget that we're still a natural part of the environment Well, how weird is it that plants literally put their seeds in the middle of delicious fruit So that we should have been shitted out and that shivl act as a fertilizer and help it grow Yeah, it's fucking wild What I create it not only that but if you eat the seeds they're bad for you, but if you see a cyanide in it So it's like evolutionary design Evolutionary design for you to just pass it through digestive tract whole. Yeah Just swallow them or even the fact that it's the certain color that reminds us of a flavor They're like a certain color looks delicious. Yeah All it's doing is tricking us into eating it to shit it somewhere and allow itself to Repress certain color that looks poisonous right so you scared of it. Yeah, you know I was watching this video the other day of a spider that makes a decoy spider and Put it in the spot that How it's building a sculpture right yeah, and it looks like a fucking spider. Yeah, which is really crazy So how does a spider even know what a spider looks like and how did it develop a mirror right? How did it develop this ability? To make a sculpture out of its own webbing like look at this that's crazy man. Yeah, I mean that's really crazy It's making a decoy. Yeah, I mean like those caterpillars. It looks like they have a snake. Oh Yeah, or whatever Romanticus is you ever see mantis that make it look like they're their arms or giant teeth They put their arms Bridges and they make it look where they have a giant mouth. Yeah Such a fucking like oh, that's that's the wild thing about evolution. It's like how What is the entire process that allows some thing to develop where when the the moth opens its wings? It looks like eyeballs. Yeah, like what is that? Yeah Fucking just life is really good at reproducing itself How do you get a Venus fly trap where a plant tricks you and it coming onto the center of this trap and then And then it flies nuts The whole thing I mean that's why you got to like find some joy in it find like find a little You know entertainment and how fucking bizarre everything is we get so wrapped up in our day today And are just getting by like just having the moment to be like wasn't that a part of a problem with working really hard to like You know, you don't see the forest for the trees. Yeah Yeah, you can get caught up in whatever the fuck you're doing and like forget like god the world is pretty amazing Yeah, the whole thing is so fucking bizarre. Yeah, and I you know We're so we try so hard to back like we fucking know it all too To just leave some room for some some mystery. Yeah, so important Well people are weird man, and there's no real good working Manual of how to live life. Yeah, there's there's no right way. There's no right way like Any advice anybody tries to give you They're only working on their own experience Especially when you're trying to pick a weird career. Yeah. Yeah, like an artist. Yeah, good luck or comedian or an MMA fighter or anything Like you want to do that. It's a who you can even ask you gotta find what you love and Literally just fucking go for it like and I I know there is a sort of Like okay, you got kids you got a fucking mortgage. Yeah, you know like I'm I've hustled all kinds of different ways to to make sure I continue on the process, you know on the path But like yeah, it's very different if you have people that you're taking care of and those responsibilities are paramount But then sometimes maybe that that reward system that you would get from something else maybe comes from that 100% 100% But what we're saying is that like as you are Listening to this if you're going on your journey into life and you think you might be going in a safe direction that it's gonna make money Versus the direction that you really want to go to ask yourself how bad you really want it Like what do you want to do with your life? Do you want your life to be really fun? Do you want your life to be really rewarding? Will you wake up and you're excited about what you do or do you want every day to be a grind? Do you want every day to be like you can't wait to get off so you can get a cocktail So you can fucking calm down cuz you hated you hate everybody in the office and everybody treats every like shit The boss is a dick and you just get home. You just want to drink and watch Netflix like You gotta decide you gotta decide and you're gonna have to take some right drastic steps and you're probably gonna have a lot of doubt Especially if you're doing something weird like if you want to be an artist or you want to be a comedian like yeah, it's a long road That doubt fuels it can it can handcuff you and make you stop, but it can also Push you to go further. Well, that's where doing something else that's difficult So you know that you can do difficult things really comes in handy and that's what I always preach about Jiu Jitsu Yeah, I think Jiu Jitsu above all of them is the one that you can do the most and You get the most out of it and you can get hurt for sure and I've been hurt a bunch of times Don't get me wrong, but it's a different kind of hurt and sparring the hurt that you get from kickboxing and you know that you Were talking about for Mooie Thai. It's different. You can't do that every day. You can't you can't sparvey day You get hurt. Yeah, you get your brain gets beaten up your fucking your nose gets fucked up We can't breathe out of it anymore. It's just you don't want that kind of hurt It's too debilitating and it could fuck with you for the rest of your life in terms of like the just literally the way you think Which was always the scariest thing for me I remember when I was thinking about stopping fighting It was like because I was lying in bed at night with headaches. Yeah from sparring days Yeah, and I was like what am I doing to my brain like this is the only thing that I have that's gonna help me decide How to get through life? Yeah, only thing that I have. Yeah, and once you start meeting people that you know are compromised Meeting people that you know have brain damage like yeah It's starting to see it man like I think people who have been fighters their whole life You know starting to see a lot of that like go to the CTE or whatever the football players We're dealing with and like how big of an effect. I mean head trauma is so So fucking damaging. Yep, like and the way that it could show itself in so many different ways And like gambling addictions. Yes, it's drug addiction depression even like manias like like like hallucinations Yep, you know I I feel like it almost transforms people into like Like Like waking nightmares Sometimes for some people sure to where it's like that feeling of like you know like you see somebody But there's somebody else exactly right like there's so many like aspects that like just end up Destroying your your normal day-to-day life. It's yeah, fucks up their hormones it fucks up everything and You know yet it makes for this insanely Attractive sport to watch yeah, and they love it right? You just got to know when to get out Yeah, you got to know when to get out and that's what's hard Yeah, and the really the hardest thing is That they don't have anything else Because in order to be really good at something like fighting you have to dedicate your entire life to it It has to be everything about your waking moment Yeah, and when it's not and it's just a job That's when it gets fucking dangerous because those guys get really fucked up a lot of the time Yeah, when you have to get the next fight to to keep the fucking train rolling Yeah, and then you have a family and then like you realize like you know how many savings Yeah, and so then to quit like what are you gonna do? How are you gonna generate you know if you're fighting and you're making 250 300 thousand dollars a year fighting three or four times a year like how are you gonna replace that? Well, they're a great job. Yeah, you're not you don't have any skills Yeah, all your skills are in how to fuck people up Yeah, so what are you gonna do you gonna teach you could teach maybe especially if you're real technical? Yeah, but that's not gonna give you the same quality of life or like that You know you could eventually I mean there's some guys and make a lot of money off of teaching sure You know, it's kind of rare the I mean we have to be really good Yeah, yeah, you have to be really good because there's like be franchising this is a lot of demand You know like you could if you're an Eddie Bravo You can teach seminars and you have a bunch of affiliates and a bunch of schools He's on the top, you know, five percent. Exactly. You know exactly for most people. It's grand. Yeah I mean I teach I I was telling Zach like to me jujitsu is like a parasite and it got in me And now it's trying to find other hosts Like I literally have just trying to share But it's like it's like jujitsu is forcing me to share it Regurgitating it into some other hosts so that it can regurgitate itself in that's a little bit somebody else But it's a beneficial parasite don't you think that teaching helps your jujitsu though a million percent like I show all of my students all of my tricks So that when I try to use my tricks on them it stops working Yeah, and then I have to evolve the tricks or like create other little smoke screens and diversions Yeah, to get to the spot that I need to get because they know yeah, and I I like to I'll show stuff that I don't normally do but a majority of my curriculum is stuff that I do that I know works that I know all the ins and outs of I know every little detail of how you get to the spot like what you do what you do if they do a b or c and that's what I share and As I do that like I I shite I notice little techniques not working anymore Well, do you think it's also as you explain the techniques to people it tightens up your own understanding of the techniques Yeah, makes better at thousand percent because you have to think of it And it like a lot of times our movements are muscle memory Mm-hmm. Right? We don't really consciously think too much about it because we've done it a thousand times Where it's like I do this then I do this then I do that right? And you don't think about it, but when you have to show somebody yeah To think about all those things that you never think about help explain to somebody who Doesn't know what the fuck you're talking about yeah and get them to Graspy I've seen that time and time again in jujitsu where guys pretty good and he starts teaching like coaching like Beginners one-on-profit lessons just to make some extra money and next thing. No, he's a killer. Yeah, it's like wow That's it's I think that's a missing part of the key to development is teaching I think I Honestly surprised when others don't want to do the same like I never like I never gatekeep techniques Like I if I see something that I think will work like I honestly think I'm a much better coach Then I am a jujitsu practitioner like I'm horrible at competing like Just sometimes I just to be like, okay, I'm just gonna stay here until like kind of have a room to get out I don't have to try to fucking hard but I Can see the game much better in my students and right like work my gym stealing me is a little bit of like a rag Sort of like bad news bears kind of gym because there's so many high-level competitive gyms in San Diego Yeah, but we go to all the local tournaments and we get on the fucking on the podium That's cool. Yeah, yeah, that's very cool and we're not There goes a tough place for jujitsu dog. Yeah, you got fucking jacos placed down there Barrett Yoshida's down there how many people isn't it was hoyler had a school down there Stylen's in San Diego. He actually gave the guy who was the purple belt hit through me on my head that I was talking about earlier He got his black belt from hoyler Autos is there. Oh, yeah, that's right. That's right. Oh, it's what a hotbed of jujitsu. Yeah It's like little fucking Brazil and they're funny like California Especially like during the UFC's growing period became one of the biggest hotbeds of jujitsu in the world Yeah, they all went there. Yeah, I went there because they could surf. Yeah, they even surf Like probably like climate-wise fairly similar fairly similar Yeah, and then a ton of population to draw from to get students. Yeah. Yeah Especially in that LA area where it's like people were already kind of like in a Bruce Lee in Norison shit, right? And then yeah, you know, you see hoists just fucking freak everybody out We had me I watched all those early fights as a kid I had a friend's dad who like would always fucking get the pay-per-view That's another thing about Austin. We have so many jujitsu gyms here now. Yeah, Gordon has his place now And team has their place. You have got Gracie Baja's here. You got shanji rubaros here Yeah, everybody's here. There's so many different gyms here. There's multiple 10th planets here You know, there's there's a game just opened up a 10th planet in Bastrop There's a 10th planet right down in this area. There's a 10th planet There's like three or four 10th planets. Yeah, I think there's at least three and they're all packed right packed. Yeah Yeah, yeah, it's like there's so many people that are interested in it because You know, it really does work. It really helps you and not just works like as a martial art to learn how to defend yourself It's a vehicle for understanding yourself better. It helps you in everything you do As long as you just do it smart and don't get hurt Exactly that's like me trying to get up when I fucking my neck was pinched like that was jujitsu. Yeah Like I use it in so many aspects of my life like it's such a such a beautiful weird little sport Fucking my neck was pinched like that was jujitsu. Yeah, like I use it in so many aspects of my life Like it's such a such a beautiful weird little sport Yes, sir lifestyle my backswell. I'm glad you came in Joe Rogan. Thank you for having me my brother Tell everybody where they could find you online Mike Maxwell art calm and all the social medias are at Mike Maxwell art My gallery in Santa Monica's BG gallery and I got a gallery out in New Orleans mortal machine You could find my dope out there. And is it all on Mike Maxwell art? Yeah, you could find all that. Okay beautiful. All right brother. Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate my man. All right, bye everybody