The general gonna experience what do you think is gonna happen with Trump? What do you know about the the raid? The FBI raid I have no inside knowledge I don't know I mean he called I think I Think he did retweet us a couple times He retweeted me a couple times, too hilarious He I was laughing my ass up. I was like the fucking president retweeted me I think that the people who are arguing that that he's been given a ton of fuel and like they just poured rocket fuel in his engine I think it's absolutely true. I mean if you just look at the fundraising and he's done off the back of this already right But what did the absolutely yeah, but I don't mean in terms of politically? I mean like legally like what did they find oh and is he actually is he actually in trouble? Because I think the goal was to try to knock him out of the 2024 elections, right? But big match trying him for crimes What did you do? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know what they were jamming Do that is it been absolutely released what they caught? I don't know that yet, but it's holding on to Boxes is it really about he was life half confidential information that he shouldn't have had in his home like that was so important They couldn't just ask for it. They had to go in there and get it Well, I think the part the problem is having it right because if you have it in an Unsecure location meaning unsecure in terms of the government's protection It's not it's not locked up in archives. It's not in a place that's very difficult to access You have control personally over the access to something that's top secret if that's the case Then that's a problem because that safe could be open people can get in there people can get the code They can copy it they could send it to China Yeah, but do you think that's a genuine concern or is it we they want to find something anything that they can use to prevent him for money again? I think both things are valid I Think if they're just doing that and they're using the FBI in a way that they would never use it against Hillary Clinton And they're going after him in a way they would never go after Galen Maxwell's client list Oh my god, then I think was going to be right then we have a real conversation But it doesn't mean that there shouldn't be a real conversation about should someone have access? No I don't know what the files were I have zero idea whether not They were okay for him to have or declassify. I don't know but I Think the argument would be if you're not supposed if there's a fucking a whole chain of command about classified documents This is this is the law on classified documents and you decide to violate that law because You think you can't right? I just want to keep them and you just keep them in your safe I don't know if this that's what happened But if that is what happened that someone needs to be held accountable for that you're not supposed to do that right right? You're not above the law and you can't decide that you're not going to follow the law because you know better Right and I think I think where people lose where they stop where they don't care about that It's because they're like, okay, you know if you're gonna be selectively enforcing laws like that and just turn a blind eye to Hillary deleting emails that have been subpoenaed and all of that in the A blind eye to Hunter Biden trying to act like this is not a story until you're forced to admit that it is It's the double standard that makes everybody say this is persecution for sure and so even if it's just even if there was something That was done that was wrong They're still choosing to be selective about going after him in a way that comes across as They're after him doing what they wouldn't normally do to someone on their own side if it was Hillary Clinton's home They'd have no interest in what's in our safe. Good. I feel them Jokes Yeah, I see what you're saying. I see both sides though I see the side that if you're an anti-Trump person and you find out that he's doing something that's against the law You'd want to prosecute it for it. Yeah. I see both sides. Yeah. I really do I don't know the specifics of the Hillary Clinton email thing in terms of like what those files were but if they're the same Classification of files as like he had you could make the argument They were more vulnerable because they were on a regular laptop. Well, and it's still destroyed after subpoena I mean imagine imagine if Trump was subpoenaed for this information instead of handing it over He burned it right that is where she gets really squirrely. Yeah gets really squirrely and it's like what what punishments are there for that? Is it zero? There's nothing nothing not a fucking thing and everybody's just like, you know what it didn't she had She has a hat for sale to his but her emails about her emails. She's she's capitalizing good for her I wonder if like amongst people that are on the right now a black hat with white letters get your ass kicked You know like the Maga hat. Yeah, you could have a Maga hat that said anything like I saw a lady get maced in the face Because she had a hat on that said it was a red hat with white letters that said make Bitcoin great again And she was at one of those protesters a video for the Maga. Yeah, and some guy maced her in the face He pepper sprayer in the face because she had a red hat with white letters about Bitcoin. That's assault by the way It is assault. Well that happened a lot of those fucking anti-Trump protests. That's it's just the problem is that He was such a divisive character that he became a great enemy for the other side He wasn't like a statesman who like you know you could criticize his policies and his positions You could say he's heartless all you want, but he represents the United States in a state's been leeway and like no Trump's you know, he's he's a wild guy that like encourages people to hate him Do you think DeSantis would demand or command more respect from the left and the left still hates him But they don't hate him in the same way they hated Trump They try to but he's more reasonable. He's very like level in the way he talks about things He's firm though. I mean, yes. He's yes, but you know I'm saying like he's he doesn't get he's not He's not an insulting like character like Trump's a character right like part of what he's doing is like doing comedy It's like he's doing stand-up when he's up there. I mean when he makes fun of Biden and makes fun other people like he's doing fucking stand-up He really is and he kills It's he's got this thing You know and that thing is like everybody's with him is fucking really with him and everybody's against him is really really against him And he like encourages it, you know, he he that is what I think is not good That that part of it like you're I get where he comes from because like that's what made him's fighting against the haters You know, but when you're a president like that's a different role That's different role than being the fucking host of the apprentice right and a lot of people hope that when he got in there He's gonna abandon that and just be like common sense get shit done. No, he's on Twitter calling his ex girlfriend horse Sayin about Kim John and call him little rocket man. He's fucking why I don't see anything about Rosie O'Donnell. Oh, yeah Did you call her fat pig something like that? Yeah, exactly what he said, but it was nasty. Oh, he says horrible shit He calls her a loser all the time. Yeah, but I mean people think it's hysterical They do and they do have something like a butt, you know the but her emails thing, but his mean tweets, you know like he could sell shirts and stuff about that because it's like, you know, yeah, well Yeah, a lot of people will say yeah, I hit that I don't approve of his tweets and all these tweets No, a lot of people would say that a lot of people on the right will say that yeah a lot of people on the right This is where I think they have hope in DeSantis that he wouldn't do the same kind of things He would never tweet things like that. He would never call Kim Jung on little rock man all the shit was hilarious He would never call his ex-girlfriend horse face like that kind of stuff is you know in many people's eyes and a lot of Conservatives eyes. It's unbecoming of the commander in the office. Yeah. Yeah, that's that's the argument against it