Boom and we're live. How are you sir? Oh brother I'm so blessed to be here man I want to salute you to work that you do and the fact that you will one hell of an artist man I'm telling you. Well, thank you very much coming to stand up comedy strange times We the swing from the political the personal from the animals on to the Visionary it's just a beautiful thing to behold my brother. Thank you from you. That is an honor I've been a huge fan of you for a long time So for you to say that to me means means the world. Oh, it's a deep thing I can see your love for Richard Pratt, man. I walk in your space and I'm just chanformed by the guy's the spirit They're spread his place for man Yeah, big here Prior here then when you tell me you work with the great Richard Pratt. It's all my For five weeks I followed him when I was a young comedian at the commestore I went on right after him every night he performed What was that like? It was strange to be in the room with him because When I was a 14 year old boy my parents took me see live at the sunset strip and I could not believe that anybody could be so funny Just talking that was my first experience with stand up comedy other than that. I'd seen like I'd seen people perform on the Tonight show and things on those lines. I'm about hoping It was like ha ha ha it was okay, you know what I mean? But when you see Richard in concert in a movie theater, I couldn't believe how funny it was it didn't make sense I'd seen funny movies before like you know comedy movies that were made you laugh but nothing nothing like that I'm like this guy's just talking it changed my life That's that's what you can see the power of art. Yeah, and it's connected to freedom because I've always viewed Richard Prior as a free as man 20th century certain to free as black man along with Muhammad Ali He's a free as black man to 20th century. He is so self determining Yeah, the choices that he makes has to do with his own sense of self He doesn't care to other people think he doesn't know the king looking for other people's approval recognition He's gonna be who he is any pays a major cost for that. Yeah, me anytime you that free in a world of such Such on freedom you're gonna pay a major major cost. Well, yeah Tackler honesty and he took I feel like what happened was Lenny Bruce opened the art form up and then Richard prior took it to a new place That's that's in terms of the the origins the real greats that's exactly but then George oh Yeah, oh George calling He was the most prolific he did an hour special every year till he died every year And they knew every each one different and but all three but I think you are in that tradition I was saying man when I saw you doing the dogs and the cats I'm getting inside of there Souls, you know For found that he is so man as an artist and as a human being to do that I said oh my god, and it reminded me of prior It's what I walk in and I see your connection. I say I'll be I shouldn't be surprised well it was just being in the room with him was strange I just couldn't believe it was real. You know, it was in my twenties. You end of 20s. He was in his He was at the end and as I said he couldn't walk anymore. They used to have to carry him to the stage and But he performed sold out every night sitting in the chair. Yeah, sat in the chair. Yeah, yeah, yeah But it was sold out every night people could continue to Never seen that before I don't believe there was tapes of it. I don't believe anybody recorded it if they did record it Nobody released it. It was just it was this was in the 90s and This was again. This was the end of his life He just decided, you know, he was dying and he's decided he'd go back to his love You want to go back doing stand up and because you got you got that picture January 1st 1963 brother prior my brother just broke down on yeah, Jamie I didn't even know what he got a ready five days and jail He had a woman that he knew he moved to Pittsburgh apparently with soon he's about 22 years old There Prior conviction there it is. There's the mock shop. Wow. We got a beginner. So He had a friend of his which is a woman that was singing in clubs her father was a cop and in his autobiography He wrote that among other things that he or she paid him or she gave him money He admitted to beating her ass So I beat her ass first didn't think about hitting a woman as much as I thought about my own survival That led him to being arrested Since the 90 days he served 35 of them Wow and had a $7 fine. He had a crazy life man. He grew up in a brothel Yeah, right didn't be over. Yeah, you're you know. Yeah No, a device against any sister's wrong, but prior to him and he He was wild free cruel tender Genius crazy wrong as he could be right as he could be the human being he's a complicated human being though, you know, you know, I never met him before but It's his spirit means the world to me me as well Well, I think every comic I've never met a single comic that doesn't think he's one of the most important figures in the history of the art Probably the most important It's like him and Lenny Bruce in my opinion and then kennison later But kennison for a much much shorter time who would be the greatest female comic artist I think Roseanne Barr Roseanne yeah Roseanne is profoundly talented. Yeah, I know that about she She doesn't get the credit she deserves because she's legitimately mentally ill And that's one of the things I had on the podcast a highlight what she's heard She was hit by a car when she was 15 and she she spent nine months in a mental hospital Yeah, she lost her ability to count She was very good at mathematics before that and then after the car accident the severe head injury changed her personality Yeah, same with kennison kennison is hit by a car when he was young as well and changed his personality radically too head injuries Make people very impulsive very wild and impulsive and oftentimes a slave to their own impulses and I think kennison was a big example that as was Roseanne, but it was him was the first really loud brash almost male female comedian who could kill like a man, you know She was what about that don't drown out ever than they So I love more me great Monika gets to me. She she touches my soul every time She's on stage. Have you ever seen Miss Pat? No, Miss Pat's a monster really? She's a monster and she's had a crazy life. She's been on this podcast a couple times Her life was insane. I mean, she was selling crack when she was 14. She had a baby when she was 14 Or was a 13 she was in pregnancy pregnant at 13 with a married man had a couple kids with him. Yeah, she's she and she is Funny she's so wild and funny Yeah, there's something about the it goes back to Aristophanes, you know it goes back to Those early comics in the history of the West Who were willing to tell the truth especially as it related to the everyday experiences of ordinary people, you know the first Plato's text itself You know the Republic was grounded in an imitation of the comic writers who were the first to really delve into every day people's experiences not the well to do that's tragedy tragedy only had to do it to with the nobility And aristocracy but it was comedy that dwelt into the lives of everyday people then Plato takes the whole form and shifts it into the dialogue and Makes Socrates of course to Grand the Grand hero, but it was Aristotle's stock in these at least in the West who Initiated this with the clouds and and frogs and so on and it goes all the way through from Jonathan Swift to Mark Twain to the venue West to Brother Ishmael read I mean these are the great American comic writers Twain Wes Read and see comic writers are different than the tragic ones Of Dostoevsky and up in the cult and Kafka's comic in his own deep way too the greatest of course a check-off though And talk check off but I know you check out check off right no, oh brother You you haven't fully lived On check-off, oh you read three sisters of the uncle wound you read the cherry or any of the short story He's had over six thousand characters in his short story to be thrused and and into the And in the ravine or even misery man the greatest one is called a student. It's only two and a half pages This is favorite short story or you read that tonight below your night mine. You listen at you read that tonight Listen to look Curtis may feel okay. There's still a Stephen saunheim. Okay Stephen hot song I know more Into the woods Curtis may feel I loved and I love and then the student check-off Oh, man, you'd be ready for some serious serious cardiac On your recommendation. Oh, no, no, cuz I know you you serious intellectual too You you do your homework But I'm just saying this in terms of just enhancing you know all of our lives I mean the comic writers the comedians a very as sorts to be there on the stage of video on the page I think the band guards of the species in a very deep way, you know because we as a species Have to objectify our grief and our pain and our sadness and our sorrow and it begins with molds and groans and you Transfigure those molds and groans first into song but song then moves into language in the language is not rational language of philosophy and dialectic but it's a language of stories especially the stories that are Self-critical we laugh at ourselves not at others We laugh with others rather than just at others So it's not that sudden glory that Hobbes talks about in regard to the comic where you're looking down and condescending You see that's an aristocratic conception of the comic you laugh and act of ordinary people who are so dirty and filthy profoundly anti-democratic right as if You know well to do folk don't fart right don't s it No, don't do number one and number two and fall in and out of love and act of fool and live lives of Consonsistency right but act when you get these democratic forms of the comic See that's you and prior and Roseanne and Mo-Meek and George Carl and all that that's free spirit Don't brother in most of our lives you see we dealing with a whole history of a species of structures of domination Oppression that's the history of the species for the most part and there's moments in which there's breakthroughs And which there's a freedom of spirit and then you have some institutionalization of that which is democracy That's why democracy is so fragile and usually don't last that long because it cuts around radically against the sense of really wanting to be free. I mean those the ice cubes right Most people really are afraid of freedom They want to defer to authority They want to conform and when they're introduced to freedom and they really catch his whole They say oh my god, it's tremendous cost to be paid, but I like that There's something about that And they see they can hear the music they can see it in your comic art or priors and others and it allows These effects and consequences that people's lives to really enrich their lives before they die Why do you think people are afraid of freedom? Well, it's it's courage. I mean There is no freedom without unbelievable unprecedented unstoppable courage and courage is not widely distributed in this piece That's a very charitable way of looking at people They can place it they can place it to stick cowardly They well adjust it in justice and want to smile and walk around his peacocks rather than cut against the grain and have to bear witness and therefore NAACP on a cross or like Socrates condemned Most of the great figures that we know. Yeah, and so this is more consequences for that now than ever. Oh, yeah cancel culture That's exactly right. Yeah, oh, it's true. It's very very true But I mean we live in a culture that's so corporatized commercialized marketized It's all about money money money status status and you lose any deep sense of honor of character It's all about what appears to be the case. It's the culture and superficial spectacle So it's all about image. Yeah, you see yeah, and images just sums Surface for now Well, I can't recommend your book race matters enough and one of the reasons is because of your analysis of that Your your your understanding of this the superficial aspect of the pursuit that so many people are locked into from cradle to the grave and you just you encapsulated that so well and The way you worded it and the way you phrased it. It's it's so it resonates so well and I I really admire this lifelong pursuit that you have for Not just understanding these things but explaining them in such a succinct way where it's absorbable like that book It's in the 25th anniversary. I want to talk to you about it because that's the one I read and it's so strange when you read something that's so It's so current even though it's 25 years old. It rings true and Does that sometimes does that feel futile where you you have the same issues for that you spoke on 25 years ago and it's very little change in those 25 years No, it's wonderful deep question. No matter. I appreciate the times that you spent reading reading our race matters, but no it's never futile though man It's never futile because you have a conception of victory That is not mezzionic or salvific. You're not trying to save people you're not trying to be a messiah to bring some kind of grand Gospel to people you simply trying to touch people's lives So when you enrich and enable persons life to win which you've talked about that right there You're already talking about the ways in which you were touched That means there's no futility at all. Yeah, and all of a sudden It's certainly not if you told me it becomes the the fukundity of it And so all we can do you know that's human beings is to try to inspire one another and Encourage one another and enable one another and noble one another and that in and of itself was what the great John Coltrank all a force for good. How do I become Based on a love supreme a force for good in a cold and cruel world Absolutely Absolutely and love supreme is not a love in the abstract Right it's a love of beauty in its concrete forms It's a love of goodness in its concrete forms. It's a love of truth in its concrete forms now I'm a Christian revolution at Christians. I got a love of God mediated through a Palestinian Jew named Jesus But that's tied to a Justice that comes out of prophetic Judaism, right? And we know Judaism Christianity is lawmologies religions for me Have no whole cell monopoly on how we understand the world because the all emerged a very historic moment But when it comes to this love that allows us to persist in a world in which cruelty and envy contempt manipulation Disarmesty and that's shot through all of us We're not finger pointing the name card. Oh, no, you know I've called up But the Donald Trump a gangster over and over again And I say that because there's a gangster inside of me. I got a reconquered every day So I know gangsters when I see And gangsters not a subjective expression. It's an objective condition If you grab on a woman's parts that's gangster you think with somebody's oil in other country That's gangster you lion send these people who said that the America's garbage Quit lion that's gangster. They got a critique of America. You did too an American carnage in your inauguration You said well you talk about the full sisters in Congress saying well Evil Jews know Dan said evil Jews. They said evil doings of Israel every nation status dump some evil things Right if there's a Palestinian state which I hope there is they're gonna do some evil things Every nation state has to be accountable U.S E.P. Opio Guatemala is real China and so forth and so on and every nation state has been associated with certain forms of barbarism We know that but there's some good things Some wonderful things about Israel some wonderful things about Palestinians and formations creating a state is wonderful things about America I mean a lot of people say even brother Trump to all they hate America. No, they love American comics They love American music You ask sister Tally if you ask sister priestly y'all love a wreatha I read the Franklin means the world to me. What about Mary J Mary J means the world Mary J and the wreatha are as American as Donald Trump Even more in some ways they've been here longer that people been at 10 generations Yeah, Donald Trump's grandfather just arrived his mother straight from Scotland precious Mary Ann 1930 she arrived right and so in that sense you say way way to well quick lie and let's just be honest and candid Just like the comics let's just be honest and candid and recognize because what is a definition of comedy? it is first drama which is conflict Emotionally felt and critically reflected a bond But it's that conflict has rooted in Congruity things don't fit So that's the possible if hypocrisy right and we know hypocrisy is the tribute of vice to virtue So that the standards and you fall short so you can laugh at it now when it's really deep comedy It's talking about the human condition See that's a deeper thing. I see that's where you get checked off and she experienced joys and the blues because deep comedy is the Recognition of limits and in congruity at the highest levels of the mind heart and soul That's the different thing. So I mean you can start with comedy with You know the clowns who walk around slipping on bananas or the sophisticated professor Who doesn't realize that he got a banana? Hanging out the back of his pocket when he's lectured with the students they buy the laugh and he don't know what's going on Well, that's bodily based comedy You know farits and bananas and so forth and it's important. Yes, but high comedy is the highest levels of human dignity love thought Music mathematics metaphysics and didn't recognize all of those are Incongruous they're broken they're fractured There's dramatic conflict of incongruity at the highest levels of who we are as a species Now that's deep stuff Oh Lord in one of the most fundamental questions a Western civilization is how come Socrates never cries and Jesus never laughs who that that's the question Thomas Moore was wrestling with in the Tower of London before he was executed in his dialogues interpolation Socrates never sheds the tear. What does that mean? The founder of philosophy in the modern West has a love of wisdom, but he never loves people Because it's impossible to love human beings and not shed tears You go to your mama's funeral and you're not shed tears and you're committed to the so-cradic ideal of self-master and self-control You need to get off the crack pipe Get off Show her the depths of your love for her through being outside of yourself mastery the tears will flow You see and it's it's the other ways like your daughter this precious thing that you got when we walk in for your daughter When she graduates you and your wife gonna have tears of joy That ain't the moment for self-mastery. That's not the moment to be so credit And so what Socrates is dying his wife walks in Zen thippy and she's crying he's to get her or get her away Get her I can't stand tears. That's a problem. Yeah, that's a problem. Let's see. I come from black. Well, we start with tears All the mess we had to come terms with you know to me cries and so forth and Hebrew scripture begins with the cry of oppressed people too, right But then Jesus never laughs. Oh, and I see that's a deep one That's G. K. Chesterton Chesterton said Jesus turns over the tables of the money changes. He does not conceal his rage crucial Jesus does weep that's one of the most profound verses in the Christian Bible right Jesus wept Unlike Socrates why did Jesus weep he wept for Jerusalem? He wept for Lazarus he left wept for his friends But Jesus hides and conceals his mirth That's what chest isn't says is there any laughter in the Bible? Well, Isaac means laughter When you think of the joke of an older Sarah given birth to a young person in a Older age and so forth, but it's hard to catch Jesus laughing none of the So not to go the Gospels have Jesus laughing some people thought they discern the grin Somewhere because you turn wine in the water. He probably had a little grin on you get a little bit a little slow a grin exactly but But you can never get the full scale and variety of the human condition in any one tradition I think one of the beauties of what you're saying here one of the beautiful things about what you're saying here is the complexity of human beings and When you're dealing with the situation between these girls that call themselves a squad Endomile Trump and you deal with these very simplistic things like these chance of send her back or lock her up or they hate America or you know This this is simplifying things is is so Attractive to some people and so attractive during political discourse right during these these times when you're trying to rally up a campaign and get get get the audience behind you This is when these simplistic things resonate, but as a human being we know that things like I don't I don't Subscribe to this idea that human beings are good or bad. I think there's only the way Yeah, I'm sure look the way Donald Trump loves his family. I'm sure there's love in that guy I'm sure there is. I mean if he's had some you know relations to his mother and his brothers and sisters There were not ones of sheer manipulation and domination is no doubt as a human being it's important to keep track of his humanity But at the same time what happens is the dominant patterns of behavior This is right is me about brother Trump's best lead the fact that he's head of the American Empire and Hand of the government you see them when you have dominant patterns of behavior that are completely Unaccountable see for so long. He's been able to get away with things with no accountability at all. Yes That's what makes him a kind of a Peter Pan like figure up until he became president. She's right powerful But he hasn't grown up, but even as president he hasn't grown up people with had thought that he would grow into the office No, he just hasn't grown up He's The office position to change to be what he is that's right and I think people love that there's certain people that that resonates with them They think that's so attractive. They love it. Well, they I think they love it Because it's exciting that I mean the first thing that you know Trump was able to do was to expose the Pre-packaged commodities that we call politicians Yeah, that he came across as somebody who was just himself Yes, you see just gangster that he is yeah, and he just tell the truth. Oh, I was a close friend of Hillary's I've been at the same weddings and so forth because that's how they elite circulate Yes, and in an in an American Empire But then when they discovered law and behold He's now he's posing himself with some kind of opposition or figure and yet He's tied to big money tied to big military when he gets in he brings in the old school militarist people he's still dropping bombs on the nine countries that've been dropping bombs for the last number of years Tax cuts sound exactly the same to Mitch and McConnell and others warn it We thought we had something different here you see and it has to do with the well, what Mr. Larger storage. We have to be honest about this that see we live in both a very fragile and precious experiment in democracy and We live in an empire that is experiencing profound decline Decay and deterioration simultaneous so you can from the very beginning in the United States was really in some ways much more tied to gold and resources and land and so this very crucial democratic experiment is predicated on the monstrous crime against indigenous peoples that we've never come to terms with So you get a lot of neoliberal chatter about America's original slaves slavery that's a lie The original sin was we had to decide whether we were going to coexist with indigenous peoples or dominate them and the decision was for the most part genocidal Effect in terms of domination So it's a settler colonial society a colony of Britain You see then we enslaved the Africans who become the basis of our economy and the vast majority of profits made Were actually tied to slavery That's why so many of the presidents first presidents and america slave holders and the chief justice of the supreme court of slave holders and so forth That that doesn't mean that certain democratic practice of were not being enacted But it was enacted for white brothers with property The white brothers who had no property they couldn't vote at all the women of course couldn't vote until 1920 So they had domestic households in which they had to find some sense of fulfillment That's what history of patriarchy misogyny in part are connected and then tremendous efforts come to expanding it And this is why even when brother Trump talks about socialism he didn't realize the pledge of allegiance was written by France's Bellamy who was a Socialist The song American to beautiful. What's is one of the most beautiful song to reach all sing that song and take you to a different Hmm, I mean he's seeing things that we can't see and you know, he's blind. You know what I mean? American to beautiful Elizabeth Lee Bates Socialist professor. Well, who's Lee who was our greatest poet Walt Whitman? Pete ties the socialism who was our greatest philosopher John Dewey Democratic socialist his whole life Helen Keller deaf mute Blind graduate of Radcliffe Socialist Ryan whole neighbor the greatest Christian thinker to 20th century Democratic socialist more man in the moral society monlothicane, jonia Democratic so they all are baker Democratic socialism is as American as apple pie but with the communists and the communists threat and the Soviet Union and all of its repression and vegetation and violation of liberties and killing of the cool lots and so forth in the American mine socialism becomes associated with communism and so you saw brother Lindsey the other day, right? Yes, he looked like a cartoonist version of Joseph McCarthy they're all communist they're all communist and you see what happens is in a nail-fathis discourse It's true in the way around the world if you can define a community as pure and then characterize those on the outside who are threatening as impure to anywhere around the world. If you can define a community as pure, and then characterize those on the outside who are threatening as impure, and then view yourself as those coming to the rescue to preserve the purity. It can be based on race. It can be based on religion. It can be based on politics. Preserve that purity. We saw it in the 50s with the hysteria. Comments for what's Smith Act, they're deported. Or they take in a jail. Make the first city council went from Harlem. Benjamin Davis went to jail because he was a communist. You see, because they were the impure. Now communism needs to be radically called into question in terms of its dominating forms, like the Soviet Union and China on the mile and so forth and so on. But at the same time, when you look at Karl Marx and his critique of capitalism, this is prior to the letter, prior to Stalin, and he says capitalism is tied to this obsession with profit that puts profit before people, and it will generate oligopolies in which there will be grotesque levels of wealth inequality, and the only way that poor and working people will be able to gain assets to any resources to do organizing and mobilizing. Now you can accept that Marx is inside what I've been in. Marxists. He's just telling the truth. Do you think that socialism just hasn't been implemented correctly? Because what you think, because the argument has always been show me a socialist economy or socialist government that ever worked. Right, right. But there's so many people that find the idea of socialism attractive because it combines this idea of a community with a nation and that we're all tied together. And we obviously have some socialist aspect or civilization in terms of utilities and- They look at the arrows. They look at the military. They're not going outsource the military. Firefighters, fighters, police. I have to be some kind of governmental control. But the problem is this, that if we have to view democratic socialism as a moment in the larger movement of democracy, my dear brother, Jeff Stout, who's one of the great philosophers and thinkers of democracy, calls him egalitarian freedom traditions. And that's simply a way of saying that if you look at the world through the lens of the masses of people who are poor and working people, what are the conditions under which they can have security from domination? What are the conditions under which they can have dignity by holding forms of oppression at arms length? And for me, it's not anism. You see, in capitalism, vis-a-vis feudalism can generate liberties and freedoms. I'm for it. And that's precisely what the middle classes did when they broke from feudalism in Europe, or broke from feudalism in other parts of the world, right? You had to overthrow kings and queens in the name of personal liberties. But those personal liberties were confined too often to white brothers with property. And the white brothers with no property, they either trying to hold on to their whiteness. So they become like the white brothers with property. Or they make more choices and say, I want to be a person of integrity. I want to fight with the folk who are being excluded. And this is one of the problems in talking about race and white supremacy in America, because you see, we think too often in monolithic categories. There's never been a white supremacy without fighting against white supremacy. And that includes white brothers and sisters. There's a tradition from hand-braid and from Miles Horton, you know, of Highlander Center. You got that wonderful picture of Rosa Parks. She was at Highlander Center four months before she was arrested, before she sat down on a bus in order to stand up for justice. Right there at Highlander Center on the Miles Horton, who was Miles Horton, a white brother who brought black folk and white folk together, went to union seminary, trained on the Ryan Hole neighbor. He had cousins in the Ku Klux Klan. So his Thanksgiving dinners were very complicated. But that's true for a whole lot of white brothers who fight against white supremacy and braiding. Rabbi Abraham Joshua helped us show me. That was a whole tradition of white brothers and sisters who have been fighting against white supremacy. You get it in the music. Back to bite her back. He's sitting at the feet of Louis Armstrong. And he's a great artist. Louis is genius of geniuses. And that middle-class brother from Iowa, you asked him about white supremacy. You asked Brubek about white supremacy. You asked any of the Paul Desmond, all of these folk who are connected to traditions in which black humanity, brown humanity is seen and affirmed. You had a point in the book, Race Matters, resonated with me that I never really thought of before. And what you said was that because of the fact that the United States has this deep history of slavery and the slavery of African Americans, that white people became white people instead of Polish and German and Italian. Instead of it being like most other countries where the Italians think of themselves as Italians and the Greeks or the Greeks, those were white people. They're all combined as white people. I never thought about that before. No, I mean, you've got these scholars of American studies. No, pain is one of the towering ones, but it goes all the way back to Brother Alexander and David Rodinger and some others who've been talking about the way in which whiteness was created. Take, for example, an Irish brother who calls the Ellis Island. His people have been dealing with 800 years of vicious, British colonialism and imperialism, vicious attacks. Various famines that in some ways created are at least enabled and so on. They get to New York and they told that their whiteness and all because we know the British are white and we're not British at all. But then this is you are looking, brother West, look at Jamal, look at La Tisha. Where you gonna go on the Jim Crow bus, you just get off the boat from Ireland. If you go to the front, you would vanilla folk. You go to the back, you would the chocolate folk, what you gonna do. And for our precious Jewish brothers, so they were even more complicated. More complicated, right? Because they get to the radio. And they say, no, we're not with the go ahead. And we're not with the Gentiles. Y'all been oppressing us for 2,000 years. Pogue rams, get toels, holocaust, vicious attacks and so on. But then they get to then say, well, are we gonna be in the back with the black folk? Some of them, dear. You see, because you got a rich tradition of progressive Jews. You know, in Chomsky we got the back. Stanley, around with what he got back there with the black folk. You see what I mean? But you got some other Jewish folk like any other group. Well, we kinda look warm. Let's just kinda move back and forth. And then some of them are on a semonee, completely, especially the highbrow German Jews. We're actually white as well as the Gentiles. You and America now get beyond that old world prejudice. You say, well, you better check yourself because every Christian civilization we know is shot through a Jewish hatred. Don't believe the hype. Soon our ladies gonna be manifest. You see what I mean? And so in that way, you can see the discourse of whiteness, blackness, brownness, redness and so forth becomes so deeply rooted in American law, American structures, American perceptions. And this is why the arts are so crucial because it's primarily in the music and in the arts where the breakdown of white supremacy begins to take place in the country. It's not the politicians. It really is, it really is no accident that the first massive form of entertainment in the United States is what? The minstrels in blackface. And you see what's going on with blackface? Where Eric Lott and others have talked about the love and theft. On the one hand, there's a fear of black freedom. Because black freedom somehow means less freedom for whites. There's a fear of black creativity because that means maybe white supremacy is alive. Maybe they're human just like us. Maybe they just as creative, imaginative and talented just like us. Then they hear the music and they say, ooh, they got something going on on the black side of town that we don't know. It's like you go to see prior, right? It's somebody that told you, old brother Joe, white supremacy America tells you that black creativity, black intelligence, black genius doesn't exist. And you go see prior with your parents and you go away thinking, just need grows of genius. Somebody lied to me. I got to recognize that. And then you recognize, oh, there's a whole tradition of prior and we go on and off from the cold train, the ceremony, the on and on and on, right? And so people begin to think, especially white brothers and sisters. My parents have been lying to us when it comes to black intelligence, imagination and genius and humanity. And yet the structures make it difficult for us to come together. We're talking about up until 1960. That's a long time though. 2017, 1776, the 1964 and five. That's a long time for both slavery and neo slavery to be in place. And here we are now 54 years later, trying to create a multiracial democracy, which is a beautiful, beautiful thing. And it's already been enacted in the jazz groups, sliced stones, bands, multiracial, the comedies that stood in the comics, did you all have? You sit down with comics. You all talk about the genius across race and gender as if it's a natural thing. That already shatters the white supremacists and that's in male supremacist categories. A whiteness, blackness, all in different silos. But it's so hard to do it on the ground. See, part of the problem of talking about race in America, that's why I've been very critical of a number of contemporary black intellectuals because white supremacy cuts so deep in the culture. People begin to think it has magical powers and somehow it just floats above American history as if it's just part of our DNA in a biological way. But all conceptions of race in the modern world are grounded in predatory capitalism. So that the talk about whiteness and blackness becomes a way of rationalizing social structures like slavery and Jim Crow. And it has to do with trying to extract labor resources. It's an attack on their humanity and identity, but it's tied to economic structure. So the talk only about race means we hide and conceal the social structures that are generating unbelievable suffering for everybody. Everybody, you see. And so the last thing you want is to talk about race. I'd say the same thing about gender and the way gender is much more complicated because gender has been around for so, so long. Every culture that we know almost. But in modern conceptions of race are tied to modern conceptions of predatory capitalism here and abroad, which includes imperialism, which includes empires. So the United States comes out of the British empire. We engage in a heroic, courageous, revolt against the British empire. It was a magnificent struggle. That's what I like about George Washington in Thomas Jefflick's. I'm an anti-imperialist. They were anti-imperialist. They're urban gorillas. They picking up guns. They fighting. I don't go that far. But they're also white supremacists. You see, so as soon as they overthrow or push back the British empire, what do you get in the Declaration of Independence? Beautiful words about equality, but you also get savages. We got to take that land. And you get an empire of liberty. This is where the comics come in. What does an empire of liberty look like? Who's not in on the liberty? It's a whole lot of people not in on it. Well, that was Carlin, right? Carlin had this bit about this country was founded by slave owners who wanted to be free. That's right. In Thomas, American Dream, you got to be. Yeah. You got to be dreaming to be. You got to be sleeping. Do you think that much like this country is an experiment in self-democracy, a very recent experiment? When you look at human history, right? The hundreds of thousands of years that we've been human, there's really only been a couple of years, a hundred years of this. Do you think that that's maybe the lens that we should look at something like democratic socialism through? Not that it can't work, but that it hasn't been implemented correctly before. That's exactly what we got to get beyond theism. You're absolutely right. Obviously what makes, not just United States, has been democratic experiments all around the world and various circumstances. We become central stage because we become a world power that understands itself as a democracy. With all the contradictions that go ahead and an amethyst, begin as a settler colonial enterprise, steel got slavery, patriarchy, workers don't have the right to engage in collective bargaining in the United States until the 1930s. Argentina had it in the 1830s. Argentina is not known to be an only cutting edge for social justice. Love you down there in Argentina, but they know that. But they had a collective bargaining. Why? Because our robber barons and our power elites were so powerful. You see, Rockefeller and company had private militias that were bigger than a lot of public armies to make sure workers were not able to engage in collective bargaining. I was in San Francisco just yesterday. At the Commonwealth Club, which is now lodged in the longshore of the association with this fancy, they become a welfare. Well, to do ruling class. Harry Bridges, longshore of in strong unions, Jack London and other great socialists there at Oakland, right? And what were they trying to do? They were just trying to ensure that ordinary people gain access to jobs with a living wage, de-s and education. This is one reason why I've spent so much time with my dear brother, Bernie Sanders, right? Because it's a democratic project that simply says, how come poor children can't have access to some of the things that the children are the well to do have? They have the same value. And of course, as a Christian, for me, they have exactly the same value. So how will they get it? Well, here, come, socialist movements that say, first thing they want to do is we're against child labor laws. That's the jungle. That's Upton Sinclair. He's a socialist. He's trying to be governor of California, right? And what were they doing? What were these capitalists doing? They're hiding these kids at six years old, seven years old. They were dying at 30. There were no laws against child labor and they were working seven days a week. So the labor movement brought us the weekend. And I'm not talking about the singer from Canada. God bless him. I'm talking about the two days we have off because if we didn't have that from the socialist movement and the labor movement, that have been working young kids seven days. They did that year after year, decade after decade. That's greed. Right. That's greed. There's no accountability, you see? That's where that whole idea of the, let the market decide falls apart. Thanks. Because the market just wants profit, right? Absolutely. And that doesn't mean that markets cannot be used in democratic ways. But they need to be ethical. But they got to be ethical. You got to have some accountability and regulation. Child labor laws were very important that a breakthroughs at that time. But there are other, you need to have laws to make sure the water was clean and the food was regulated and clean and so forth. There's a narrative that you get from poor people, often. Or people that are lower middle class that are against the concept of socialism because they equate it with people that want to free ride. That's right. They equate it with people that don't want to work hard. That's right. And that's a strange narrative when you consider all the things we talked about already, like what we need with the fire department and the police department. And all the different ways that socialism does form utilities and all the different ways that socialism does form a part of our culture and our community. Why do you think that that is this narrative? And how does that narrative get reshaped? Because that narrative of that, the only reason why people want socialism is because they want to free ride. Right. Right. The question by the one is that first we have to listen very closely to our right-wing brothers and sisters and conservatives and middleers because oftentimes, they're human means like anybody else. And they've had their own arguments. I don't think they have strong ones, but they have their own arguments. So the first thing you'd say about that is what makes you think that the well to do don't have free rides? What is inheriting wealth all about? Well, in a rolling world, is free rides a loot. It's all it is. What is free, the connections of getting into the prep schools and the Ivy League schools and so forth, even though they work, it's still a kind of free ride. So if they're preoccupied with this issue of being free ride, we tell them let's make sure that people do work hard and sacrifice. And therefore in some way deserve what they have. Now, if just based on that principle, the upper echelons of American society would be indicted, deeply indicted. And it's not a matter of hating the rich, because I don't believe in hating anybody individually. I hate greed. I hate injustice. I hate white supremacy. I hate anti-Jewish prejudice. I hate anti-Palestinian prejudice. I hate patriarchy and so forth. But the human beings were these ideologies filtered through are still human beings. You see what I mean? So that's the beginning of it. Now, of course, part of the question here is has to do with, they'll say, well, we wasted this money on the poor. You say, wait a minute. Donald Trump just passed a $750 billion military budget. Democrats voted for it too. How much waste is in the military? Why is 60% of every $1 coming out of the federal budget tied to the military? Why is there no close oversight and accountability of it? How come American people don't know about the four countries that we are bombing or assisting other countries in bombing? We can go right down Pakistan. Afghanistan, Yemen, absolutely. Mali, Niger, Somalia, Iraq. I mean, we can go on and on and on. How can we don't know about the 4,800 military units? 587 around the world. We've got US special operations in 128 countries, only 197 in the world. What about the soldiers who die? Hardly any talk about it. What about the innocent people we kill? Hardly any talk about it. What about the drones that we still drop in? And not always on military combatants, but innocent people. Almost from the area. Sometimes even disproportionately. Those are precious people too. They have the same values in anybody and they help you America, Chicago. Do you feel the don'ts? Drones are particularly insidious because it doesn't even seem like it's really happening because it's a robot doing it. And it's done long distance remotely. No human sensitivity at all. Apparently the PTSD that suffered by those remote drone operators is pretty profound too. You could understand that. You could deeply understand. And yet no serious public conversation about it. Very little. I was on the plane the other day and the pilot says, I hope you all are able to take a few minutes of your time because we've got a family outside waiting for the body of someone just killed in Afghanistan, I'm an Italian family in Chicago. One of the saddest things that we want to see in your life, man, is a family lined up and they bring in the body out. And you say to yourself, how come there's no public spotlight? And you see, when I was growing up in the 60s, what a Cronkite Vietnam, we saw the bodies. Well, during the Bush administration, they made it illegal to take photographs of flag-draped coffins, which is unbelievably insane. That's exactly right. And continued under Obama and company. And you say, well wait a minute, they're paying this ultimate cost and they changed the narrative and the tears of the families and they can't even put a public spotlight on it. I got. And then of course, they lied to us as well. Our drones are not in any way killing civilians and they end up killing an American and they have a press conference the same day in economic compensation for the family to rest of their life. I agree with that. But what about the drones that are killing folk and Yemen and Somalia and Pakistan and Afghanistan? Oh, they deny they're even killing them. You say quit, lion, that's John Brennan and come. He's in both Bush and Obama administration. You see, how do we keep track of those in the name of what? Democratic accountability. That's not socialism. Socialism is democratic accountability, but there's been socialism without democratic accountability and what do you get tyranny? That's so reunion and company. But when you get capitalism with no democratic accountability, what do you get? You get a predatory capitalism with gross wealth inequality and everyday people, the masses of porn working people fighting for crumbs. And there's also this denial of it amongst the most patriotic. They don't want to consider it. They don't want to factor it in to what we think of when we think of America the great. You don't want to factor in those innocent people, which was the last time we checked it was in the 90% of people that are killed by drones are actually innocent. It's some insane numbers. But we have to have voices. That's part of the problem. Do we have to have voices that say, I don't give a damn for popularity. I'm trying to be wedded to integrity. I want to put a smile on my grandmother's face in the grave. And she told me as a Christian that if the kingdom of God is within you in everywhere you go, you ought to leave a little heaven behind. And heaven takes the form of laying bare the humanity of each and every one of us, especially the least of these. That's the 25th chapter Matthew, right? What you do to the least of these, you do unto me. Who are the least of these? The orphan, the widow, the poor, the children, the elderly, the workers, the gays, the lesbians, the trans, especially the trans days, they just trash like I don't know what. But the black folk, the brown folk, they're white poor. They're indigenous peoples. Not just here, but around the world. And what does that mean? That means that you have a certain kind of calling that will always pit you over against those who are well adjusted to injustice, no matter what color they are. Well adjusted to injustice is a very beautiful way of putting it. No, it's a, that's part of the American dream, it doesn't go far enough. See, American, the American dream says, I'm going to work hard, sacrifice and get mine and live large and some vanilla suburb, maybe with a trophy spouse. I feel good about myself. You say, nothing wrong with wanting to gain access to resources, nothing wrong with working hard, nothing wrong with living where you want to live. But then the question becomes now you're successful, but you're not great. and this has to do with he or she who uses their success for something bigger than him, service to other, service to the least of these. So that the great ones like to rich your priors. You see, not a matter of how much money he made, it's a matter of his soul in his comedy and the love that he left in his legacy. Mondo the King, Jr. died. Basically a broke man, gave every penny that he won from the Nobel Prize to the movement. Malcolm X only had $150 in his pocket. Who cares about the richest black person in 1968 and 1965? That's ephemera. We talk about deep joy, deep love. We will remember those who raised their voices and said in the name of something bigger than my ego with my narcissism and my adenism and we all have it. We all have it. So we have to always be self-critical in that regard. We all fall short. You know the great stuff. You're back at number great. You know the great comic writer. Try again, fail again, fail better. That's the story of all life. Try again, fail again, fail better. But even if failing better, we can at least raise our voices and try to connect it to movements and organizations and structures. And thank God we still do have a significant number of decent people in the American Empire to just feel powerless. Well there's this conversation that's happening now. There's a conversation that's based on the information of recognizing the fact that so many people have wasted deep aspects of their lives. Long lives, pursuing meaningless things and recognizing that there is a lot of injustice in this world and that people are afraid of admitting that injustice because then they would somehow or another be complicit in the enactment of that injustice. I think it's one of those things that people are terrified of when you talk about doing something to reinvigorate poor and disenfranchised communities. They start talking about the welfare state or well but this is not how things should be done and people need to pull themselves up by their poo straps, not recognizing that everybody isn't started the same starting line. There's a concept that I've been talking about that if you really cared about America, you would want less losers. Like what it was the best way to love America, what would you want more winners? You'd want everybody to be a winner. We have these disenfranchised parts of this country that have been that way forever. There's a guy that's been on this podcast who was a police officer in Baltimore, Stanislm Michael Wood and he talked about how when he was a police officer he recognized the systemic racism and how crippling it was and one of the things that he recognized was they found a piece of paper that was a blotter report of all the different various crimes that were committed from the 1970s. It was some year in 1970. It was the exact same crimes in the exact same communities that he was dealing with them and he was- Generation after- Recognizing the red lining about the fact that there was areas where black people were not allowed to buy homes, that they kept them in these communities, the same crimes kept occurring in the same places and all they were doing was going in there and arresting people and nothing changed and nothing was fixed and as a police officer he was realizing just becoming aware of the fact that this is- He's a part of the system. He didn't want to be a part of the system anymore but he was a part of the system that is creating this problem. When you address that though, the people that don't suffer in those communities that aren't a part of that community, there's a natural inclination to resist. Oh that's true. And it's because they don't want to do anything. They don't want to think they're responsible. They don't want to think they're a part of it. They don't want to discuss it. And discussing it, you feel resistance. They will end the state of denial. Yes. Trying to avoid and trying to evade. No, it's very real. That's very real. But you know it also works within communities of people of color. This is again why I think we have to resist any monolithic or homogeneous characterizations of people. You see? So at any time you talk about white supremacy, you've got the John Brown's. And you know Mary Ellen Pleasant, who was a black woman who was worth $347 million in the 1840s. Whoa. She's called the mother of human rights in California. What did she do? She made a rich white brother and he died on her. So she ended up with millions of dollars. First thing she did, she gave John Brown a million dollars. John Brown had a million. I'm not even noticed. From her in his pocket when he was at Harper's Ferry. That's how he survived. You see, now John Brown was killing some people. I think that's wrong. I don't believe in innocent people no matter who they are, no matter what color. But it's safe. And he was at Harper's Ferry. That's how he survived. You see, now John Brown was killing innocent people. I think that's wrong. I don't believe in innocent people no matter who they are, no matter what color. But at the same time, John Brown had a love of black people, much deeper than many black people have with themselves, because he's willing to die for black people. But the same is true. Within, let's say black communities, you've got OK, 1% of the population in America who owned 41% of the wealth. You've got three individuals who have wealth, equivalent to 160 million fellow citizens. But within the black community, the top 1% of black folk have what was 70% of the wealth. So that means you've got a lot of precious Jamal's and Latisha's out there who are told to live vicariously through the lives of black celebrities. So it's all about representation rather than substantive transformation. You get that in politicians. You've got a black president. All of y'all must be free. isn't that a beautiful thing? Live through him. Live through the family. Beautiful achievement, magnificent achievement. But it's not about symbolic representation only. This is about fundamental transformation. So it's a challenge, Mary Ellen Pleasant and others. And Martin King and others are challenges for those of us who do have some resources to still raise our voices. Because you can be black, highly well-adjusted in justice economically, terms of race and so forth. And the same is true. You can be brown. You can be. So it's not just a matter of looking for that one individual who represents. It's a matter of connecting that representation to fundamental transformation. If there's no fundamental transformation, you end up with a whole generation of peacocks. Look at me. Look at me. Look at me. All about forlage. And what does that do? That falls directly into the culture of superficial spectacle. Wasting we need is just spectacle with no substance in that way. And this is a battle within the communities of peoples of color. Because it's not going to be a matter of just pointing out white supremacy. Of course, white supremacy is fundamental foundation in part of the country. It's not the only foundation. Because you got resistance to white supremacy. Lydia Maria Child. She wrote a book in 1834 called an appeal for that class of Americans called Africans. It was deeply influenced by one of the greatest works ever written at that time by David Walker, appealed to color citizens of the world. She's a white sister. She is as vanilla as Doris Day in the 1830s, fundamental part of the Black Freedom Movement. When you see, those folk need to be lifted up. Because what does that do? That exposes our humanity in terms of the choices we make, not just the skin color we have. And I would say the same thing in terms of gender. The brothers who are fundamentally concerned about breaking the back of patriarchy. And we know patriarchy is shot through us. Because we grew up in the 1950s and 60s. No man escapes it. But you try to reconquer it all. And the same is true where our precious gaze and lesbians and trans folk, you see, to be decent human beings who make moral choices. I believe in the primacy of the moral and the spiritual, the centrality of the artistic, especially the musical, and especially the comics, as the vanguard who represent a freedom and a courage and a vision to connect us as human beings. Because you can't really be a comic with a wholesale Nazi ideology. Now you can be a Nazi genius like Martin Heidecker, who's a great philosopher and a genius and a thug when it comes to politics, you see. But a comic has got to be able to be open enough to deal with the end congruity and inconsistency and the sheer absurdity of it all. You talked about moments of freedom earlier. And I recognize that as one of the greatest things that you're seeing when someone's on stage and they're killing those moments where everyone's together, they're all together locked up in the last, and they're all together. There's a sense of community that you share with the people that are in the room. Absolutely. It does bring people together. Even if it's for brief moments, for a few seconds, or... Yeah, but all of the takes are not to be trashed. Life consists of moments. Yes. You know what I mean? Yes. Definitely. And see, it's in a democracy. You see, it's those moments that constitute the memory of what could be as opposed to what's in place. You know, the great August Wilson, the great playwright, Black playwright, Deeply influence, he said, by the blues, Barack and Bearden, Romain Bearden, the great painter, and I'm Mary Barack, of course, from Newark like yourself. It's like Sarah Von and Philip Roth, right there from Newark. And he used to say that performance authorizes alternative realities for the audience that get them to unsettle their conventional perceptions of the world. Wow. And that's what great artists and great comic, but that's what that's what you do, that's you do in strange times, bro. That you bring in, the fact that we're living in such a grim moment, what I'd call, you know, an American empire in decline. And we all need to call for his regeneration, his democratic revitalization and regeneration. But how do we do that? Only by example, man, because there's a difference between what the great Bert O' Hunger calls by a graphical time and historical time. All of us born in circumstances, none of our own choosing were only here for so long. We all have insecurities, anxieties, and fears knowing that our bodies will undergo extinction one day very soon. And therefore, to deal with those insecurities and fears and anxieties, you have to have certain structures of feeling and value that give you some sense of worthwhileness as you move through time from mother's womb to tomb. Right? And it's only in biographical time, because we only got one life, decided Jordan. And there's no person who's a Messiah. Now, people will tell you they are, but you say, okay, just call it, be self deceived, drink your coffee, I can keep moving. Because there's no Messiah out there. There's no saviors out there. There's no Messiah's in groups. There's no Messiah's in collectivities. There's only lives to be lived. We back to check off again. Lives to be lived. Acknowledging things we're in place before we arrive. So therefore, we ought to have gratitude for the love that we received. I mean, that's how I begin my whole life. I am who I am, because somebody love me. It's mom, it's dad. It's my brothers, my sisters, my friends. And I don't deserve it. And I have to somehow follow and ask for, when I ask for an assumption, they say send it. Like a puff of smoke, you got to let it go. Spread whatever love justice by example, examples are the gold card of justice. That's a wonderful line in conscritica, pure reason. Examples are the gold card of judgment. The judgments we make are predicated on the examples that we have. And we must have examples of greatness. If you're going to be a classical composer, you better study some Ludwig Beethoven. You're going to be a serious artist of musical theater. You better study a genius who's still alive, named Stephen Sondheim, from West Side Story to company to Sunday in the park with George, to passion, to swing it out across the board. Not to imitate, but just to know what greatness is in your genre. If you're in hip hop, you better study some rock him. Whoa, you better study some follow the leader. Let's put two pockets. That's right, you better study the focus of greatness the same way you study prior and Bruce Lenny, Bruce and the others, and Bruce and Bar and the others. But that's one of the more important parts of being a person, right, is to really your diet of what you take in in terms of whether it's your art or whether it's your education, try to take in the best and most inspirational and the most spectacular versions of human endeavors. Absolutely. See, that's one of the reasons why sports is a kind of American religion. Sure. Because in sports or whatever form, I know that you got the Taekwondo thing. Yeah. And you understand the role of excellence with the Greek scholar, Tayden, that plays. But to be able just to turn on our television and see Brother LeBron James do you think that's another context that cuts across race, class, gender and so forth. LeBron, how you do it, then memories of Mike Jordan and this is where I was. That was so important. I lived. When he sat out those three years in the late 1960s because he wouldn't go to Vietnam. Courage, man, Muhammad Ali, along with Richard Pryor's and Richard, it was the freest black man of 20th century. But see, the boxing is so crucial as well as the other sports because for black people, every other sphere in the society is unfair and unfree. But when you get in that ring and the referee is fair, you finally get fair competition. That's why Jack Johnson was such a threat. You remember Jack Johnson's knocking white brothers out. There would be racial riots against black folk, killing black folk all across the country. Don't you get the idea that just because he beat the white man in the context of fairness that you can beat anybody. And that goes all the way to Muhammad Ali. It's very interesting. You know, the time I spent with another genius named Prince who we miss so, so, so very much. There's nobody like him. But he, like Miles Davis, view Jack Johnson as his favorite black man. And that interest. Well, he was a pioneer because there was none before him. Jack Johnson was literally the first. Oh, by himself. In many ways, there was one, I think, but not as famous. Not as famous. But in terms of the spotlight. Yeah, there was other great boxers. Right? Right. But he just took it to a heightened, and he'd leave the country and so forth. Yeah. And what Muhammad Ali, you know, you got someone who was just him himself in the context of a social movement that was taking place at the same time. So he would associate himself with the black freedom movement, called a civil rights movement. He joined the nation in Islam under a hundred-mileage of Muhammad. They became, then became very close to Malcolm X and had to deal with the split in its own way. And ultimately becomes, you know, a more orthodox Muslim, but at the same time, recognizes his political consciousness was tied to the nation of Islam and so forth. And for him to do that, I mean, to be associated with the Ottoman-Lajum or Hamut, the nation of Islam probably had about 0.1% approval in the country. And probably about 4% or 5% in the black community. Because at that time, black, folk of black Christians were just afraid of the black Muslims. But it was Malcolm X who, in all of his genius, made it so broadly conceived that even Christians like myself, I'm a Jesus-loving free black man, but I can't live my life without Malcolm. You see, and he's Muslim to the core. He's praying five times a day. You know what I mean? That's just beginning up. He's also very complicated too, because his grandfather was white. Well, he brings us white. His father was a garbage. His mother was tied to the iteration. But the father was a garbage. I knew it was killed. His mother, of course, put in the ass. In the same asylum, he's a foster child. The great stories he tells in the autobiography of Malcolm X were the great classics, really. I remember it was in history of American civilization. But it's very misunderstood. In terms of the cultural narrative of who he was. Absolutely. No, it's true. He used to say sincerity is my only credential. Mm. Isn't that powerful? Damn. Sensarity. So when he said, white men and women are daffles, and he believed it. Now, he's wrong. White brothers, this is not devil. Then he says, I changed my mind. They're not devil. Too many god devilish behaviors. He's right. Because that's too many of all of us have devilish behavior. But when he said the first thing, he said what he meant, he meant what he said. When he said the second thing, he said what he meant, he meant what he said. How many folk do we have like that today? They don't scare the change of mine. And speak what's deep in that soul. You see, it's one of the great gifts of, the artists. And I speak about this especially in the black tradition is what we could call soulful connosis, K-E-N-O-S-I-S. Now connosis means self-giving, self-donating, and self-empty. So if you go to a James Brown concert that by the goals for folk and a half hours and gives everything every fiber of his being. And at the end of every concert, what does he say? I'm an extension of you. You an extension of me. Proning exists without you. Did we fail to play a song that somebody came to hear and the sister hallows? You didn't play soulful power. And he said, hear it, butte. I got to play that song. Because he's serviced. You see, our green. You go to our green concert. That brother came walk after the concert. He's given everything from falsetto to tenor to everything. Well, ultimately that's what happened with Prince, right? I mean, Prince had such incredible pain in his head. The hips jumping off piano, that's how he jumped off. That's how he got hooked on pain pills. That's exactly. And that's what killed him. Ultimately, John Coltrane blowing his horn as if his neck is going to snap every night. And then he gave a concert November 1966, right? Before he died in July of 67. He drops the horn, start beating on his chest. And I see that at least they say, what's happening, Trane? He said, I'm just giving the people all and I can and now I'm horn getting in the way. Oh, wow. You know what I mean? But don't you feel that when you walk off the stage, man? When you walk off the stage of strange times, man, you give it everything. All the Joe is at that moment. Now, what is that? You see, that is the example of a love supreme that is there to serve the people. Now you're going to make a living too. They're going to get paid. You're going to get paid and so forth. But that's not to prime anything. That's not it. It's even Curtis Mayfield saying he's his songs that the radio won't play. When he's told not to go to the rallies and he shows up with his guitar anyway in plays We Are Winner, that's self-giving, self-emptying. And I tell that to the young musicians these days. Because a lot of, you know, in the cultural spectacle, nowadays, you get these performers, they just show up and think they ought to get a standing on race for 10 minutes, say, no, Negro saying it's our first man. Shit. Well, no, no, no, no, no, no, spectacle and peacock. We want you saying something that's going to stir our souls away, say I'm cooking, John, and Taylor, and Lou Rawls when the soul stirs, be it. Now, we respect that genius and so forth. See, Beyonce is fascinating in this regard because she's a genius. There's no doubt about her. She's, I think she's the greatest entertainer of our day. I've been very critical of her because there's a sense in which she's still tied to the cultural super-fristful spectacle in terms of where she looks and girls in formation and so forth. But at the same time, she's also grounded in the tradition. And there's a new movie that she made. You see that? No. Homecoming? No. I haven't seen it. Oh, man, you got to see that's one of the greatest performative films ever made, man. Really? When she goes to Coachella, and she shows her Coachella but all of the bands of black colleges and performs all of her songs with all of them moving 150, 200 of them. Wow. And didn't reflect on the Nina Simone and her brief of Franklin. Oh, no, Beyonce, I was wrong about Beyonce in a certain sense. Now, I'm telling you, that's sister. She brings the tradition with her. That is the highest level of both respect and of excellence. Well, maybe she changed who she is because of criticism, like yours. Wait, if you saw, yeah, I've never met her. But it reflects. So for sure to say, it's really as hard to say. When people hear things like that, it does make them. I think that could be the case. I mean, she'd married to a genius. For sure. With Jay-Z too. And of course, the kids and her lovely parents and family. And you never know what goes on in the mind and heart and soul of a great artist like Beyonce. What was it that led you to be critical initially? Oh, just because I'm very concerned by young folks. I've made three small, good word albums with Prince. Make me sing. Prince, he would not sample any of allowing any of his moves to be sampled by hip hop artists. He was very hard on hip hop. But when we asking for spoken word, he said yes. And thank God we did. Same was true for the greatest soul singer of his generation, Gerald, the Vert, who really deserves so much more attention, who's on the album and so forth. So I spent a lot of time with young folk in studios. Just did a thing with Tefpo, one of the great artists coming out of Ferguson, an American empire, on Black Julie and two, E40 of coming out of LEO. I'm great respect for, I've been blessed to do a number of things with the young folk. But I tell them, I say, I'm old school, y'all. You need to know that. See, we into originals, not in the copies. Do you see, that we into lifting every voice that's soulful so that we stir souls. We don't want to just titillate bodies. We don't want just stimulation of body edges. Now I'm not a puritan. So I believe in body stimulation at the right time. You know what I mean? And it got nothing to get so orgasm. The thing is, but the thing is, you can't just organically move through life. You got to have context. You got to have tradition. You got to stir souls in that way. And so I put a lot of pressure on one of the things that I bring a lot of about, critique the barriers. See, I am deeply shaped by the dramatically, the deaf phonics, the main ingredients, the whispers, lakeside, James Brown's band, George Clinton, boots his band. I'm shaped by the emotions. I'm shaped by the Jones girls, the miracles, the temptations, Marvelettes. All those were groups that expressed their soulful self-empting in a form of sweetness. I believe in sweetness. And we're losing that. I go to the young folk. Where is your dramatics? Why is it? We don't have large numbers of groups that sing in tune. With a beauty and a sweetness and a gentleness and a kindness. When you hear the voice of David Ruffin saying, ain't too proud to beg the vulnerability, the flexibility of it, the intensity of it. And it goes straight to yours. So that's why the people keep listening to David Ruffin from Why Not, Mississippi. I would say the same with Ted Meals of Blue Magic. I get the young folk. Just stop. Let's just listen to Ted Meals of the Blue Magic. Let's just listen to Russell Tonkin's Jr., the stylistic. Oh, brother, where's you just old school? You just nostalgic? No. Love, sweetness, gentleness. Never go out of style. That's my brother would put a clip. Never go out of style. Everybody needs sweetness, kindness, gentleness. Black music used to be the fundamental conveyor of that sweetness. So that the being Crosby's the Frank Sinatra's, these are great, great geniuses themselves. You have Frank, who will you inspire by? Billy, holiday. Oh, you talking about the genius from Baltimore City, Billy. That's right. You Italian working class brother from Old Bokeh. That's right. Because I'm tied to excellence and sweetness. Now, Frank said not to. He's saying some sweet gentle songs now. But the younger generation these days, they've got John Hemman, some others who can are beautiful. Don't get me wrong. But it's smaller and small. But it's partly a matter of the oligarchs in the recording industry. See, the boys are men in the way. It's the last great group singing performer to act that connected to the dramatic and delphonics that I'm talking about. See, what happens? Well, I think they can make more money with just one Negro and a microphone and run a name out. So you get a genius like Kanye, deeply confused politically. We won't go into that right now. All this Trump connection. We need some serious pushing on that brother. But they'd rather have an individual isolated, easier to control in the industry. And the same oligarchs run, live performance, radio, and the music and the products. You know how they've now undergone this fundamental transformation and industry, especially given a new technology and social media. So I tell the young folk, I say, you know, I could not have grown up without the sweetness of those rhythm and blues groups. Now, I know the circumstances are different. But where do you get your sweetness from? Musically. What will be the soundtrack of your freedom movement? Genius is like Kendrick Lamar, providing some of the soundtrack. There's no doubt about that. And then there's others as well. But not enough. Not enough soul stirring. Not enough soul stirring. Not enough soul stirring. It is no curse, may feel. Right. Near reefer. Nobody near smokey. Right. Do you think that's connected to the peacocking? Oh, Lord, yes. Social media. It's a loot image. Spectacombs money. It's a Instagram push button. It's going in front of the Bentley. Oh, it's got to be in front of the commodity and so forth and so forth. Big house. Big jewelry. Up in the grass. He had his sharp cars. But with that genius got into the studio and the same love TK. Oh, you don't give a damn what kind of car he got. Right. He don't touch your soul. You know what I mean? And it's not just on the black side. We got, you know, you got vanilla blues, men like Bruce Springsteen and the Jewish brother genius of. You're telling from Minnesota Robert Zimmerman. All of these folks were involved in the Canosis activity of self-emptying, but they were deeply shaped by the sunhouses, the Robert Johnson, the muddy waters, the Maureenys, the best he smith, the blues tradition. Do you know Gary Clark Jr., Gary Clark Jr., I've heard of it. I've got to check it out. I'm going to educate you. I need some education about brotherhood. He is one of those rare musicians. Were you here? You hear a riff and it's a Gary Clark Jr. Pull up that video of when he played with my friend Suzanne from Honey Honey. And they did Midnight Rider from the Almond Brothers, but he did it as Gary Clark Jr. He's got a sound of his guitar. It reminds me of Hendrix in a way. It's very different than Hendrix, but it reminds me in that it's so distinctively him. Well, I got to hear this. Yeah, he'll pull it up right now. He did this. He's a brilliant guy and a great guy too. But he's just a unique artist. I don't know anyone like him. And his sound, it's one of those things where there's no mistaking who's playing the music when you hear him. He's got his own signature. Oh, yeah, even when he's playing Midnight Rider, which is a classic. He has so many people to play a song. Put this up. Put up. This is them up there. There's Gary. Oh, oh. This is me filming this. Is that right? Yeah, it was in the crowd. They did this Midnight on a Tuesday in downtown LA. How long ago was it? Year ago or so? Just recently. Yeah. This motherfucker. Oh, no. He's one of my favorite artists for sure. I hit that rabbit jost and hit him already. He's got everything in him. But it's also the buddy guy. But he got. But he got. Once you hear more Gary Clark, you realize this is him. You could feel it in the air in that club. There was maybe a hundred people in that club. Suzanne is reading the lyrics from her phone. She didn't even know the lyrics. They did this totally impromptu. It's right on the spot. Totally on the spot. Unprepared. They talked about it. It was Duke Midnight Rider. Okay. So they weren't even, they didn't rehearse this. They didn't at all. This is the life. He's just taking off on it like just takes off on it. Just did his first. Where's he first? Austin, Texas. Oh, he's from Texas. Oh, yeah. He's a bad motherfucker. He's a bad motherfucker. Check him out. He's one of those guys that you watch him and you just get a tingle. Like there's an energy that comes out in him. Undeniable greatness. Yeah. That's part of that self. Yeah. Yes. But he's also an incredibly humble guy. No peacocking at all. He's not that little. He's a artisan of spiritual maturity and moral security. Yes. But he's insecure to make you want a peacock. Yes. He's just devoted to the work, devoted to the art. How bother you? Gary's probably in the sturdies. He's very young. Yeah. He's still young. Better. His latest shit is his best shit. He lives here in LA. He goes back and forth to Texas. He's around here all the time. 35. Yeah. I don't know. He's thinking he's out here now, right? Isn't he out here? He was just, Suzanne just sent me a text message. They were just jamming in his house last week. So he must be out here. Oh, yeah. He's got some shows here in September. He's opening for the rolling still. Oh, shit. Oh, shit. Oh, shit. Good call on my team. That's a hell of a show right there. Yeah. He's, there's a signpost or him over by the kitchen. He signed something for me. Wow. He's a new educator. He's a great brother. Yeah. Gotta get something. I'll have to check him. I'll tell you which one to get. So he's got some great, great work. But there's, there's those artists that when you hear their thing, whatever it is, it literally gives you energy. You feel it in your body. It's like a drug. It changes your state. Absolutely. No, I mean, when, when you have the very creative marriage of technique, and vision of craft and imagination mediated through sound, the vibration that I sent, just beyond the language. You know, the great John Coltrane had a whole philosophy of vibrations. Sun rose, part of that dialogue as well. Eric Dauphie, some of the old geniuses of that time, you know. And these vibrations are just, they're as real as a heart attack. But you can never see them. Almost. Yeah. You know, John was bootleered to find the materialist is someone who is obsessed with utensils and afraid of perfume. Because perfume, you can't touch it, but it's as real as a heart attack. Well, the vibrations of deep music, most are too. Yeah. The miles or the merrillu Williams, Jerry Allen, any of the great artists, it just goes through you. Yes. And it's not simply cerebral. It doesn't bypass the brain, but it doesn't stay in the brain. It goes through your whole body. Yeah. It's like a drug. No. It changes your state. Like if you could take, if there was a drug that you could take that made you feel the way you feel when a great song comes on, you'd want to take that all the time. Take that all the time. Yeah. If it had no side effects. Well, then away, you can play that song over and over. Yes. You can. I mean, it definitely, you get a little bit taller enough. Unfortunately, you would find out the one. But who would have made your musicians that were shaping your senses? I was always in the rock and roll. I was always in the classic rock when I was young. You know, I was always into God from everyone from Queen. I was a big Queen fan when I was a kid. Definitely in this is New Jersey. I hadn't gotten to Boston yet. No, well, I left New Jersey when I was seven. Oh, no, seven. No, this was Boston. I lived in San Francisco from seven. Being a fan of those are kids. Definitely. And this is New Jersey. I haven't gotten to Boston yet. No, well I left New Jersey when I was seven. Oh no, this was Boston. I lived in San Francisco from 7 to 11 that I lived in Florida from 11 to 13. And then Boston from 13 to 24. So he was mainly that Boston context where you had the classic rock? Yeah, a lot of house Smiths which is a Boston band of course, you know, a lot of Van Halen. Oh yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of that. See I didn't get into classic rock as much as I probably should have. It's only so much time. Yeah. This was only so much time to listen to music. That is an issue right? There's so much great work in every year. New great work gets created. Track of all of love. Because he was mainly rhythm and blues on our side of town, you know what I mean? Yeah. In Sacramento, California. Jazz came later and then for me musical theater came and then classical music. I played classical violin for the early 20s. Oh wow. And so classical music was always very important. It must absorb a lot of time. And he and well man, I was first violin man. I used to conduct two. Oh man, I declined to knock music with Mozart. We played egg martin, but they told me then so forth. And as soon as it was all I'd go home and you know rock would hold his red and man. And when Isaac Hayes, the black Moses and great, very white and others. But it's fascinating how you begin to see these connections, the broader connections. And so classic rock was something that I got to real late. Late as in you know, 21-22. Right. In that sense. Very, very much so. But a world without music. Oh it's suck. Well it's interesting too when you it's all about the context of when the music was created too. Because if you go and listen to Robert Johnson today, it's still undeniably brilliant. But what's interesting is it was so good back then that people thought he sold his soul to the devil. I mean that was the narrative. That was the legend. But if you listen to it today in comparison to something like Gary Clark, it's so simplistic. It's so true. If Gary Clark go back in time to when Robert Johnson was alive, they would think he was from another planet. But that's the truth. They wouldn't even understand it. They wouldn't even understand what he was doing. That's very real. Now I was blessed to have dialogue with the BB King on a number of occasions. He was a brilliant, the King in a lot of ways. King not because he was the greatest blues artists. But because he was a great blues artist through his personality and through his generosity, he was able to create such a presence that he becomes the King in that way. I had a chance to see him live. You saw him live. He started. Was that at the very end when he was sitting most of the time? No, he was still standing. He was standing all the way up to the late 90s. Oh yeah, no, no, absolutely. It's a power out of his voice, man. But he used to say that the blues was a kind of high school visa, the jazz who were those who went to college. By college, he meant just studying with all strong, with Duke, with Rutherford and the way of any others. I always tell myself, I don't know about that because genius and excellence comes in a number of different forms. Most jazz musicians don't have the genius of a Robert Johnson. Yet, Charlie Christians' guitar is more complicated in variety of ways in Robert Johnson too, so that you have to be able to be flexible enough to see the differences in development building on the genius of those who came before. So you can end up being a very good guitar player who plays some unbelievable chords that Jimmy Hendricks created. Yes. But you build it on Jimmy. And it becomes almost not taken for granted, but something you can use as a launching pad. Like Steve Rehvond did. Yes. He wrote Jimmy's vibration. That's a great exam. And added his own feel to it. Absolutely. Absolutely. And here again, you see you have the that common humanity that cuts across color. There's a lot of controversies days about cultural appropriation. You know, can white brothers and sisters really be part of a black genre so forth and so on. I had a dialogue at my class at Harvard. This spring, I teach a course on black intellectual tradition. And I include some white intellectuals as part of it. Strange career, Jim Crow, for example, by the great C. Van Woodwood, a history of Jim Crow to the Bible among the King's head was the Bible, the Civil Rights Movement. Woodwood was a white Southern brother. And I asked him, that's what we don't understand completely. By the way, I said, well, let me ask you this. It's Eminem, a part of the hip hop tradition at the highest level. Yes he is. Yes he is. That's who we talk about. You see, you had to be a fool to deny the genius of him and him. Yeah. Yeah. If Eminem you see. But rather than knowing him and him and out, Dr. Dre and so forth. So he immerses and soaks himself in it. But he puts his own distinctive stamp on it. All in hopes would be another, righteous brothers another, average white band from Scotland. You know that average white band and the funk that David generated. Oh my god. Now of course no average white band without James Brown, James Brown, took it to places nobody took it. But you let those guys brothers play a person, the person on you. Yeah. Oh lord, have you ever picked up the pieces of white. Why'd you have to go? Why'd you have to go and make me love you? In the slow. Why'd you? I mean it's just soulful man. You say, Scotland. Scotland. Robert Burns. Mm-hmm. Well, just God. David Hume. Colonized by the British Empire. Responding in their own creative ways. And by the 20th century, they soaked in rhythm and blues. Wow. Koreans like that today. Really? Oh man. You know, come here. Pop, Cape Pop and Cape Rhythm and Blue. I know they've got a lot of break dancers over there. Oh, it was not just BTS now. BTS is something else. They don't say they pack massive squares on. But I'm talking about like urban, urban, succarpal man. Oh, they, you put on coffee, man. Oh lord, have mercy. I played at the Dan, Dan, he gloved other day on the Whitney, Bernie Sanders campaign. We traveled away off in the country and South Carolina for Brother Bernie. I say, Dan, he was San Francisco. I said, listen to these young Korean brothers, man. They don't remind you to natural for Richmond. I put it on. Oh, man, they can't be Korean. What you talking about? Those Koreans got a soulful sound, man, at a blow. Yo, mine. I was just reading the book called the Birth of the Korean Cool by Sister Wong. Oh wow. And it shows again how, you know, that human spirit is always grounded in something local and particular like black music. But it travels, it's the roots and the routes. Yeah. So the roots of black, but the ROTES is global. Right. So just immersing themselves in the culture of the Japanese jazz. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. You just got back from Thailand. Yeah. That was last year. Yeah. That was that last year. Yeah. But now, man, it's a human thing. It's a little momentum of the culture thing. The momentum of culture is so strange because the titans a great example of that. It's like they're so different. They're so in the momentum of culture. Like I just got back from Italy. They're so different. But yet they're so similar. But they're so, there's a momentum of the way they live their lives. It's very unique and unusual. And I think that's one of the great things about traveling is you get to see, oh, well, the way we live here is like, especially here in Los Angeles, which is preposterous. Yeah. I never lived in it. Exactly. I grew up, but I never lived in it. When you live now, living in Cambridge. Yeah. Cambridge is far there. It's fine until four months of the year when it's just a frozen wasteland. It's I used to perform a catch-rising star. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And Harvard Square. Absolutely. Yeah. It's Cambridge is, I mean, it's a great place. It's wonderful. It's intellectually. It's wonderful thing to hang out with. There's a lot of gates and yeah, Brendan Terry and Bob. Boston's a strange place. It really is. There's so many different flavors to it, you know, but it's so goddamn cool. But it gets cold. But that's who's time to go into library and read some books. Yeah. It also builds character. But that's true too. There's something about people that grow up and cold climates come to terms. Yeah. Chicago. Chicago. Yeah. Chicago's a person. Yeah. They're great people there because they have character. Absolutely. Detroit. They deal with that shit. They do in the terms. You write about that domain. I mean, one of the sad or features of our our moment, given all our the joy of reveling in each other's humanity and music and so forth, is that, you know, he got impending ecological catastrophe, escalating nuclear catastrophe. Economic catastrophe to grow test wealth inequality all around the world. Spiritual catastrophe, in terms of intensifying forms of depression, suicide, wasted lives, lack of self respect, not believing oneself and thinking that the only way you can really make it is by imitating the mainstream forms of conformity. And then the political catastrophe is a right-wing movement all around the world. And by right-wing movements, what I mean is the rule of big money, big military, and then scapegoat the most vulnerable and try to convince the most vulnerable that is their fault, that they're in the subordinate positions that they are rather than giving them a fair chance. And that's the makings of new forms of fascism and so on. You see, and you say to yourself, you know, how do we hold on to some sense of hope? And there is no hope without wrestling with despair. If you were afraid of despair, you never have hope. When you say it, you got the rest of it, not allowing it to have the last word, but you got a rest of it. When you're talking about your concern about nuclear catastrophe, impending nuclear catastrophe, you talking about what's going on right now when I ran? Well, I'm thinking about Russia. Russia is the only way to ask you, as missile has ever ran. North Korea. It's a possibility of war. Yeah. U.S. bombing, pressures of Iran, Iranian brothers and sisters are as precious as priceless as anybody else. It just happened to be under the authoritarian rule that does need to be changed and transformed. There's no doubt about it. But you think, you know, all the hell they've been through many, in the past years, when the United States was on the side, aside of whom, and they were all alone in the world. Very much like our Jewish brothers just felt in 1973, they're already undergone a genocidal attack when our three brothers Jews killed. And 73, in the world, all by themselves other than the U.S. Empire. And you say, oh my god, who can I rely on? And that brings out the worst in people, the worst in people because it's all about in-crowd, in-group security. Yes. Authoritarian on the inside and distrustful of the whole world on the outside. And this is why it's so difficult to have a discussion about the Israeli occupation, what our precious Palestinian brothers and sisters, because to try to be able to cast a light on how an underdog, because that's the history of Jews in 2000 years, is basically an underdog. It became an oppressor. And how they become top dogs tied to the U.S. top dogs. Right. Now you always have, again, those Jewish voices and organizations that are critical of the Israeli occupation, critical of any actions of human beings, including Jews that need to be called in the question. But it's hard to keep track of the rich and priceless humanity of Palestinian brothers and sisters under occupation, second class citizenship when it's very clear that Jews have been so viciously treated for 2000 years in the history of the West as well as the history of the Middle East. And yet we have a moral duty, the key track of the preciousness of press Palestinian babies. Just as we ought to keep track of the preciousness of Jewish babies. And Gaza and Tel Aviv must have a spotlight in terms of what those human beings are going through. On both sides of that divide as it were, even given the asymmetric relation of power and the structure of domination, called the occupation. But it's the same thing about Tibet. I'd say saying about Kashmir. I'd say saying about Western Sub-Saharan, under Moroccan domination. There's so many examples that we human beings generate that require our moral and spiritual witness and our analytical attention and our artists who can authorize and alternative, even if only for a moment and alternative. What is the art like in Palestine? The art? The art. The art in Palestine? Oh, I believe. I mean, I would imagine when you deal with such an oppressed group of people who are living in such a curious situation and time and history. It's unbelievable. I was just talking about Dear Brother Mark Laman here. We just had him at Harvard for a dialogue on the Palestinian and Black situation. And he goes back and forth and he talks about the Palestinian hip-hop artists. Really? Oh my God. They got one of the richest sub-cultures of hip-hop. This isn't always the case when you have a culture that's downtrodden. Absolutely. You get the courage in turkeys, who apply the disproportionate amount of influence on turkeys culture. What's like a good Palestinian hip-hop band to look into? That's a good question because I didn't really follow I'd like to listen to that too because I don't know what they're saying. I love listening to music where I don't know the language. You can just feel the spirit. Come into vibrations. I love Brazilian hip-hop because I don't speak Portuguese and it's just amazing and sound. I've never heard of it. You can see fighters from Brazil. They'll come out to their soundtrack as Brazilian artists. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, to me, you know, one of the uplifting features being rooted in the arts and music is that no matter how ugly, ambitious, and hateful things are, it never suffocates the human spirit. Somebody go tell a joke in a hell. Somebody's a lot of a song. It touches so. Yeah. And it's almost a way of saying, I love you. Not in a sentimental Hollywood stereotype or a typical way, but you know that song by Stevie Wonder? These three words. You got that, me? We can't play. Oh, you can't play. Oh, I thought it go. We'll get now. Right. Because that was a video that you put up there before. Yeah, but that video was Gary Johnson singing in a concert. Oh, that's a deal. Yeah. Yeah. That's we get a little bit of listening to Stevie, man, because he's talking about how an aching heart can be kindled to smile and open and connect in a world overwhelmed by hatred and distrust that shot this shot through all of us. And we all contribute to it. We all contribute to it. You see, I mean, that's one of reasons why even when I talk about, you know, brother Trump has the, the gangster I call him a kind of do you have created a fascist Frankenstein and he's the creation of the worst of America in the way in which Martin King represents the best that they are both America's apple pie. But any critique of anybody ought to begin with yourself. Mm. Let it begin with who we are because we all got gangster elements inside of us. No way around. That's what it was. No, I know. I met him one time. I think at the end of a meet a bigger concert in the casinos in the Atlantic city way back in the 80s. Wow. And it was interesting. He was able to Mike Tyson. I think and he was interesting because it was a chocolate affair. You know, you know, the vanilla brother there. Right. And you know, what are the first things that come across to the brother is that he is so glad to be there hanging out with the like brothers. Cool. It's so funny. You could just tell him he just is square. You say, man, you're going to listen to your beach boys, man. We got Jay Brown, brother. We got we Brian Wilson. We love you. But we got JB, man. And, but it, but it's, but it's a cultural dynamic because he was the richest one in the room. Right. And Mike Tyson got a lot of money when Don King got so that one or two. But, but it was a different kind of dynamic. And so it's a context in which you embrace, you know, we embrace him because that's the best of black culture. We embrace everybody. You know what I mean? Donald Trump's mother shows up from Scotland in 1930. Black people been in nine generation. We ain't going to say, go back where you come from. Come on in here, sister. Be bought at his Democratic experiment. We owned the other side of the chocolate side of town. But we welcome you. But don't say nothing about our brown brothers and sisters coming in from Mexico. We learn because if anybody is definitive about what is America, it's going to be read in black people. Because they are the ones who's undergo the monstrous crimes against humanity. The genocide is stolen land on the one and the stolen peoples and the human bondage on the other. Those are the pillars. The worst pillars of the country. Then you've got democratic visions coming not just from Thomas Jefferson, but they coming from the slaves like Frederick Douglass. The border crisis is a very interesting one, right? Because it represents the fear of people from the downtrodden countries where they don't have opportunity trying to get into this country. But then it also represents the fear of criminals, of drug dealers and gangsters and gang members make cartel members making the way across and victimizing our citizens. And both things are real too. But if you tell the lies and make it as if the latter represent the whole, and that's what Trump specializes in. Did you see the video of Pence when he was down there at the detention centers and just looking away, no humanity? Just very disturbing. And it's so sad because here's a brother who speaks his whole personal identity. On Christian being a Christian. Yes. Yes. And you say the same stuff like, the Michael, I mean, as a President, I'm not trying to call in question your Christian faith and nothing. I don't have authority to do that. But the Bible says in part, by that works, you shall know them. The works of love, the exemplify. You see. And you know, nowadays you got commodified Christianity and a commodified culture of a declining empire. And you get Christian evangelicals, 91% of self pro Trump, 79% see, say he's doing the best possible job and you say how Christianity seems to have lost meaning of the cross. And it's become so accommodated to the empire. And it was the Roman Empire who put Jesus to death. Roman Empire, you had some neo colonial elites who cooperated, but it was a Roman Empire who put Jesus to death. It was the greatest empire of its day, very much like the Persian Empire. The largest, greatest empire of its day with Cyrus degree. Now you got the Roman Empire putting Jesus to death. And here Jesus is sent there by the crowd, by the mob. And you say to breath, Michael pins, so you're going to accommodate yourself to Donald Trump. You're going to accommodate yourself to policies that are so inhumane and barbaric just to retain your position and try to then rationalize it as a Christian. We need some music and some comedy to try to get in contact with his humanity to change him, but most importantly, you just need a social movement. You know, you need to get him out of office. But with panzages, seeing him in reaction to those people is just a failure of just cold, destined to call us. Well, the narrative is that they broke the law and that they're imposing upon our great nation. And you know, this is, it's crimes of opportunity. They're just trying to, they're trying to find opportunity. They're coming over here because they want a better life to not have sympathy for that. And other than indigenous peoples and and my own African peoples, that is the history to come to this open and bring into the country those who are eager and have energy willing to work and sacrifice and an unbelievable contribution of voluntary immigrants to the making of American. American that a nation of immigrants, I don't like that language, but overlooks indigenous peoples in voluntary immigrants like black people. And slavery was not America's original sin. That's another neoliberal line at the hero, the time on the corporate media. If indigenous people suffering has to be rendered invisible to highlight black people. What's one of the least discussed in justices of this nation? And then there's their current situation in these reservations with extreme alcoholists. So they still got their rich music and poetry and resistance, but the social conditions are just, but they are the casualties of a settler colonial enterprise. And we rather act as if they don't exist. I mean, we black people became central because our labor and our imagination and culture became central and we had a more barracks of war, 750,000 people there each life precious. And that has been essentially been in the shaping of America. So when people talk about race, they go straight to blackness as if indigenous peoples in redness is not integral too. It's just that they've been rigid so invisible and the vicious attack has been so immense. What's so complicated too that they have their own rules on the reservations? They're allowed to have gambling and they can have all sorts of, they have their own sovereignty in a certain way on the reservations. It's very odd. Oh, no, it's true. And I was blessed to be there in Standing Rock a couple of decimers ago. It was one of the marvelous moments in my life to stand there with the group. There was a multiracial group of people came from all around the world. And I am a client from Canada. And for the most part, it was a matter of the indigenous peoples coming together. Memories of Wounded Knee 1890 for a hundred people. Could you remind people with Standing Rock? Standing Rock was a struggle over that pipeline. Absolutely trying to put pressure on the Obama administration to ensure that a pipeline was not built that would violate the sacred lands and many of the sacred memories of indigenous peoples. And it was magnificent because you had to come together of indigenous nations because part of the problem, this is true for a hollow press people. It's fighting among themselves and the difficulty of coming together. The first time you had to come together with a significant number of indigenous peoples nations unified against the greedy corporate elites who were trying to promote this pipeline through Canada all the way down to the southern section of the United States. And it was just a struggle. Well, we first, we got an announcement right when we were there. It was freezing December. And there were holes in people down to the old Lord. There were holes in people down wetting them down while they're going on. And it was about minus 15 or whatever it was. It was freezing out there. But no, we got an announcement from the Obama administration for a suspension of it. Because they had plenty to do it too. I mean, Obama administration can be very accommodating in the Wall Street interests and corporate elite interests and so forth. Even given the image and spectacle of black president being a progressive in what have you, much more progressive than Trump. That's not saying too much. But we got a suspension and the struggle continues, really. But it was it and it's sent tremendous ripples through the cultures of indigenous peoples and their nations in terms of coming together. And the fact that it was successful. Absolutely. And there was at least a relative victory. All these victories are relative and very relative victory. But it was beautiful just to see again. You know, you can't downplay the role of joy. No brother. This is so very important. The joy in struggle. The joy in organizing, the joy in fighting for justice. The joy in the nightclubs. The joy in the churches and mosques, the temples synagogues. Joy is something that we need to come back to. That's one of the great secrets of the human conditions. What are the sources of joy? What are the conditions for the possibility of joy? We've been obsessed with pleasure for the last 100 years or so. And there's nothing wrong with pleasure. But pleasure is not the same thing as joy. You know, when you look at the sparkle and eyes of your precious daughter, that's not pleasure. That's joy. You and your wife. That's deep, deep joy. You see, that's what endures. You could be broke as the 10 commandments financially. But that memory will bring you joy. That's a real joy. Not peacocking. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. Well, you said so many amazing things today. This was one of my favorite podcasts of all time. I just want to thank you for being here. Is the time I've already... Time, it's already 11 o'clock. No, good God almighty. But brother, man, this has been a blessing, no brother. My pleasure. What an artist. You are. What a human being you are. You stay strong, though. You too, sir. Thank you very much. It's really a loving man.