The Jerogean experience. It's a wonderful thing that I had to fight to, you know, get everybody approved. Well, it's tricky in boxing sometimes because sometimes it's difficult to make those match-ups happen and a dream match-up like that between two undefeated world champions and for you to dominate the way you did. Because a lot of people had that like a pick-um fight. Like a lot of people didn't know how to call it, but you just fucking ran that fight. That was amazing. Yeah, you know, that's the fight that we've been on for years. And to finally secure the fight and perform the way that I performed, it was a great moment for me and my career. It was beautiful, man. I mean, just the way you control, the way you switch things up, the way you control the pace of the fight, the defense, your defense was on point. Those hooks that you were landing in close were magnificent. It was a brilliant fight, man. I mean, I'm sure you appreciate it. I'm sure you watched a bunch of times, but man, that was like a real... Because it was such a mainstream fight, such a huge fight where everybody was paying attention to it and talking about it, even casuals, that they got to see you perform that way. You know, now it's like there's no dispute. You're the number one pound for pound guy on earth. Yeah. That's something that I got to credit to my coaches, you know, because we drill everything that you're seeing, fight night, we drilled it time and time again, time and time again. So it was... It came natural and easy for me when the fight came. You know, like I said, only thing they kept saying, how he's going to beat me is because he's bigger and he's stronger. That was it. You look stronger. Of course. Of course. And I was just like, how do you know he's stronger than me? Right. He might be bigger than me, but big, no meaning stronger. But he's just taller than you. You look more muscular than him too. But it was just the technique was what really stood out. It's like you just were a master in there. It was a master class. That's something that they wasn't giving me credit for as well. How? Because they say... That's the thing. It's like how will they not? Well, I don't know what it is with me. They just always try to diminish my accomplishments and all the way. Who I was fighting, they say, oh, well, you wasn't fighting nobody. And this guy, Aerospanz, is the most fundamental, least sound fighter in the game. So that's why everybody was picking them. But I was favorite in Vegas. So Vegas must have had it right. Yeah. Well, the wise people picked you as a favorite. You know, just based on your accomplishments. It's not like Aerospanz wasn't a great fighter. He's a great fighter. But it's so interesting when you watch a great fighter against what I believe is an all-time great. It's just levels upon levels upon levels upon levels. And right now you're at the top of the fucking mountain. Yes. Yes. Yes. And I'm enjoying it. I'm enjoying it. Beautiful. You deserve it. You deserve it. That's when you plan for that fight, you knew that you were probably going to fight him for the last few years. It was something that was on the table. But not really. There was a point in time where I was like, you know, I shifted gears and I shifted my mind off of Aerospanz because I didn't feel like the fight wasn't going to happen. But once I left Top Rank and we started negotiating, I was like, oh, well, maybe this fight will happen. Then once I fought Avennesian because the conversations and everything that we was talking about to get the fight done, it wasn't lining up to what I wanted. So I decided to take another fight. And I came back to the table and like, listen, let's get this fight made. And at that point in time, things wasn't going. How I would have liked it to go. So I just hit up Smith's like, hey man, listen man, if me and you're going to fight me and you're going to get this done. Because, you know, there's a lot of people that blocked in the fight. How was it blocking? Like what was the whole business wise? You know, I just felt like I was worth ex amount and they felt like I wasn't. And they wanted to do the deal a certain way. And I wanted to do the deal the fair way. And Aerospanz seen it. He was just, he was agreeing with everything that I said. It was like, yeah, we can do this, we can do that. And he probably felt like he gave up too much, you know, at the end when it was all said and done. I felt like everything was fair. Was it in terms of like the purse split? Everything. Everything. We talked about everything. You know. And so this fight had been discussed for like how many years now? Five. Five years. Wow. That's crazy. That takes out long for someone just to happen in boxing. When I came to the, what's the way division? I called out all the champions, except Sean Porter. I called out all the champions. I went up the mall, you know, at that time. And I wasn't able to get in the ring with any of them. And at that point in time, there was calling Aerospanz the boogeyman. And my reply was how is he the boogeyman when I'm chasing him. And I just wanted to prove to the world that I was better than what they said I was because given the fact that how great I looked against each opponent, they say, oh, well, he wasn't nothing. Or he was this. He was that because how talented I am. So they didn't want to give me no credit because I passed all my teses with flying colors. So it was great to get in the ring with Aerospanz Jr. And do the same thing if not better than I did for the past opponents that I faced. No, you were on fire. It's sort of the same thing that Roy Jones Jr. faced. Everybody's like Roy hasn't beaten anybody. Like yes, he has. Yeah. It's just he's so much better than everybody else that he was making everybody else look like they weren't any good. Yeah. But those were world championship caliber fighters and Roy was just light them up. Right. That sometimes when a fighter eclipses everyone else and reaches the pinnacle, that's the criticism they face until there's an undeniable moment. You know, that was that was your undeniable moment. Everybody's got to shut the fuck up. Yeah. And that's what, you know, my feelings was, you know, a lot of people like man, you look too happy. You know, after you won, after you won, I didn't see the excitement in you. I was like, man, I was happy. I was happy just I had to prove myself, you know, to the world how great I knew I was, but at the same time, I was kind of disappointed at the same time that it took this long for me to get my recognition for me to get a big marquee fight of this status at 35 years old. Yeah. Especially after chasing it for five years. Right. Yeah. So it's like, I've been champion for nine years, going on 10 years in March. So I've been doing this game for a long time. You know, and I've been at the top since I've been getting bold. And I've been looking for all the biggest challenges there is. And some of them I was able to capture and some of them went the other way. And I'm just blessed to be able to be the first man to be undisputed in the junior well-to-weight division, the first man to be undisputed in a well-to-weight division in a four-bell error, the first man to be undisputed in two-weight divisions. So it's a blessing. It's a blessing. It's a huge blessing. It's an amazing accomplishment. You look, Tappy. You're a dancer with your mom. You were having a good time. Yeah. You know what people thought you weren't happy. Because, you know, when you're going to back room, everybody want to see the excitement. Right. I was just like, I got that out for my back. Yeah. Well, you can get that out. Was there anything unusual about that fight? Like, is that exactly how you expected the exchange is to go? I'm sure you watched a toilet tape on him, right? Actually I didn't. Really. I didn't. A lot of people always ask me, do I watch a lot of film on my opponents and I always tell them no because I have a different style. They're not going to fight me the same style or the same way that they fought their previous opponents. They just not, you know. So I already knew how he fought. I just watched probably like two fights of his just to get a feel for what he liked to do, what he don't like. The things that, you know, I can capitalize on. And that's it. Like, I don't watch too much film because I'm going to make my adjustments on the fly inside the ring. So yeah, I don't watch too much film. That's interesting. What is the general consensus on that about watching film? Do most champions watch film? Is it just on an individual basis? No. Some people like to watch film to where they feel as if they know what they opponent is going to do when they're going to do it because they got certain habits to identify when they're going to throw a punch or when they're going to back up certain things that you see as a, as a top athlete, you start noticing, okay, I noticed that he's doing this when he's doing this. He's doing that when he's doing this and you pick up on that. And so you put it in your mind like, okay, we're going to prepare for this. When you do that, we're going to do this. So you try to capitalize on it. But me, I never was that type of person. I let my coaches, they do the studying and then they come up with a plan and then they shoot me the plan, the plan, the win and we just go from there. When you switch, because you're, in my opinion, the best ever at switching from Orthodox to South Pole since Marvin Hagler, you're the best ever. When do you decide, do you just feel it? Do you go out there of South Pole sometimes and say, I'm going to fucking switch it up? How do you make those changes? Well, I think I made the change to fight South Pole in the backdress room. Really? Yeah, because I was like, man, how should I come out? Because in my mind, I was just so filled with the energy from the way in as the press conference, the way the moment. So I was like, man, I just want to go out there and everybody's saying I'm too small. So I went to prove wrong. Everybody was saying he was going to walk me down. So I was just like, man, they just don't know. I just had that chip on my shoulder. I just went to go head on with the bull and just go fight them. And it was like just box. I was like just box. And then I was remembering. I was like, you ever fought too many South Pole's before? And then on one of the occasions, he got hurt real bad by a hood. So I was like, I'm coming out South Pole and we don't box just to start off. But at the same time, I'm going to get my respect out the gate. I'm not going to be doing all that moving. So the plan was never to move and everybody when you interview them, that was like, all Terrence got to be slippery. He can't stand in front of his pants. He can't do this. He got to get on his bicycle. I'm like, you know, Terminator, I'm like, man, I'm going to be right there in front of him. Like I always do. You know, I'm going to make him miss and make him pay. And I'm going to fight my fight. So I feel like that was the key for the victory because he wasn't used to fight in South Pause. Do you feel as comfortable orthodox as South Pole? Do you feel like you're better in one stance or is it just depending upon that opponent? I think it's depending on opponent. You know, I feel I'm equally as great in both stands. I'm very powerful in both stands. I hit just as hard with my left, probably even harder with my left than my right, you know, but I think it's the opponent. They were talking about it in the broadcast. They said that when you were a kid, you hurt your hand. And so that's why you started practice in South Pole. Yeah, that's when I started actually practicing it. You know, that was something that when I when I had the cast on, I was like, man, I love the gym so much. I'm like, man, I'm not leaving the gym. Like I'm going practice with this left. And that's when I got the left stronger because at first when I go South Pole, it was only, you know, my right, my right, my right, then when my hand got messed up, just started working on the left and it started getting stronger and stronger. And I started getting more accurate because at first, it's just though it just be throwing it. And then, you know, it just got to a point where they both, my left was actually way stronger than my right. When it came back, so I had to get my right back stronger. That's great. It's crazy that you have that option because that's such an amazing advantage to be able to fight just as comfortably from Orthodox to South Pole. Oh, yeah, definitely, definitely. You know, I look at it like you can't go nowhere. Like you trap, like you move to your left. I can go to South Pole and cut you off. You move to your right. I can go orthodox and cut you off. And then it is great that I can pack a punch in both hands as well because a lot of people when they switch, they give up something. I think when I switch, I gain something in both stands that I probably don't have in the other stands. It's great for me.