The government of Benjamin Netanyahu in Israel  and its many organized cheerleaders here in the United States have for some time now made the  case that all criticism of their government is anti-semitism. And it is because their government  somehow speaks for all Jews globally. Every Jewish person is represented by the Netanyahu government.  Therefore, the actions of the Netanyahu government represent every Jew on this planet. And any  criticisms of that government are by definition an attack on every Jew. They are anti-semitism.  It's a position that doesn't make any sense, but it's kind of hardened into a consensus  in the United States, at least for right now. And if you think about it for a moment, it's not  only incorrect, it's a kind of slander against Jews. It is itself a kind of anti-semitism because  no, not all Jews are represented by Benjamin Netanyahu and there are many who don't want to  be. And that's true even within Israel. Yes, polling consistently shows that most Israelis  were in favor of the war, but in Israel, as in all countries, most people don't really know the  details of what is happening or why. And that's by design. Israel is a particularly censored place.  It's also a particularly small place, fewer than 10 million people. And so its citizens, by and  large, live the same way we do in an information vacuum where what they know is determined by  somebody else for political reasons. All of which makes it very important to do our best to  break the spell of this. To hear from people who disagree and hear them explain why people who have  some credibility and knowledge, not just wackos with weird opinions, but thoughtful people who  have a dissenting view. And one of those people is a man called Abram Berg. Berg is in his early  70s. He was born in Israel. He's from a prominent Zionist family and he himself was a prominent  political figure for many years. He was a member of the Knesset. He was speaker of the Knesset,  the Israeli parliament, its lawmaking body, its congress. He was even interim president  of Israel at one point. So his opinions may represent the minority of Israeli opinion, but  he himself is not a fringe figure. He was at the very center of Israeli politics. Once again, he  was the interim president of the country. And in the hours after this current war broke out, he  wrote a very strong op-ed in the Israeli press explaining why it was a terrible idea, why it  didn't serve Israel's interests. And while the people do doing it had no idea why they were doing  it. It's pretty brave thing to say in the middle of a country of war, but he said it because  he's a pretty brave guy. Agree or disagree. So we thought it would be worthwhile to hear  directly from him. Aimber from Israel. Here it is. Amber, thank you very much for doing this. I  I want to ask you about something that's happening right now apparently. So the president of the  United States issued a statement this morning saying that because of ongoing negotiations  between the US and Iran, the US would not actually commence with hitting civilian infrastructure uh  as he'd promised. um and that we're going to try and work something out diplomatically this week.  Almost immediately after issuing that statement, there were reports that the Israeli military  was hitting civilian infrastructure in Iran. What assuming that's true, what do you make  of that? What strategy does that suggest? The same strategy that Israel has for years,  no strategy. In Israel, in many many cases, the compilation of many tactics sometimes assemble  into a de facto uh strategy, but otherwise nothing. I mean, just look at the last two hours.  When was the announcement of the president, the surprising one, two hours ago, and you have  a bundle of messages coming from all directions. The first and the most important one, hallelujah,  they're going to renew the flights so we can go for Passover vacation. That's the immediate uh the  immediate reaction of many Israelis, my daughter included. The second is, oh, Netanyahu knew  altogether. I mean, Netanyahu is behind the move as if framing it as uh as his own move. And then,  oh, Trump, oh, he is so softy. He is so uh he's so weak. He doesn't have any resilience. Uh the the  Iranians, they trick him, etc., etc., etc. Bottom line is nobody has a clue. And in these chaos,  the military does what it does the best, simply uh hammer the nail. But you're suggesting that those  tactics, the one we're seeing to today and the ones we've seen for the last month, don't add up  to a strategy. There's no strategic goal in mind. I listened to you very carefully in the last  couple of weeks and the way you try to conceive the Israeli strategy from Netanyahu's 40 years  life mission to the greater land of Israel biblically speaking or messianic escological one  and I envy you that you really believe that we have something like that. Okay. Uh it doesn't  work that way. I mean in a way then let's start somewhere else. I mean somebody once told me  that what's the difference between an Israeli and an American among many differences is that  we Israelis we see an aim so we aim and we shoot. You Americans you see an aim so you take an aim  and aim and aim and aim and aim. You are a lot about process and we are a lot about yala let's  shoot it. And there is a difference here. I have no idea what's the American strategy. I do not  know what was the endgame. I have no idea what is the the the final uh uh design the architects  of the White House or the Washington really had in mind. I can tell you one thing for sure. Israel  wants to remove the Iranian uh the Iranian monster because part of it is a real threat and part of  it because we pumped it to the size of a monster. So we are fighting in a way a real demon and  a demon which is our own creation. So what we want to do is we don't like the war. We  want it to end. We don't like the missiles. We hate the sirens. We skip nights after nights  of sleeping. But once we are into it, let's make sure that it's over. So the real will of many  Israelis is let's get over with the Iranians. The the problem is the relative  size. Israel is a small country. Iran is a large country. How exactly do  Israelis expect that's going to happen? Sizewise and number-wise, we are let's say  10 million in a good day and there are 100 million in a in a in a in a in an average day.  In a way, many Israelis do not really measure it this way. Many Israelis believe that we are  a kind of a superpower. A couple of weeks ago, I was in a high school somewhere and I promoted  my good old no goodnick peace agenda. Okay. And one of the students stood up and said, "A can I  ask you a question?" I said, "Yes, please do." And he said, "Why won't we do to them what we  did to them in Afghanistan?" And I said, "I know Gaza. I know Lebanon. I know Syria. I know Egypt.  What did we do to whom in Afghanistan?" I mean, we haven't been there yet. And I asked him,  "Where are you from originally?" And he said, "I was born in Moscow." And I said to myself,  "Haha, he thinks like a Russian." And I asked him tell me how many Jews are there in the world  now Tucker with no hesitation he said ah 54.3 okay and how many Israelis are we he said  something like 20 million in the eyes of many Israelis we are not just superpower  technologically and superpower economically and a regional hgeimon politically we  have the numbers the numbers in economy me the numbers in support, the numbers in  demography without really calculating what are the real numbers. So when you ask the  Israelis how simply do it and what what will the end victory look like from an Israeli  perspective? How will Israelis know they've won? I don't have a good answer for this question. at a sense that in many cases the American or the  western way of thinking is usually a kind of a win-win. I mean we end the war and we make sure  that we left at the other side somebody to talk with. I mean yes it is ridiculous that American  president is saying I would like to talk with somebody but there is nobody there because I  killed him. Okay, this is your own oxymoron. This is some a paradox that I take it you  intellectually you know how to square this circle. Okay. But from the Israeli point of view in many  many cases philosophically no psychologically we do not live in a win-win situation. We live  in a zero sum game. If there is a competition, if there is a race, if there is a war, if there  is a battle, if there is a conflict that ends up that Takar and of profits, something is wrong with  me. I want to win alone. I want you to be dead. I want to humilate you. I want you I want to cancel  you. Whomever you are my enemy. And when you look at this philosophy, you understand where comes  the political rhetoric that every adversary, never mind who is he, minor or major, by the end  of the day he is a Hitler. And every decade we have a new Adolf Hitler. And since everybody is  the arch enemy, there is only one solution to this one enemy, removal. And therefore, when you ask  me what is the Israeli political echelon, forget about the people in the street, the political  echelon approach toward uh um any kind of resolution, whatever it is, it's not a dialoguist  one. Now, it is not just about Netanyahu, which is a case by himself. When you look at  what is allegedly called opposition in Israel, they simply compete with the government who is  more aggressive, who is more as if resilient, who has more so-called creative solution to the  enemy we have to demolish and obliterate. And this is why you don't you hardly find in Israel  any reconciliatory politics. So we're still in the middle of Lent, inching closer and closer  to Holy Week, the days leading up to Easter, when we are called to walk alongside  Jesus through his suffering, his death, and then finally, gratefully, his resurrection.  And there's never been a better time to commit to more prayer. That sounds worth pursuing. We  sincerely recommend downloading the Hallow app, which we talk about every morning at breakfast  in my house. Hallow offers thousands of prayers, meditations, music choices to help draw you deeper  into the passion and listen for God's voice. Jesus died for every person, no exceptions. This month  especially, remember his sacrifice. Download Hallow today to connect with the Lord on a daily  basis in a way that you will not forget. We are completely hooked in my house. No kidding at all.  Literally every day we talk about it. Lots of apps are time wasters. Hallow is the opposite.  Get three months free at hallow.com/tucker. We sincerely, passionately recommend it.  Where where does this attitude come from? When I was in school in high school,  every other week the rabbi I I was in a in in a religious high school  in a religious academy Yeshiva. So the rabbi used to call my mom. My father  was busy. So he used to call my mom and said, "You have a very very talented boy child. He's  like an egg. The more I boil him, the harder he becomes." Now in a way our life experience as  Jews in the last couple of thousands of years and Israelis in the last couple of decades boiled us  into a very very hard stiff neck egg. On one hand, we never trusted hands offered to us and on the  other hand, we never experience to extend our own hands. I'll give you two examples. The rhetorics  of Israel since 48 is a rhetorics of survival, of existential threats, of permanent imminent war.  Out of nowhere came President Sadat to Israel. I remember myself as a young soldier at 73 war at  the other side of the Sist Canal in a foxhole in the desert in the middle of the night a frightened  18 years old boy and I was listening to the Dan uh um iPhone Transistor. Do you remember the  Transistor with the rusty voice? Oh yeah. And I heard President Sadat in the middle of  the night say, "I'm ready to sacrifice a million and a half Egyptian soldiers in order to  redeem the Silent Peninsula." And I said, "Holy, holy God, million and a half Egyptian soldiers  against me, Abraham, a Jew from Jerusalem." I was I was frightened to death. And then four  years later, he came to Jerusalem and I'm running now. Now I'm I'm I'm a released par trooper  officer, young one running after his convoy and chant no more war, no more bloodshed.  It was redemption. It was escological. It was messianic. It was the first time Israel  was offered a different syntax from a syntax of war to a grammar of peace. We never grew up  into the challenge of Sardat. Never. We never walked all the way with the Egyptians with the  Palestinians as was part of the original Camp David framework and we rejected it even when  couple of years later Oslo demachina out of nowhere Oslo came to the world. As problematic  as now we know the facto that Oslo was at the time when it was launched it was an eruption  of hope it was again an offer for a different language we didn't grow into it so Israel does not  have a vocabulary or state of mind to talk peace I now there is a different layer that I'm not at  all sure we uh it's too early in the conversation between us but this is the transformation  from eternal Judaism that was a religion of powerlessness and if I would like to use waslav  uh terminology we had the power of powerlessness and we transformed into Israelis with the power  of the almighty and we feel much more threatened Well, there's a paradox. So, as Israel  has become more objectively powerful, it has felt more threatened, more endangered.  Yep. Yep. Yep. It does seem like if you were to just as an outsider, it does seem like Israel  is more threatened and it does seem like if it had continued on the trajectory from the Saddat  talks or from Oslo in the way that you suggest, it would be less threatened. I I think objectively  that's probably true. Or maybe both. Maybe at the same time we have opportunities and the threats  are better threats so to say. Let's look at numbers just for a second. When I was a student, I  mean at elementary school, a pupil, we were taught that in 48, the year in which the state of Israel  was born, seven Arab armies invaded the justborn state of Israel. So 48 it was 7 versus 1. In  ' 67, 19 years later, it was only three out of the seven, Jordan, Egypt, and Syria. 6 years  later, in 73, it was only two out of the three, only Syria and Egypt. Ever since, as broken  as it is and as chiley as it is with Egypt, we have a peace agreement. And Syria in a very  good day is a dysfunctioning threat. So you can and the Palestinian issue that was not there in  48 the way it is today was born along the road. So you can say listen in eight decades 48 to 26  from seven armies to half a problem which is the Palestinian one. This is an evolution. This is a  positive progress and in a way it is and this is before we count in the potential of Saudi Arabia,  the potential of the Emirates etc etc etc. On the other hand two elements emerged as well. The  first is Israel that at least in two three stages in its life was fully accepted in the among the  family of nations. 48 and its euphoria 67 and the eruption of redemptive feelings all over the  world maybe and the atrocities of October 723. three times that Israel in conflict time, this  is beside Camp David, beside Oslo, beside other positive peace peace agreements, but in a conflict  situation that Israel was wellreceived and well accepted in the world. And then we we must ask  ourselves how was it wasted? How comes that two years ago, three years ago, Israel, three years  ago in 23, Israel was so well sympathized with all over the world and now so despised. So the  threat of being rejected, of being a world pariah, maybe it's not a military one, but it's  a deeper one. It's an existential one. And the other is assuming that the Iranians would  have had a nuclear capability that very soon will lead to a chain reaction chain of reactions  that others will have nuclear weapons in the Middle East without using the weapons. But  a Middle East with mass destruction weapons is a different scale of a threat for many but  for Israel especially. So I will say yes we have better relationship with many and the situation  is not 48 is not 67 is not even 23 but the threats are not gone. They were transformed and different  and require different strategy and philosophy and value system to address. Inflation makes credit  card statements particularly scary. You work 40, 50 hours a week just to buy groceries and gas,  things you used to be able to afford without thinking that much about it. Then the banks charge  you 20% interest. If the system is designed to keep you underwater, it's working. But there's  another option. Our friends at American Financing are doing something the big banks despise. They  are helping people mortgage rates in the fives, supporting the American dream of home ownership,  and they're showing homeowners how to take their hard-earned equity to wipe out high interest  debt. Now, we're against debt in general, but in this economy, most people have  no choice at all. So, don't go bankrupt, enslaving yourself to to a lender. Average  savings are about 800 bucks a month, and it takes only 10 minutes to talk to a  salarybased mortgage consultant. No upfront fees or obligation to see how much you can save.  Give American Financing a call 800685-5696. That's 1800685-5696 or visit  americanfinancing.net/tucker, America's home for home loans. How did this war start? How did  Sorry, this this current war, this month old war against Iran. There's debate in the United States  about how it started. whether or not the United States was pursuing its own interest, defending  itself from Iran or whether President Trump followed the lead of Prime Minister Netanyahu.  What's your view? If we go back to your initial introduction or your immediate uh question you  bombarded me with without any introduction, okay, you said we have no clue what what's going on. So,  we do not know. We we don't yet have information neither about the launching of the of the campaign  neither nor about the continuation of it. So in a world with no uh with no information in a realm  of no information between me and you we can look at the gestalt we can look at the frameworks of  what happened the details tetris like will fall in and I will say the immediate trigger was an  awful one. ah we had an opportunity since when you declare a war because there is an opportunity.  I mean that's the worst opportunionistic reason I've ever heard in my life. My father was a very  wise man used to say about one of his colleagues that's a man of principles principle number one  opportunism. And I say, what kind of a principle is this one to declare such a world war in a  volatile reality that China is out there waiting for something and Russian Ukraine is ambushing  us and now you have to to have another front. So the immediate trigger that we had an opportunity  I would say whatever was the opportunity using it was an unjust immoral trigger. The  larger frame is Netanyahu life mission. I take it that it requires more than one takson  and more than two hours between you and me or five hours or as long as we can tolerate each  other in order to understand this figure. He's a very very interesting individual and a very  very significant uh leader of a state in this time. significant. I hope it's natural enough  because I I don't have much of much of sympathy to his leadership. However, he's there. He's  significant where his life mission is coming from. And I will say that it has two drivers.  One is very Jewish and one is very conservative. The very Jewish is in a way like my mom. My  mom believed that the world is divided 50/50. 50% Jews and 50% to hate the Jews. Which means  she believed we are something like 3.5 billion people with the Jews. Okay? And the rest  of you whomever you are do not like us. So this notion that the entire world is against  us and you cannot trust nobody but ourselves is embedded in the Jewish conscience ever since  maybe even since the Bible since biblical time but for sure later on and the exilic period  instilled it into our psyche. So we do not trust and therefore we're not being trusted in  a way. There is a dialogue of not trusting here. So Netanyahu is part of this classic Jewish  paranoia. The entire world is against us. At the same time, he is a very kind of a 9070s,  80s, 90s conservative and your hobby neocon to say we are the children of light and that  all of those offsprings of darkness and our life mission is to push them back. Our life mission  is to fight them. is never compromised. Never realize if there is somebody out there that  we can communicate with. Maybe they are not a uh monolithic uh uh monolithic group of people.  Maybe like us that divided, they're dissected. There is a diversion. There is a richness  of expressions in ideologies and values and religious manifestation. No, no, no, no. They are  all all of them. And when you listen to Netanyahu, Huntington through Netanyahu, he is the leader  of our civilization of light versus whomever is the civilization of darkness. So he's built  in classic Jewish paranoia that many Jews have. Some of it rightly so, some of it molded molded  into it. And part of it is part of a of a world view that you know better than I do because you  explore it almost couple of times a week. And this is the mistrusting Christian West who  does not trust anybody but itself. And when you look at some of their attitude towards  Europe itself does not even trust itself. So where this war started, it  started with an opportunity and a frame of mind. How does how do you think Prime  Minister Netanyahu sees President Trump? He's afraid of him because he's unexpected. I don't know if the term whimsical is a right one,  but he's unexpected. I believe the more I monitor the the the the the actions of the president  that there is a kind of a worldview behind it. Not always articulated the jury but de facto  I can realize I can realize some things there. So first Netanyahu is fearful of the unexpected.  The second Netanyahu is so talented that he took the disadvantage and made it his prime advantage  how to puppeteer the president. So I will say he has a dual feeling a fear and a know how to use  this fear for his advantage. Now look at the at the pattern. How many American presidents sold  Israeli prime ministers as their elder brothers like Clinton and Rabin, George W. Bush  and Ehood Almer maybe not elder brother but an experienced one golden mayor  and Nixon. So there is there a kind of uh older younger brother relationship between  Israeli prime ministers and American presidents that Netanyahu with his vast experience and  malicious intentions knows how to use also this leverage point in order to promote  his agenda with this American president. How how do you think he did it?  What what were the leverage points? I heard you with this how you  call him the prophet the Canadian uh the Canadian prophet this weekend.  Yes. Okay. It's interesting. I I'll tell you something very funny in a second if  I may. Um he came with four theories how it happened. I'll tell you something very very  simple. It's a chemistry between two charmers. Listen t I cannot stand you but you're  a nice person so I talk with you. Okay. I mean you know you know my ideology. Yes.  Of course. I know. I mean it's a one and a half and you know my position and despite or in  spite my positions we're talking. Yes. So so so there is something there at the very personal  chemistry that simply worked and Netanyahu is is is brilliant campaigner. Listen, when  you walk out of the room with Netanyahu, check your sleeves whether you have your  hands into them still. Maybe he stole your your hands out of your sleeves. This is  how talented it is he is. He picked his pocket and so did Trump to him. They use  each other. I don't understand. I I mean, I I understand half of that explanation, but  I I don't understand what President Trump or the United States could conceivably gain  from this. It seems like a 100% loss to me. It's more a question to you as an  American than a question to me as um a far away subject of the American empire  or the American influence zone. Okay. Yes. I'm sure that there is a prophet here. Now,  is the prophet for example a place in history as much as many authoritarian leaders since  they do not trust their people to commemorate them after they pass away. So they commemorate  themselves while still alive. Make sure that there are libraries on them and cultural  centers and bridges and and airports and you name it. Okay. Still, history plays a role.  And when you think of Trump coming from Manhattan with so many Jewish associations around him,  he's familiar to the Jewish talk of New York. He is familiar to to the rhetorics of Jews and  their association and affiliation with Israel. He understands that many of them sees Israel  under a permanent threat of extinction. Saving Israel before the base before the Christian  Zanis saving Israel is historically speaking is almost prophetic. Listen to his rhetorics  after Gaza. I put an end to 3,000 years of a conflict. I don't know when the counting  began and still counting. Okay. Nonetheless, it's a state of mind. It's politics and  history mixed. And Netanyahu as a child, as a son of of of an historian, understands  this this this how to play this god. So you believe it's likely Netanyahu said to  Trump, you will be recorded by history as the man who saved the Jews. This is on the positive  side and on the negative side is you do not want to be recorded as the one that in under his  god and in his shift something so awful like the second holocaust happened to the Jews. There  are two sides to this moon. Yes. The dark one and the one a bit more illuminated. Publicly you speak  about the len side of the of the moon. I mean in dark rooms you speak about the dark side. Yes. We  are under permanent threat. Save us. You you said a minute ago that what the Israeli government  has done in Gaza has permanently or at least for the moment made Israel into a pariah state  internationally? How is Gaza seen within Israel? In order to to to touch such a volatile issue,  I needed a very very brief introduction to offer you my frame, my own framing of this last  couple of years. Yes. Whatever Israel did to the Palestinians since day one 100 years ago,  all the wrongdoings, the transfer, the expel, the demolition of 4, 500 communities, the Nakba,  the tragedy, the catastrophe of the Palestinians, whatever we done to them, all wrongdoings does  not justify the first step and the first step towards atrocities committed by Hamas on October  7th. I agree. None. Right. And whatever Hamas did on October 7th to the Israelis, brutal, awful  crimes against humanities in the bodies of my friends and my colleagues and my fellow  citizens. Whatever the the Hamas did to us does not justify the moral crimes and maybe even  crimes against humanity that Israel exercises in Gaza ever since. You have two crime scenes.  Do not neihilate each other. Do not balance each other. Do not justify each other. You  have to deal with Hamas crimes and with the Israeli crimes simultaneously as difficult  as it is and sometimes as paradoxically as it is. Now the this is how I see it. Most of  Israelis are not in my place. Most of Israelis regardless of October 7th, I mean even much  before October 7th, do not really know where Gaza is. Yes, it might be 5 minutes away from a do  doorstep, might be 40 minutes drive from Tel Aviv, but it's beyond the mountains of darkness. I  do not I do not know. I don't know where is it. I haven't been there ever. When you look  at the Israeli media up until October 7th and 10 times more after October 7th, you never see  Gazian people. You see tunnels, you see cement, you see rockets, you see demolitions, you see  uh uh Hamas troops running here and there. You never see the individual Gazian people as if  there are no people there. And the report is never about the humanitarian side of it. The  report is always about insurgences, terrorists, etc. Gaza, as the awefully expressed by my  president said, in Gaza there are no innocent people. God forbid to live in such a situation  that you do not believe there are no innocent people the other side. Even Abraham the patriarch  believed that in Sodom and Gomorrah the innocent people and God negotiated with him. But we  are better than God and we are worse than Abraham. We simply write off any innocence  in Gaza and ever since it did not improve. So in a way Gaza it's not a blind spot. Blind spot is it's too technical. Gaza is the moral  abbies in which Israel collapsed into. I find it so striking what you just said because  Israel is such an international country. I mean, I don't know what percentage of the population  was born somewhere else. And, you know, people are always in and out of Israel. I mean,  it's hardly in it's not central Africa. It's right in the Mediterranean. It's very international, as  I said. So, it's interesting that many Israelis don't have a sense of what's happening just  right at their southern border. What do they think when they read about it? There's so much  international controversy about it. When you pull up the internet, someone's getting mad  about Gaza. How do Israelis respond to that? You put here two topics. The first is  media report. Yes. Media and the second one is where is the existential reality  of Israelis? Whom are we asked you the economist editor the right to exist? And you  exploded what is that right to exist? Okay. And I said to myself, Tucker, don't don't  don't don't don't don't get mad at her. The question is a different one. The right to  exist from the point of view of being a Jew, not for being part of the international community.  Is Israel justified according to the norms? It tells itself it is the only democracy in the  Middle East, the most moral army in the world, etc., etc. there it implodes. Now let me  try to answer your question first about the international reports. Most of us listen to  Hebrew media only and read Hebrew media only and the Hebrew media filters most of the non-Hebrew  expressions. We do not speak English. I mean, even listen to me with my Arnold Schwarzenegger  accent, okay? I mean, we don't speak English, okay? We don't speak German. And if we read  something about it, they're all anti-semites. and the weaponizing of anti-semitism into a kind  of a thick filter that enables us to reject any kind of legitimate criticism is part of the  system here. So media wise we hardly hear the international situation. Hardly hear it. The  question of what does that mean to us? I will say as follows. Up until the second world war, 90%  of the Jews in the world were Christianborn Jews, what we call Ashkanazi. Yes. And 10% were born  in the Muslim sphere, what we call. So it was 90% Christian world Jews and 10% Muslim world  Jews. Today in Israel it is 50/50 which means the old perception that Israel is an offspring  of the west of the Christian dom demographically doesn't work because at least half of the Isra  Jewish Israelis not not to talk about the 20% of Palestinians with Israeli idea but from the  80% Jews 50% were born or offsprings of Muslim world jewelry which do not share the same legacy  and the same heritage and the same tradition that Jews should with you which is the evolution  of the west. I'll take it a step further. Yes, many of us were born in so many other  places or our parents or grandparents, but most of us were born here and here is a  very strange place. On one hand, we're not Europe anymore because we got disconnected and  on the other hand, we never got connected to the region. So we are kind of a standalone island  totally disconnected from the region refusing to get connected. When normalization was offered  to us only 2 three years ago it was a threat. We never dwelled into the strategy what should be our  relationship with the region. So much so that in a way we resemble a lot the kingdom of Jerusalem of  the crusades. Foreigners coming from the outside circling ourselves with a kind of a self  siege wars and never integrate. It is not right because there were interaction between the  regional Muslims at the time and the Christians at the time. But nonetheless, the kingdom as a  political entity never wanted to be part of the region. After two 200 years, it expired. The  state of Israel born out of the ashes of the Holocaust for sure, but earlier on was born out  of the nation state idea of getting secular Europe with its solutions to its national groupings  came to the Middle East which is not part of the nation state thinking didn't go through the  processes of secularization and revolutions the industrial revolution the French Revolution,  the American Revolution, the British Revolution, never went through them in order to get where  we are today and therefore didn't find any any any any hooks to get connected. So we lost our  western hintterland and we never seeded enough in order to grow to be part of the local FA. So  we are isolated. I I think many I don't know what they think now, but for most of my life in the  US, many Americans regarded Israel as a kind of Europeanish country. That was always my opinion.  Some of them felt that Israel was almost part of the United States. Not in a sinister way, but they  we've got so much in common. 51st state gold mayor I think was from Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  She she grew up in Milwaukee. Milwaukee, right? Okay. as as they used to say at the time,  the woman who made me walk famous. She smoked Chesterfield cigarettes, American cigarettes. I  mean, it it felt very American. What is the view, would you say, of most Israelis now  toward the United States? We love it. We admire it. We want to be to move there.  And we think you are so childish and naive. Why? Because this is what you are. Okay. Can you  I mean I I'm not sure I would disagree with you at all, but uh what what about Americans  strikes Israelis as childish and naive? Israelis with Let's begin with a smile  because it's a heavy stuff. Okay. You know why we Israelis do not make love in  the street? Because then everybody will come and give you advisers. Here everybody is a prime  minister. Everybody's a diplomat. Everybody's a strategist. Everybody is Takson. Everybody is  everything. Everybody is Napoleon. We know better. And when we think about first begin  with the west in general, okay, how don't you understand that immigrations  bring you that brings you down that you compromise your own very existence? How don't  you understand that the Muslim title wave of immigration is going to compromise your very  entity? Leave aside, I don't think that many Israelis understand the exchange theology. Okay,  I'm not at all sure that they exchange theory, but speaking generally speaking, you ask  Israelis how many Muslim you thinks there are in Europe? H something between 30 to 50%.  Which is far away from the number. Yes. So, what do you think about America? What do you think  in America? Oh, wow. Wow. Wow. What do you know? Michigan in the last elections just show us how  big is the the Muslim the Muslim minority Obama Hussein Obama so that you don't understand your  own your own reality so to say this is the the kind of the experience everybody gives advises is  really reality uh uh uh at the daily the second is it's very very difficult for us very difficult  for us to understand the fairness of the game. If you ask me what does  that mean to be an American, I can give you five different answers. One  of them is since you have a constitution and everybody is equal in front of the  constitution or supposed to be equal in front of the constitution. There is a fairness  in the game. You cannot trick me. You cannot look down at me. You cannot abuse me. I cannot abuse  you. On the other hand, we don't understand it. We Israelis will live in a reality that  constitution is a threat. Equality to all citizens, not just Jews and Arabs. But for the  sake of it, Orthodox and nonorthodox is a very is a threat to the very existence of the state. So  on one hand as if we have shared value foundations but when you try to translate this values  into practical reality here the gap grows. We cannot accept we cannot accept the American  wall of separation between church and state. impossible for us. As much as the definition of  Jewish and democratic is hollow in a in a good day and deceiving in an average day, it's it's it's  a stupid definition. But we believe it's possible and we cannot accept it that you are not Christian  and democratic. You're democratic first. Ah only democracy the weak not for us. and then I'll take  it to to to maybe to the last to the last stage. Okay. We don't care. We hardly care unfortunately  and it pains me about American jewelry. When Netanyahu said a couple of years ago, they're  Democrats. They don't support my position anyway. Let's go with the Christian Zionist. That's our  political backbone. They're the best friends we have. And giving up on American jewelry beside  many other things that we don't respect them when it comes to the law of return, when it comes to  accepting the reform and conservative movement, religious expression, which is totally rejected  by the religious establishment in Israel, etc., etc. When we look at America, we see two  things and we don't accept both. On one hand, we see as if this is the total definer, the  absolute definer of the democratic movement, the wokes. All Democrats are wokes. And  on the other hand, all the right-wingers are are hating Jews like Taka Carlson. That's  it. So in between, what's in it for us? Okay, Silicon Valley, technology, economy,  profit, but not the values. Not anymore. Is this a religious war from the Israeli  perspective or from the orthodox Israeli perspective? This one in in Iran now never defined this way officially. I would say it's the second me personally who  observe the situation and try to intellectualize it in order to to comprehend yes I will say it's  the second stage of religious war at what sense up until October 7th the conflict between us  and Palestinians which is bloody and malicious and and and awful especially awful because  it could have been resolved so many times before was a political conflict between two  national communities. So political conflicts, a national conflict, as difficult as it is,  we know what to do with that. October 7th was the first round of the fullcale religious  war. Jewish fundamentalism at the Israeli government and Muslim fundamentalism at the Hamas  government. And the philosophy of Hamas and the ideology of the Israeli government and some  of its leading ministers was out in the open with rabbis and chaplain in the army and  ministers and members of expressing it loud and clear. So October 7th was first chapter  of the deterioration of the political conflict into a religious one. This one in Iran which  is 3 years later which historically speaking is maybe the same period. It is so fast. I  mean what is what is it 3 years in in human history? It's nothing. It's not even a comma.  Yes. Yet when you live it day in and day out, it's it's it's it's difficult. It's heavy. It's  sirens. It's kids not sleeping. It's sleepless nights and fear. But it's a different one.  The war in Iran now from my point of view is the first religious fundamentalist war world war.  Jewish fundamentalism, Christian fundamentalism, and Jewish fundamentalism at the battle  at the battle at the battlefield. It feels that way to me. Unfortunately, I'm sorry.  It feels that way to me watching this. That's exactly what it feels like. And the problem of you  and me as much as I take it that on few many other things we are other sides of the of the the other  side of the street on something like that which is such an existential problem to our ideologies  and our identities and our values. Never mind where are you in the in the other conf in the  other disagreements between us. We are watching. We are just watching. We didn't yet come forward  and offered an alternative, a comprehensive, attractive, spiritual and political, ideological, and maybe even a scological  alternative that fights them. I asked myself with with shame. I cannot tell  you how much we didn't we didn't we didn't yet open the the the chapter of what Jewish settlers  are doing in the occupied territories in the West Bank. Daily crimes against innocent Palestinians  conducted by wild savage settlers ignored by the army and by police and supported by members  of Kesset and members of the cabinet daily. I I'm full of shame. But the utmost  one is where the heck are the rabbis? Where are the spiritual leaders? Maybe they're  not coming because they are the insiders, because they are bei behind it, because  they support it, because they promote it, because it promotes their messianic ends  of the day esqueological philosophy. And this is, as I said earlier, where  classical Judaism implodes into into Israeless. How uh important is the rebuilding of the  temple to the people you're describing, to the cabinet ministers, to the rabbis  who are not speaking up against what's happening in the occupied territories. Is there  actually an effort to do that? Do you believe for the people in the street, not the rabbis, not  the people engaged, not those you ask question about, to the masses, it's a non-issue. Yeah,  I figured that it is as if a kind of a I mean, yeah, Disney World in Orlando. Okay. Yeah.  I mean, do there whatever you like. I mean, just just give us a break. Okay. So  for the masses they are not there on the other hand since ' 67 at least five I'm not at all  sure that not more at least five attempts to remove the mosques from the temple mount were  done by these groupings since ' 67. heaven. Which means that when you come to address this  question, it is not so much about the numbers who support the removal of the temples and the  re the removal of the mosques and the rebuild of the temples. It is about the dedication and  the readiness and the fanaticism of those who are ready to act. I'm I'm let me just say I'm  embarrassed. I I did not know there had been five attempts to get rid of the Dome of the Rock  and Ala. So these were plots to blow them up. Is that what happened? Yep. Yep. Huh. Yeah. What  happened to the perpetrators, to the plotters? The most famous one is the 80s what is called the  Jewish underground. A group of settlers from the same educational system that I grew up that I was  I was ed I was brought up on. Some of them are friends and friends of families and people from  the same school I went etc. I mean pretty like me people. Yes. Who were caught, sentenced, sent to  jail and got a political deal a couple of months or two years later and few of them if not many of  them became prominent prominent Israeli figures. One of the most important newspaper editor  in Israel, Makishon, advisers to ministers, members of Knesset, you name it. Well received  back into society, not excommunicated and not uh uh excluded. Not not secluded, not excluded.  So much so that today sits in jail for life. I am who assassinated the prime minister  and there are constant voices even within the Knesset even within the government and the  Netanyahu's coalition calling for his release. So as for your question, what is the support?  The supporting the public is very small. The dedication of the few is very intensive. What  would happen if the Alexa complex were destroyed? I don't Docker, let's move on. That's how I  feel. But I I mean I don't live there. You do. So you see that as a a profound change  in world history if that were to happen? I'm not at all sure that we are not we are  not already into this profound change. Yes, like this war with Iran combined with October  7th combined with other things. We're in the middle of a transformation of world order to  what next order or disorder neither you nor me know. And maybe we don't share the same vision  or what should it be, but we're in the middle of a transformation here. Now, this issue of the  temple of the temple, the issue of the mosques will be morally speaking a coin with two sides. on the Israeli side.  If and when this will happen, God forbid, that will be the end of justification  of the existence of the state of Israel. And if this, God forbid, will happen, I'm afraid  it will trigger the masses all over the Muslim world that this might topple down few regimes  and bring to power different powers and different regimes that the entire world order the way we  knew it will not be recognized by us anymore. Yes, it is much more danger volatile and explosive  than a nuke. Yes, that is certainly my read on it. I don't think you're overstating it.  Of course, no one can predict the future, but that that seems very likely. Do you think  my other sense, again, I'm I'll allow you to to have the more definitive word on it, but is  that if there was ever a time it could happen, it's right now in the middle of this war. The only  thing I will say is that I hope that the attention of the prime minister is given to that also. Yes,  that's that's the only hope I have. I trust him. My trust is very minimal. And this is in a very  good day. I hope that he understands if something like that happens in his shift. It's it's bigger  than him. Yes. And I hope he pays attention to it. I feel the same way about him, but I agree  with you. I don't see why he would want this. Here we go to something else. Netanyahu is a well-  read person. He is he he he is not an he's not a u in an an alphabet. He reads books. He  understands. He knows. He has a vision. You can agree with him. You can disagree with him.  But at least he's an interesting interesting uh uh uh partner. He knows what he's  talking about. Okay. What happens to him in the last couple of years is that he does  not behave politically according to his wisdom. He behaves according to his political survival instinct rather than according  to his ideology and philosophy. So between political survival or conservative  right-wing decent right-wing conservativism if he was the right-wing conservative I would  say I will oppose you but I respect you. Yes. the minute it's the personal survival instinct only  I don't accept it and I don't respect it and I suspect it and the fact that in his cabinet there  are so many influential ministers who promote this agenda and create daily provocation around the  mosques troubles me I take you a step further how many times did you in your analysis say listen  there are so many fanat addicts in politics, etc., etc., but the Israeli army is a is a  moderate one. They usually the the the the sound of reason. Okay, this is this is the perception we  have. But pay attention. Most of the generals and the high high up officers of today are people who  were brought up, educated, shaped and molded at the previous times of Israel under Rabin, under  Perez, under Manin, even under Ariel Chaon in a much more responsible country. The people who  climb up now the ladder, the military ladder are different kind of people who were brought up under  the chaotic problematic value system of Netanyahu in the settlements educated with this kind of messianic mission to use the  army. me as a tool to accelerate redemption and a day will come that you will see a chief of  staff with this kind of agenda. You already have the head of the Shinbet of the of our uh uh  uh uh secret service coming from these circles. So to trust the Israeli army to be the moderator  for good is might be a mistake. Pay attention. Things have changed so fast there. I mean  from an outsers's perspective it's just a very different country from what it was even 15  years ago. That that's how it feels to me. It is right. And in order to understand the shift,  I will say as follows. When was your first time here in in in the region? 25 years ago. Make me  the 2000. Yeah, exactly. Okay. 2000 was the end of the tale of secular Israel. Israel of 48 was  as Bernie Saunders called it socialist but let's call it European wise social and democratic a  very young democracy but with with a prospect to move on for a better more developed democracy  and very secular Israel of today is democracy in deficit in a good Okay. Harsh capitalist to the  level of libertarian anarchy almost sometimes and very religious. So Israel of 2026 is not  Israel of 48, not Israel of 67 and not Israel of of 2000s. different society, different  leadership, different different rhetorics, different ethos and pathos. And the real  struggle today between the political forces, yes, it's very personal. My personality, your  personality, my leader, your leader. Okay, that's granted. We have it in every political system.  Imagine politics with no ego. So boring. Okay, God forbid. So thank God we have some ego  left. But the the the undercurrent is the warming called war between religion and politics,  between the Jewish and the democratic. That's the real deep struggle. Will Israel by the end of the  road will be Jewish religious that their religion is defined by these kind of people or will it be  back a kind of a liberal democracy and let's not argue now what is the the the the definition of  this liberal democracy but much more secular in it thinking and therefore speaks with the language  of reason and this is the real political struggle in Israel today. I'm hopeful. By the way, as  difficult as it is, the pendalum will come back. But we have to understand what the fight is all  about. Do you think given Israel's moves since this war in the last month, right, both in West  Bank and in Lebanon? Do you think that Israel will have different borders by the end of it?  Will control more territory by the end of this? As much as there are enough people who  buy into your suspicion that we that we want Israel from the Euphoratis to the to  the Nile. This is actually your question, right? How real is the Greater Israel Project?  It's just hard to know. It looks real, but I don't know. No, I just wanted to to  show you that I listen to you. You see? Okay. This was just I'm just quoting I'm just  quoting the Torah. That's it. Yeah. Okay. So, as much as the there are these elements which are  the same elements that were behind the killing of it and the underground to remove the mosques and  those who harass the Palestinians. now etc etc etc. I do not believe that in any future that  both of us will be part of it. Israel will have any legal and legitimate borders but the 48 4967  borders. There will be so many attempts. There will be so many provocations. There will be so  many manipulations by all of these people. It will never work. So much so that I also wholeheartedly  believe that some were by the end of the process most of the settlements and the settlers from  the West Bank would be removed as well. Yeah. Hm. That's not the trend that we see from this  vantage. Why? Why would you predict that? No. Most of Israelis want to have good life. As much  as Netanyahu came with his prophetic vision of superparta, we still prefer Athens. Okay. No,  it's I mean because of the because of the suaki because of the halumi because of whatever we  prefer everyone prefers Athens to Sparta of course you see so as much as the democracy in  Athens was a little bit how shall we put it not updated. Yes. Okay. the the the  original version was a little bit limited, but yet the the the vision of Athen as the place  of aesthetics and philosophy and wisdom and reason and and democracy, the seeds of of of of western  democracy. Most Israelis would like to have good life. We want to live. We want our children to  live. I cannot tell you how much I cried when my kids went to the army. I was standing there  when the bus took them and I remembered my mom telling me, "Kido, when you grow up, there will  be peace and you will not have to serve in the army." And I did have to serve in the army.  And then I said the same thing to my kids. And between my wife and myself and my kids, we  have more than 30 years of service in the family. Now we have grandchildren and one day soon they will have to  serve because we are citizens of the place. We are partners to the responsibility. And I know that the day in which my  grandchildren generation will stand up and say, "We are ready to defend the legitimate  Israel, but we're not ready to sacrifice our life or to sacrifice the life of others on  the altar of this craziness." This day is close. That's very reassuring. I'm sorry. That's a very  reassuring thing to hear. I give you I give you a moment that you were there with me in that  moment when October 7 erupted like a volcano covered the entire city of Naples, so to say,  the Israeli Naple, we were all under the dust. What was the first thing that came back to the  table? Two-state solution. As much as Trump said, I made it I mean I I solved it and Netanyahu  like Houdini made it disappear, it came back to the table and it is still there and you  cannot ignore it and you should not ignore it. And therefore the pressure from within and from  the outside and the reality and the options I hope will be offered to all of us after this round  with Iran will be over. There will be new options some of them hopeful some of them promising.  Eventually Israelis will say we are ready to serve the needed but not the fantasies. Are are  you concerned that Israel, if this continues at the current pace, will be hit hard enough by  Iran that it responds with nuclear weapons? The first time I thought about it was when you  started to raise the issue in your programs and I had a feeling that you are really troubled by  it. Very. And I had a feeling that now you're troubled that Israel will be nuked or will nuke  them because the effect on so many other fronts and the the the the nuclear race that will start  right afterwards will put all of us in a real threat. So I I fully I I I I started to think  about it. I'm not so much troubled by Israel nuking them because Israel has two strategies  since we as Jews we could never compromise with one opinion. So we said yeah let's have two  opinions. So we have one conventional army that is order to win never mind what and then we have the  nonconventional capability which is order to win no matter what. And I believe that every threat  yet in the region we can address with not with conventional with conventional power and setting.  Yet if there is should be a way out of it, you promote in the last couple of weeks you  promote the issue of all the sides who sit together around the same table talk respectfully  to each other with no patronizing and with no uh with no uh arrogance. Just talk to each other.  I say something as well. Yes, of course. I'm a dialoguist. I talk with you. Okay, we we're  talking I want the outcome of this war to me to be a Middle East clean of weapons of mass  destruction to all. Israel denied bombs included. Now it is clear that Iran must have North  Korean strategy in order to protect itself. It didn't start with us. It started with the  with the Iraqis. Then they said, "Listen, the only way we can protect ourselves is  to have this kind of supra capability." So in order for Iran not to have it and therefore  Saudi not to run after them and then Egypt to say, "What about us?" And then the Emiratis or the  Qatar is buying something from Pakistan. And then and and and we should make sure that by the  end of this negotiation whatever we give to whom because this negotiation you give you take you  negotiate the outcome should be a process a Middle East clean of weapons of mass destruction  which will be imposed on Israel as well. Who could impose that? President Trump  overnight. It's hard for me. I mean, again, as someone who would love to see would  be grateful to see what you just described, I want that. It's hard to see Netanyahu ever  accepting that under any circumstances. That's right. That's right. It's difficult. It's not  easy. But as my wise father that was mentioned once already in this program used to say he  doesn't believe in sticks and carrots. He believes in carrots and carrots. And then  he said even a carrot can cause some pain sometime. I mean there are ways to do it.  There are ways to secure it. There are ways to guarantee it. It opens a whole new window  so to say about can you trust America today? What the G states that both of us are curious about them. Yes. Okay.  Something is happening there. What will they say if America will walk away from  this conflict and leave them alone at the mouth of the Iranian lion or the Israeli lion? That's  right. Not good. Not good. What Japan will say. That's right. what South Korea will say, what  India will say and and and and Taiwan, Singapore, all of these important places. If you cannot trust  America, so it's self-reliance. Self-reliance me means an immediate arnament race, which is bad.  So in order to prevent the world to go into a new race like that and this is the entire world  and we know who will be the profiters of it. All of those who export death and weapons of hatred  to all over the world in order not to make these industries industries of hatred and industries  of suspicion and industries of of death. In order not to make them profitable, the only way to come  positively out of this conflict is to begin here at home. Here is the first region which is clean  and we move on. And these are the guarantees we Americans are giving you that nothing bad will  happen to you if a threat like this one day will will stand in front of you. So America in order to  do anything is not just about the oil prices which is important by itself. I mean if you live in the  suburbs for so many years and you want to drive to your pharmacy or to your supermarket, the price is  crucial. I I I I don't I don't I consider it very seriously as a as a daily existential uh issue for  the American citizen. But if you want the world to be pacified and calmer, you need to restore not  the trust in the markets but the trust in America. Again, we strongly agree on that. What  would happen? What would happen if no American leader was able to restore that trust  or the United States couldn't afford to remain a a stabilizing force globally because it's  expensive? Um, what would happen to the world? The simple answer is I have no clue. The little  bit more augmented one is somebody else will walk, somebody else will grow into this responsibility.  Will it be China that with all the problems the Chinese are having? They're about two things.  They're very much about continuous stability at home and abroad. and they hardly ever initiate a  war. They play games, but they don't declare wars the way we declare wars every now and then. So  maybe China would grow into it. Maybe there will be a different world coalition of interested  parties who would like to see something like that. And and this is a very very ambitious end.  What about Europe? I saw your vice president there and then I saw your secretary of state there.  One with a little bit more abrasive style, the other one a little bit more subtle one saying  the same thing. You're up. You are done. And I say I'm not at all sure. The good old continent was  done so many times and rediscovered itself and re can you say rebirth itself re Yes. How do  you how do you re re reproduced itself? Okay, I'm out of it. Okay. reproduced itself so many  times in history and I have a feeling that this mechanism of renewal which is at the cradle of  the western civilization western civilization is European first and only then the rest of  the Christian Anglosaxon etc etc and I have a feeling that Europe has the power to renew itself  and to grow up into it and remember that Israel and Turkey and Iran and Saudi Arabia are the  next door neighbors. It's not a far away from Florida place. No, it's not. And I take Mark  Twain I take Mark Twain wisdom who said that every now and then America declares a war  in order for Americans to study geography. I understand. Okay. Did he really say that?  But that's pretty good. This is this what I read. Okay. And if he did not, let's give it to  him. Okay. He deserves it. Um you know in the world you either you say either Bernard Cho or  or uh um Gao Marx or Oscar Wild or Mark Twain, right? We have a limited pallet. Yes. Agree.  Yeah. One of them one of them did it. Okay. So um and I say for Europe it is much more natural  at what sense? When you look at the Middle East, the Middle East of today with all of its  fragility and all of its volat volatile forces is the leftover of two poisonous European  fruits, the Holocaust and colonialism. And I'm not at all sure that Europe went yet  through the process to internalize it. to grow up to the challenge. What do we do  about it? Do we have any kind of historic responsibility? And with America walking away,  this America walking away from NATO and walking away from so many things. Maybe it's time for  Europe to re re recalculate its position in history. So I I have to to end I and I should have  done this at the beginning but I just want to make sure that you get credit for this. I I want to  read a a line that you wrote immediately after the beginning of this war um and you wrote  it in the Israeli press because it's just so preient and you're describing your prime minister  Netanyahu and our president Trump. said neither he nor Trump has the faintest idea why they want  what they want to happen here after day one. You saw that at the very beginning that  this was a war without a strategic goal and I think that's proven true. How were you  Here's my question. How were you treated when you said that? What was the response to  that? And what has your life been like in Israel over the last month? because I don't  think you're in the majority in your opinions in I left the Knesset voluntarily some  20 years ago and ever since I dedicated most of my life to think to write to read  to lecture to teach to offer alternative narrative to Israel easy it is not  and with each and every book of mine and each and every article of mine in a way  I'm pushed further away from the mainstream. This is not just about the death wishes  and the threats and the push backs in the streets. It's not about that. It's  about the loneliness of having an opinion. Yet I'm a Jew. What does that mean? Being a Jew is  many things. One of them is to be dedicated to the culture of disagreement. When you look at  the Talmud, that's the most important Jewish writing of creation. That's the oral Torah. This  is the development of the written scripture. It's thousands of pages. So boring, Tucker, you cannot  imagine. My goat ate your tomato. Your cucumber heated my wife. I mean, what kind of But it's not  about goats. It's not about c cucumbers. It's not about this. Jews for centuries, so did I. So did  my father. So did my grandfather. Study the Talmud because the Talmud documents obsessively not just  the decision and the verdict of the majority but the position of the minority with the assumption  that a day will come that the majority will wake up and realize how wrong they were. We have  already ready made the strategy prepared by the minority to become the new majority  philosophy. So being in a minority and a Jew, it's not a problem. So were the prophets. So  were the rabbis. So were the in intellectuals. So what? It's a responsibility. And I see my role in  life and it's not alone. You never do things like this alone. Is to offer first a thinking which is  different than the the the parameters parameters of the public discourse and to be courageous  enough and expresses expressive enough for people to know there is an address out there. There is  somebody out there who thought about it and he's not afraid. So, shouldn't we be afraid? Look at  my t-shirt. Okay. I went abroad couple of months ago. I'm going with that. I said, "Listen, every  ultraorthodox has his outfit that you recognize like an English." Okay. Yes. Every settler has his  or her outfit, which is an M16 rifle and something else. Okay. I have my uniform. So I'm in the  airport comes to me. A guy says, "Boo, don't you think it's about time to change your shirt?"  Said, "Why it's stinking?" He said, "No, no, no, no. Peace is stinking." Okay. And of course, for  me, it was an opening for a deliberation, for a discussion. So yes, many times I'm alone, and yes,  many times I'm even lonely, but I'm full of hope. And I offer hopes hope for other.  And when my daughter asked me, daddy, how do you feel? She asked me the  tucker's question, how do you feel? I said, what's the problem, dear? I'm in a majority. I  agree with myself. At home, we all think the same, so it's a majority. All my friends think like  me. It's a majority. Politically, I support people like me. So, we are the majority. The fact  that they have more numbers, that's marginal. Bottom line is sometimes Tucker being a Jew  means being an alternative. Well, I like your alternative and this this conversation has really  been a blessing for me. So, thank thank you very much for taking the time to do it and I hope a lot  of people see this. Thank you very much for your time. Thank you. And giving me the opportunity.  Thank you very much, Tucker. Thank you.