The Joe Rogan experience. I was doing my first documentary back in 1997 when I was just naive enough to think I can get an interview with Steven Spielberg. We had a mutual friend involved, this woman Janet. And she gets back to me and she's like, yeah, so Spielberg's definitely not going to meet with you. But he knows you're working on this UFO documentary. He thinks you should look into this landing case that happened in Africa at the school. And I said to myself at the time and remind you guys that I was making a film on UFOs. And I dismissed it so quickly because I thought there's no way that a mass landing with the sheer volume of eyewitness testimony at a school in broad daylight could happen in the whole world not know about it. So I just walked away from that story for about 10 years. 10 years later, I'm doing an event to the National Press Club with Leslie Kane who was part of the article in New York Times. It came out in 2017. And she introduced me to this guy, Randall Nickerson. And she's like, oh, he's working on this landing case in Africa. Long story short, he's working on a film now. I think it's coming out next year, specifically on just that case. Dan Ferra is producing it. And he said, I'm working on the case and if you want to do something with me on it, a small piece I could. So I got back into it. I licensed some of the footage that Dr. John Mack, the Harvard psychiatrist that came and interviewed the school children on camera within a week of it happening. He unfortunately looked the wrong way in London got run down by a car and died. So I contacted the Institute with the help of Randall Nickerson. I licensed the archival footage. We tracked down the witnesses today. We flew them in from all different corners of the world, brought them together. A lot of them were standing right next to each other. They came face to face. And one of the things I realized was that there were roughly 100 kids in the playground, broad daylight, aerial school, rules in Bobway, 1994. And they got within arms, arm, thumb of them with an arms length of these beings. And brought these witnesses together for the first time in 20 years. And a lot of them hadn't even told their, you know, significant others. Just because they said they were tired of having to defend this. And I myself didn't believe it when I first heard about it back in 1997. And that segment of the film is the most, in my opinion, is the most powerful segment. It's very compelling. You've got all these children saying what they saw on camera after it happened. And then you see them 20 years later. And then we go to Africa and we meet with the headmistress. She was a teacher at the time. We went with other witnesses. We go to the landing site. We talked to people at the school. In that case, it's absolutely. And it was witnessed by lots of other people in and around the area for several days before it chose a school to land. It's so compelling because the children are all clearly, they're not actors. So as their adults later, they're all talking about this moment. And it's like they had a religious experience together. They're all sharing it and talking about it. And you could tell it's a deeply moving experience. If they were actors, they wouldn't have been able to do such a good job. Because to convey the reality of that moment to them, to be able to have this interpretation of this event where they're all consistent in the story and they're all clearly still shook by this moment. It's really interesting because if you had that scene in a movie, it would take like a really good actor to pull it off. And they'd probably need multiple takes. They'd probably want to get the best one. But those kids, the way they were talking about it and the way they were drawing it, you're like, wow, it really does seem like something happened to them. I know how credible the testimony of the children is because my partner Rebecca, she's never had much of an interest in what I do making documentaries on UFOs. I do other things as well. But when I was reviewing in the studio, the archival interview of the children, she just dropped off a cup of coffee and she stopped and went, oh my God, those children are not lying. This is the most amazing thing I've ever seen. Because look, I ask your audience to don't take it for me. Just suspend judgment for a moment and imagine hypothetically if a UFO or several UFOs landed at a school in broad daylight in Ruiz and Boboia Africa, an interacted telepathically with nearly 100 schoolchildren, not all of them had telepathic, but seen the incident. How significant of a story would you give that? Well, not only that, they had the same message. Yes. But the telepathic message was that technology is a real problem. And there's things that people are doing with technology that are going to ruin the earth. And they were trying to relate this to children, which is very strange. You know, I mean, maybe they just thought they were adults because they were the same sizes of the aliens. I mean, do you think they knew that they were children? Do you think they understood that it was a school? I mean, this is all speculation, right? But no, I definitely had to ask myself, look, during the production of the film, Paul Harris actually turned me on to another landing case that happened in Australia in 1966 at a school. And this time, there were roughly 300 witnesses that saw a disk land right outside a playground in Australia. And we went to Australia and investigated that case, went to the landing site, talked to eyewitness testimony, people that jumped the fence at the school playground and ran over to where this thing landed. And then we even interviewed a guy who snapped a photograph of a disk, a Polaroid, back in 1966, two days prior to the incident. So it's very probably that we have a photograph, we have photographic evidence, we have eyewitness testimony. And for the first time, we've got testimony from a sight seager. So why do these things land at schools? It seems like, and I'm just totally speculating here, but it seems like if I were going to do that, it seems like a pretty benign environment. We've got testimony from military guys that we take a fairly hostile position towards things that penetrate sensitive military installations. And so maybe I'm just saying maybe, maybe they say, maybe it's safe. Maybe we have to stop reacting to intrusions by UFOs as a threat. I mean, that's the whole thing behind this new task force. And as much as I respect the task force, my colleagues and I want to cooperate with them to the extent that we can bring information or resources to what they do. But there is more, this should not be looked at specifically as a threat. I mean, with the phenomena that we observe, I mean, if they wanted to blow up those F-18s, I could do it. Obviously, that's not what it's all about. And this idea of just labeling it all as a threat because it's unknown, that's a wrong idea. 90% of information comes from the public, comes from children, comes very, very little of it, is made up in France. I mean, the data we get at the French space agency comes through channels where if people reported something that's found to be untrue, they're going to be called by the police. Catch new episodes of the Joro experience for free, only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips. Easily, seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joro Good experience.