Joe Roman reagan. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night, all day. Oh, gentlemen. Good to see you brother. Hey, good to see you again. Hey, man, good. Good in hanging, man. How about yourself? I'm good. I'm good. And Jeff, nice to meet you. Nice to meet you, Joe. This is another one of your very unusual friendships, Joe. I'm trying to make it the norm, understand? Well, I mean, you're a real example of what can be done, but just by being a nice person. Hey, thank you, man, for the mention with Bono. Oh, my pleasure. My pleasure. So for people that don't know, Daryl has, I mean, how many people know if you converted? I stopped counting after 200 and some. Daryl, his journey initially started your musician. He met a Klansman at a bar. And he couldn't believe what a nice guy you were. He struck up a friendship with the star. And I played the Jerry Lee Lewis, that he didn't understand that. That too. The talent. And then this guy quit the Klan because of you and handed you his outfit and said, like, I'm done. Obviously, I'm wrong. All this is wrong. And you then went on to start meeting a lot of other Klan members and a lot of other different neo-Nazi factions. And you got a lot of these people to quit these hateful organizations. Well, I got them to rethink because I gave them things perspectives they had not considered before were not been exposed to. And that caused them to quit. You know, it wasn't like I was trying to get them out. I'm just trying to show them a different path. Right. But it's just your patience and your ability to communicate to people is just very admirable. Because that's a very tough path. You know, for people just listening to your black man, you're meeting a Klansman. And you strike up a friendship. You have one of them. You dinner at his house hanging out with them. And he's like, you're actually a really nice guy. He's like, fuck what the fuck am I doing with my life? And just by your own personality and just being a good human, you converted them. But you know, an interesting component of that also happens because there are people who won't talk to me. And they want to fight me and stuff, all the kind of crazy stuff I've seen at all. Right? But some of their buddies who are just as hateful as they are, when they talk to me and they end up leaving, their life improves. Hate is exhausting. And it begets more hate. But so when they leave their life improves, and then the buddy who want to fight me or didn't want to talk to me, he sees his buddy's life improve, then he reconsiders. So it has that component to it as well. So it's been more than 200 now, which is really amazing. And I think just these conversations that you've had with a lot of people sort of opened up a lot of people's eyes as well. It's like, you think of someone like that's a KKK member, neo-Nazi, or whatever it is. And you go, well, that guy's got to be a piece of shit as a human being. And then you realize, well, a lot of these people just got fucked over in life and started off on the wrong foot. And we're with the wrong people and got indoctrinated to the wrong ideology and experienced the wrong things. And next thing you know, they have this rigid idea of what the world is and how they fit in. And it's all fucked up and it's all wrong. And they just don't run into anyone that shows them a different perspective. Like if you're on a small town, you're around just a bunch of assholes all the time, you're around the same assholes. Like you might think everyone's an asshole. And then you go on vacation, maybe in your whole in Hawaii. It kind of, it was nice here. Let's go on. Maybe we have a totally different view of the world. We could have that with everything. You could have that with geographical locations. You could have that with racial disparities. You could have that with everything. Well, I mean, let's take races. I might have put you for a second. Let's look at our own country. As a musician, I've played in all 50 states. And when I have a booking in, say, New York City, everything's got to be on paper. You got to sign this contract. And they want things like yesterday. It's very fast paced, et cetera. So you sign a contract and people adhere to it, whatever. My experience in the South, say, Mississippi, Georgia, something like that, they don't care about contracts even though I get one. A handshake is good enough. They feel that their word is their bond. You present them with a contract. It's like what you don't trust me. That's kind of thing. In the Midwest, which is where I'm from originally, it takes a while for people to get to know you. They want to get to know you before they commit. They're very close to the vest. Out in California, it's like, I'll get around to it maybe next week, maybe the week after. Right. Right. Now, Jeff, how did you guys meet? So I was contacted by a filmmaker. And they said, would you come down and film as part of this program? So I didn't know I was meeting Darryl Davis. And the movement we knew who Darryl Davis was, because he was pulling people out of this movement. Explain the movement. What movement you were part of? I was a part of the National Socialist Movement. I was just Nazis. Nazis. For people that don't. It sounds like socialists, like, oh, college campuses. You want Marxism, free health care for all? No. Different kind of socialism. Neo-Naziism. Yeah. And how did you get indoctrinated into that? So I was a part of that movement for 27 years. Wow. How would we? How would we? So I'm 51. OK, you look young. I thought you were about 40. I was like, what the fuck? Well, that's OK. Now, you look good. Thank you. Which is crazy for a Nazi. We think it's a lot of stress. You think it is a lot of stress. It is hate to be a liar. Yeah, look, I lost my hair. Why do you think we're about a Nazi? Why do you think we're about a Nazi? So how old were you when you got into it? When I first started the fascination with it, it was about fourth grade. Fourth grade. Fourth grade. How? My grandfather fought Hitler's army during the war. My great uncles did as well. So my mother and grandparents came over after the war. Wait a minute. Fought in Hitler's army? Correct. Oh, they fought for the Nazis. Yes. Wow. Yes. So my mother and grandparents came over after the war. But so one would think, so he was indoctrinated by his family. Not the truth. Quite opposite, actually. But I was fascinated. I knew that history. And I knew that my grandfather had fought. And I looked up to him. So I sought out on a journey myself. And kind of all. What attracted you to that? First of all, you have a mid-end Detroit church. Are you from Detroit? Yes. Well, I'm based in Detroit now. So were you living in Detroit at the time? Yes. So why made you fascinated with Nazis living in Detroit? Well, I grew up in rural Minnesota. I live in Detroit now is what I meant. But knowing that family history, I just looked up to my grandfather. And I thought, you know, he's a strong individual. This is a, you know, I'm just going to say it. Like I thought it was cool at the time. And there's nothing cool about it. But I wasn't taught to hate. I wasn't raised to hate. And so I seek out this movement. I join as a teenager quickly rise up through the ranks within a couple of years. I was appointed a national leader of that organization. And then I was there for 27 years. So I was taught racism and hate and to be an anti-Semite. Now, when you were in the fourth grade, what do you remember what your feelings were about people? I wasn't a racist at that point or anything like that. It was just thinking that it was cool seeing the videos of I remember watching old World War II documentaries. Thinking I'm going to find my grandfather in these, these footages, you know, and I just looked up to him and I sought out that path. And once you're indoctrinated, once you join and you're overwhelmed with this kind of ideology, it becomes your whole world. It's your echo chamber, everything about it, everything that you're involved in circles around that world. And so like when you're in the fourth grade and you get interested in this, how do you eventually like join up and meet the Nazis? Like how does that happen? Well, at that age, you're not, you know, you're not meeting the Nazis or anything like that. Today, kids are online and they're in the audience. That's a good point, right. But at that point, I wasn't. So I was searching it out and by the time I was 18, then I'm joining. I didn't have Kanye songs back there. Right. That is so crazy. Like some of these, the bullcug, you decide to give them a hug. That sounds crazy. So you, what was the first organization that you like officially became a part of? And what did they do? So the National Socialist Movement was the group that I sought out. How did you find them first of all? Because it was all before the internet, right? Right. This was a really kind of strange story. So I'm looking for books. I'm trying to read everything I can on it. I'm trying to find these. Did you have other hobbies or just being a Nazi? No, I had another baseball or anything like that. I was a long-haired rock and roll singer. No fucking way. You were rock and roll Nazi. That's nuts. That seems like, so that's like Jumbo shrimp. Right. That's so counterintuitive. How were you a rock and roll Nazi? That's rock and roll is all about freedom and creativity and expression. I know there's a lot of counterintuitive stuff in my life. Wow. Yeah. Well, I just shows you people are really complicated. Yeah. You know. So when you first found these people, so you're rock and roll musician, and how do you find them? So I found them in a book at the library. I'm ordering all these books, and it was written by a sociologist or something, and they had all these addresses of everybody that participated in the book, in the back of the book. So I'm writing, physically writing, not like emailing today, but like writing all these organizations. And then I eventually, how old were you at the time? Like 18. So you're 18, you're writing Nazi groups. So hey, I'm ready. Sign me up. Yep. Wow. OK. So who responds? So everybody, some of the groups were closed down at that point, but most of the groups responded, and I'm looking through all the literature, and I meet up with the National Socialist Movement at the time, what's called National Socialist American Workers Freedom Movement. Again, this is the Nazis. That's a lot of words. That's right, though. Yeah. So originally, workers' freedom movement. Yeah. That's a lot of freedom for some people. Yeah. Another counterintuitive thing there. Socialists for some people. Oh, right. And not that socialism, not left-ling. Yeah, weird socialism. So what were they involved in? So when you meet them, do you have to have like a is there a vetting process? They make sure you're not a fed or sit down, and what are you looking for? Why are you involved? Why are you interested? Yeah. And back then, the group was pretty small. But the reason that I picked that organization, I mean, it was only a handful of states at the time I joined. It was pretty small. The National Socialist Movement was a continuation of the movement at George Lincoln Rockwell, who was the original founder at the American Nazi Party. So that's why I wanted to join that particular organization because it had that history, because I was a fan of history. I always wanted to be, it's close to the German movement as possible. So that was the group that I sought out. And then there is like a vetting process. They want to know, you sign up an application, and later on in the group, I was doing things like having people sign non-disclosure agreements, and doing background checks on people and so that nature. I want to point this out because this is a really crazy fact. It's going to blow a lot of people's minds. Before World War II, there was a Nazi rally in Madison Square Garden. American Bunt, the German American Bunt. It is nuts when you see it in Madison Square Garden. And you see the swastika, the whole deal, and you're like, visit before anybody had connected this with evil. Like back then, that was an ancient Hindu symbol. Like there's a Hindu temple near my old house in California, and it has swastika all over it. And because of the temples from the 1800s, and they have to tell people, hey, this is a sign. Hey, it's not that God has lost the right. Back in 2018, the State Department sent me over to India to speak and lecture. And you see these symbols. All over the place. Yeah, it's a piece of good luck kind of thing. It was also a symbol for Shoto-Con Karate. When I was a kid, when we would meet these Shoto-Con Karate tournaments, would go to tournaments and meet these practitioners, some of them would have swastika patches. This is in the 80s. This is nuts. Jamie, show that photo game? Oh, OK, show the video. It's really crazy, because you see this enormous crowd. And this was before people had associated Nazis with a bad thing. Back then, it was just this national socialist party. They thought, OK, we're good. By the way, that's how everybody used to salute the American flag. Did you know that? Yes. Which is really crazy. The Nazi salute now that Elon got in trouble for? That is how you used to pledge a religion. And then once the Nazis came on, all right, we got to abandon that. This is connected. Gotta ditch the little mustache and no more of that. But this is a really crazy video to watch, because it really makes you think, like, how things can shift. Well, you know, the highest percentage of white people in this country are of German descent. Really? Yeah. The second highest are British descent. Yeah. Wow. I had no idea. German. I would have not people think it's British, but it's German. Yeah. God, that's nuts. And then you notice in the video, Joe, they also have George Washington up there. Yes. They've Americanized neo-Naziism. But it was different back then, right? This wasn't a racial cleansing. They weren't involved in eugenics. They weren't thinking of those terms, right? I think that all came later. But this was all part of the movement here in the US. Right. But what was the core tenets of this movement, the American Nazi movement in the 1930s before the war? Basically, it was a German activist, and they were allied with Hitler's national socialism. That was that. So was it anti-Semitic? Was it anti-Jewish back then? Sure. It was. Even so this whole rally is a big anti-Semitism rally. Yeah. I mean, that was before my time. But I wrote a historian on the Nazis. Yes. It was like you're an enthusiast. I was. Yeah. Yeah. So when you first get brought in, you're 18, what do they give you tasks to do? Do they teach you about things? Like, how's it go? Yeah. So a lot of the propagandaizing and stuff is books that you're reading and studying and stuff. But the group had meetings. You would have literature distributions. It would do like mine comp. Like, what kind of reading that? Yeah. I had already read that by 16. I already read that. But the group is recommending books like that or Henry Ford's International Jew, or other books like that as well. Is that Henry Ford the car guy? Yes. He wrote a book called International Jew. Yes. He was very anti-Semitic. And he supported the Nazis. Whoa. Yeah. Henry Ford had a picture of Hitler on his desk and Hitler had a picture of Henry Ford on his desk. Whoa. You'd be surprised, man, about four people. I drove here for four people. Fuck. You know, Walt Disney, same thing. IBM at the time. Same thing. Oh, I knew about Walt Disney. I had heard about Walt Disney. And I heard something about the roots of IBM as well. Well, I mean, so many German automobile manufacturers, right? Like Audi, Volkswagen, you know, all started off as Nazis. Even Mercedes, right? Was it a Nazi-owned company? I don't know if it was owned by the Nazi, but they were definitely a German company. That was one of the craziest things about the Kanye thing. Because Kanye lost his contract with the D-diss because he had said anti-Semitic things. A D-diss was started by the Nazis. Wow. Oh, it just was like, but that got to show people can advance and change. Yes. You know, the Red Cross used to not allow black blood. And then when they finally allow black blood, they set, you know, the only blood. One was yes. One was yes. That when the Red Cross first started collecting blood. OK, because you know, as you know, or you probably know Charles Drew, you know, black scientist, right, was the one who discovered how to give, you know, blood transfusions, right? So Red Cross began collecting blood. And they would not take black blood. And then when they finally took black blood, they segregated the blood. It doesn't matter if the black versus blood, you know, you should segregate it by a old positive or old negative or whatever it is, right? But not by the color of someone's skin. That's crazy. So they give you books. They, you know, kind of in doctrine. You're like, what is what is it involved in being a member? Champions are made and legends are tested as UFC 321 brings Tom Aspenell versus Cyril gone to the world. And Draft King Sportsbook, the official sports betting partner of UFC puts all the action from Abu Dhabi in the palm of your hand. The heavyweight belt is on the line as Aspenell faces gone. But the night doesn't stop there. And Draft King Sportsbook delivers the unmatched intensity of UFC 321 right to your fingertips, from take downs to tap outs to the thrill of live betting. Every fight is loaded with opportunity. New customers, this one is for you. Bet just $5. And if you're bet wins, you'll get paid out $300 in bonus bets instantly. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets if you're bet wins in partnership with Draft King. The crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-Gambler in New York called 8-7-7-8-Hopenwire. Text hope in Y-4-6-7-3-6-9. In Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling call 8-8-8-7-8-9-7-7-7-7-7 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhokasina when resorting Kansas passed through of per-wage or tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over, age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario restrictions apply. Bet must win to receive bonus bets which expire in 7-8. Cinema month required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. Basically, you know, your meetings. Yeah, you go to meetings. You do come up in these meetings. It varied. So sometimes it was once a week, other times it was once a month. It just kind of depend. It depends on the group as well. Some are very active. Some are less active. How far were the meetings from your home when you lived in Detroit? Well, this was growing up in Minnesota. I'm so in Minnesota. They were pretty close by. I moved to the Twin Cities. When you shocked, but they were there close? No, no. I had been looking for them since I was a teenager, but then by the time I was 18, I was able to find them. Did you move to be close to where the meetings are? No, I moved to the Twin Cities as I wanted to be close to my band. They got the rest out of there. But then early on, I was docked on a radio show. I was going under a fake name at 19 years old, and still had the long hair. I got it tucked up in a hat, and I went on a radio show, and I was docked early on. And that kind of changed the trajectory. Would you go on the radio show for? With the movement. With the shoes. And then you got docked as the band member? Well, no, I got docked. I was like, your home address and all that stuff? My parents. So I was going under the name Jeff Stevens, because I wanted to separate my music career from the movement and also protect my family. Because I knew this was a movement that people didn't like, and that could cause them in harm's way. And so I'm on the air. And somehow the host says, you know, your name is not. I'm spewing anti-Semitic, Dr. W. Which was pretty typical of how I behaved at the time. And the woman that was running the show was your name is not Jeff Stevens. It's Jeff Scoop, S-C-H-O-E-P. And your mother lives in this town. She's an attorney. She works here. Your father works in manufacturing. He works here. And we're going to call your mother in the next commercial break and my world just fell apart. And I look back now and I try not to blame anybody else. Because these are my choices, my poor choices. So I take responsibility for that. But 19 years old, that changed my trajectory. I felt like my whole world just collapsed at that point. Did you think like, wow, all these people are mad at me? Maybe I'm wrong? No, you would think with this kind of stuff going on in your life, you would reflect on that. But I double down. And that's pretty common in that world when someone is faced with that kind of pressure is they double down to become more entrenched. So it's like every lash of the proverbial whip anybody that tried to stop me from being involved in it or tried to dissuade me. It just made me more dedicated to it and more intense in that belief system. So I'm thinking, I'm going to ruin my band's career now. So I quit the band, I shaved my head, and I put all that energy that I had put into music, into the movement. I felt like I had no choice. What that did, that doxing. It affected my mother's career. So I mean, this was a hate has consequences. And hate was something that was like a downward spiral for me. And this is very common for anybody that's involved in it. It separates you from your family, from those you love. It isolates you. And what it did to my mother's career, as I mentioned, she was a lawyer. She wanted to be a judge. So she had ran to be a judge. She was elected to be a judge. And in the state of Minnesota, there's, at the time, anyways, it was back in the 90s. And there was a formality. And this is the way my mother explained to me at the time. She was the governor called me. And she said, Mrs. Scoop, your son's leader in the Nazi party, your father fought in the German army during the war. I do not feel you are fit to be a judge in this state. So that was just devastating. That's something, I carry that guilt and shame to this day for doing that. But at the time, I was like, OK, the system is after my family. That's how I felt. And it just made me double down and become more radical. Did you have a job at the time? Yeah. Would you do for a job? I was doing all kinds of jobs. You know, working in factories and pizza, and just anywhere I could. But your main focus was on the movement. Well, my main focus was on music until all that happened. And then it became the movement. And so what are the different things that you guys did? So the group would organize social gatherings where people would just hang out and drink and party and give talks. And then there would be formal meetings where people would get dressed up and have these meetings. You would do rallies. One of the first rallies was dressed up in a Nazi uniform. Yeah. It's like still on German Nazi uniforms. Back then. Back then. It was armbands and brown shirts and black ties. Yep. Is that you? Yeah. That's the old uniform. Yeah. That's crazy. So at any time why you're doing this, did you think, what am I doing? I'm on the wrong path. This is crazy. No. No. No. Not until later. When was later? Around the time when I met Darryl Davis. Are you already having second thoughts about the direction of your life? That's a tough one to answer. I was starting to see the humanity and others. Like after I moved to Detroit in December of 07. And Detroit's a majority minority city or non people of different races. So I'm having more interactions with people of other races by 2016. I met Darryl Davis. And like I said, I didn't know I was meeting Darryl Davis. But how'd you guys meet? It was for a film, for Darryl's film, accidental courtesy. OK, right. So they had reached out and they explained the show and I said OK, you know, because any opportunity to spread the propaganda of the movement, I'm going to do it unless it was like Jerry Springer or something. So it sounded legit. I agreed to it. Didn't know I was meeting Darryl. I still would have done it, but I would have probably prepared to debate this guy. because I knew who he was. I knew he was pulling people out of the movement. And so this was at a place called Chris's Hot Dogs in Alabama, where Hank Williams had written the song. It was, hey, good looking. Yeah, they're right. But a waitress. Right. And my girl and I were sitting outside and Darryl stepped out of a vehicle and I'm thinking, you know, I recognize this guy. He comes up, shakes my hand, we shake hands. He says, hi, I'm Darryl Davis. She must be Jeff Scoop and I'm thinking, where do I know that name from? Where do I know his face? It didn't quite register because I'm just thinking about, you know, the debate that we're going to get into. And then after we sat down, it clicked. It was like, oh, this is the guy that gets people out of these organizations. So at this point, I'm in the head of the National Socialist Movement. And Darryl and I are getting along great. We're talking about music. We're talking about all these kind of things. And it clicks in my head. Oh, wow. I'm getting along too well with this guy. He's the enemy. You know, or so-called enemy. You know, he's on the other side. So I better step it up here. So I pound my fist on the table and I said, you know, Darryl, I'll fight to the last bullet for my people. Yeah. And Howard, prior to us getting together, the producer and director of the documentary called accidental courtesy, they asked me, you know, they followed me around the country. I was conducting interviews with KKK members, Black Lives Matter and different people. And they said, do you know Jeff Scoop? And I said, I know who he is. I've never met him. Would you be open to talking with him and interviewing him? I said, sure. So they contacted him. And then they let me know, OK, we were down in Alabama at the time. He's going to come down to Alabama. You can interview him tomorrow. And what did this place call? Chris is hot dog stare. Chris is grilled, whatever. We're halfway he was made famous. And we're going to do this interview in there. So they said, they got me a rental car. Put me in the hotel. And so we're going to get everything set up. We'll have Jeff here. And we're going to film you when you first come in and meet Jeff. When we want to catch that on camera, then you'll sit down across from him in the booth and interview him. I said, OK, fine. So I go to the hotel, wait for their call. They call. I said, OK, we're ready. So I get in this rental car and I drive to the grill. And when I pull up, I see who looks like Jeff sitting on this bench out front with this girl. Something where that can't be him, because he's supposed to be incised sitting in the booth. So I just sat in the vehicle looking at him trying to figure this up. Maybe he came up for a smoker's and like that. I'm watching him. He's not going inside. So I got out. And when I got out and started walking towards him, I think that is the dude. I never met him. But I knew what he looked like. I said, I wonder why he's out here. So I went away and said, hey, are you Jeff Scoop? Because yeah, I said, I'm Darrell Davis, Chuck is in. He introduced me to his lady friend. And I said, I thought you're supposed to be inside. He was what I was inside. I just came out or whatever. So we walk in. Of course, they didn't get the capture of the moment that we met. So they're like all freaked out and stuff. And we sat down in the booth. And I started interviewing him. And as he pointed out, he was getting along too well with me. So just chatting, talking about music. And he's sitting the other. And he was saying, he was in musician. I said, I'm in musician. And I said, what kind of music do you like? What kind of music do you play? Well, I play rock. And I said, well, you know, rock was invented by black musicians. Oh, let's not go there. Elvis Presley and Bennett Ross. I know Elvis did not invent rock. I said, Chuck Berry invented rock. And he goes, OK, well, you probably know more about music than I do. it's about what what dim does it make. You know, what color the musician is. I said, well, it doesn't make any difference to me. But obviously it makes a difference to you. Because in our history books, then we talk about Ben Franklin, who cares what color Ben Franklin is. You know, if he invented electricity, he invented electricity. And he goes, well, yeah, well, I know about the guy who invented peanut butter. And I said, I'm serious. And I said, OK, what's his name? He thought about he goes, Carver. Carver. I said, what's his first name? George Washington Carver. I said, OK, very good. I shook his hand, right? And so then what did you say? He runs the NSM National Social Movement. And the whole white supremacy ideology is called the movement. So anyway, I said, well, he goes, you know, I said, it's a racist movement. He said, no, it's like a white civil rights movement for white people. He goes, you know, you got the NAACP. He goes, you know, I said it's a racist movement. He said no, it's like a white civil rights movement for white people He goes, you know, you got the NAACP and I said yes I said, but there are white members of the NAACP. Can I join the NSM? He goes, no And you know, I said, why not? Well, then it's the racist movement and then we got into it and he goes, you know I will fight for the last bullet for my people Whoa, he just kind of like, you know, flipped out here. I said, okay Did you do that because you were realizing that you were getting a little too friendly with him? Oh, yeah Funny like I'm keeping my ideology. No matter what Funny you're not gonna trick me by being a cool guy We laugh about it now, but at the time I was pretty stressed out. I would imagine yeah, cuz I realized it But you know what year was this 2016 16 there. What was the first year you came on the podcast? Oh gosh Kind of around then right yeah 15 or 16 yeah So how many other different things had you done where he he had known about you? Had you done like a lot of different interviews a lot of different yeah, oh, yeah I've been doing a lot of interviews magazines and You guys were just very aware of anybody who was like fucking up the cause. Yeah, yeah, they're awesome personality I mean think about it You're in you're in this movement and you've got a guy that's pulling people out and right and he's not just pulling out Just anybody it's some of these people ran wizard. It's grand dragon. Yeah, it's yeah, wizard and dragons is fucking hilarious So after after the thing was over You know there you know meandering around putting it in their cameras packed up. I pulled Jeff aside and Just you know talk to him just one on one man-to-man no cameras whatever And you know we just talk about a couple different things talked about women and the set and the other and just you know what guys talk about normal yeah and and we exchange phone numbers and then The following year 2006 17 he was involved in the in that large white supremacist rally and Charlottesville for jenya that turned deadly and I knew a lot of the people who were involved in the including that was the one the guy in the car ran over Yes, yes, and I know the guy who organized that thing he's been in my house, you know, I've sat down with them I've been in some of their homes etc and I've gotten when that that Jeff was was was rethinking you know I said, you know what let me you know let me let me stop reading all this stuff and find out for myself So I found his number then you know he'd given me and fortunately he still had the same number I called him up and We which you know, he remembered me of course and we chatted on the phone and then I had we stayed in contact and and Then in 2020 I had a gig up in New York City and They were you know, they booked me and said, you know Talk about you know how you meet these people and what you all talk about and and what they think about this I said, well wait a minute I can tell you about how I meet them and how I go about it But as far as what they think about stuff I can tell you but that'll be secondhand I say if you want I can bring I can bring people because every now and then I bring up a former Plantsman that I took out of the movement or whatever to talk, you know answer questions. I said how about if I just bring somebody You know whoa, you know, you know, we got we got clear that with with with the sponsors or whoever So they got back to me and said yeah, you know who do you want to bring? I said well, you know, let me let me give you some options or whatever so I called Jeff I said, you know, would you be willing to come out and talk about? You know your experiences will get you in will get you out etc And he said yeah So I called him back and said okay, I got this guy He was the commander of the largest neo-Nazi organization in the country for 25 years. He was a 27 year member and They said okay fine so a call Jeff back and said okay, you're on man You know, they're gonna fly out to New York and you'll come on and this is the first time We'd ever done anything together like that and work where we both are on the same page right and It went over very very well And that was the last gig either of us had before everything got shut down for COVID Now when you said this is an ad by better help We have a lot of big holidays coming up But before you start preparing for trick or treaters or make plans for travel for Thanksgiving There's one other big day you should focus on world mental health day It's October 10th and if you don't know already It's a great day to send some love to therapist Maybe a therapist has made a positive impact on you or someone you love therapist listen ask the right questions and help someone move forward They can help you if there's something keeping you up at night If you're looking for a safe space better help is a good place to start They've spent the past decade helping people connect with the right professional therapist and Based on the millions of highly rated reviews It's safe to say they do a great job better help does most of the work for you too All you have to do is fill out a quick questionnaire This world mental health day we're celebrating the therapist who've helped millions of people take a step forward If you're ready to find the right therapist for you better help can help you start that journey Our listeners get 10% off their first month at better help.com slash JRE that's better H E L P dot com slash JRE You're both on the same page What do you mean by that well both in the same mindset? He's not fighting to the last bullet for his people. He's fighting for all people He's he realizes that you know what what he had Experience for 25 or 25 out of the 27 years. He was a member. He no longer wanted to do and so when exactly was that shift for you So I broke free from the movement in early in March of 19 But I was going through this Process for several years. So typically you want somebody in like the work that we do We want someone to disengage from the movement and then we work on the de-radicalization part My journey was backward. So I'm de-radicalizing while I'm still involved now Somebody would have told me that while I was involved as a fighting words, you know, but it was basically like The mind wasn't catching up with what was going on So that's when I was starting those last years when I was involved I'm saying this is a white civil rights group. It's not a hate group You know and from the outside looking you go man this guy's insane Of course it's a hate group, you know, and I see I see that now obviously Tell them about your girlfriends who tell you it was a cult. Yeah, so When I was involved every girl that I was seeing and I I was Seeing quite a few different women just about everyone work that if they would come and check out the the movement They would say whoa, this is like a cult and you're like a cult leader And I'm thinking in my head what is wrong with these choices? I'm making in women. What is with these words? You know what I mean like that's a serious cognitive dissonance But that's that's the that's the thought that that goes to your head is like it's it's not me So was it initially meeting Darryl that started this journey for you? Yes, it was one of the major major first seats and so but you guys hadn't seen each other quite a while and then on your own You just started exploring these ideas and changing your perspective Well that and then not long after meeting Darryl I met a Muslim filmmaker by the name of Dia Khan and in her film white-right meeting the enemy and I'd gotten a no Dia quite well over the course of that filming and there was a number of people that left the the NSM from interacting with Dia and She has a very similar approach to how Darryl Davis approaches things. It's about listening It's about being curious. It's about asking questions and sharing different perspectives and that that curiosity and that Sensarity it can help Restructure it away someone thinks and the way they see see people so like DSS to me and this is actually in the film white-right meeting the enemy You can see the change like I showed a clip a lot of times at my talks And I'll tell the audience I'll say take a look at my eyes in that clip because you can see it the cameraman caught it Zoomed in on my eyes She's saying you know the ideology that you instead of telling me that I was wrong She showed me she says the ideology that you stand for the things that you believe in they made me feel less than ugly not worthy as a child growing up. That's how I felt that's how your ideology made me feel and No one aside from Darryl Davis had ever approached me with anything like that I was told up was wrong but that human connection When you dehumanize another human being you lose your humanity in that process and I'd lost my humanity a long time ago And what Darryl and Dia did is they cracked that door open that window to compassion and I could see their humanity Darryl did something very similar he told me about how racism and hate affected him as a child growing up that hurt That hurt, you know, I mean, I'm not gonna say it at the time when I'm still in the movie But on the inside it really hurt at the other me It's like this is not this noble grand cause that I believe that was if it's causing that kind of pain and suffering Other people so what were the steps that you had to take before you were ready to leave the movement? I hate to try everything and I beat myself up over that a lot But I kept saying it's a white civil rights group I'm telling every press outlet I'm sitting down with when they're in don't call it So Nazi group it's a white civil rights organization of course most of them wouldn't publish that because it is what it is But I'm going through these different changes. I'm having rules put into the organization where The last couple years they change from the swastika and the public view to using a old runic symbol the old run Today they switch back They use the swastika again But I was doing things like that to try to change the image of the group as my own beliefs were shifting I was trying to shift that into the party and eventually I was like because as a man I thought I'm gonna fix this I got to fix this what this mistake that I made this this terrible Movement I've got to fix it and there's no fixing it all was doing was putting lipstick on a pig Yeah, dressing up the Nazi party trying to make it look pretty. It still is what it is so eventually after 2019 rolls around us like I just have to I have to get away from this. This is not right. I can't What was the response within the movement when you left Not so good Not so good You can leave these organizations and it depends different groups operate different ways What I was involved in was above ground. So it's mostly legal You got underground groups that operate a little bit differently. They'll come after you and things like that You can leave But if you walk away and you speak out against it, you're deemed like a traitor basically to that cause So I knew that was going to happen when I started speaking out so I didn't speak out immediately but By the end of late 2019 was August or September of 19. I started speaking out and announced the movement and now it's traces on this Before you did that event with there. Oh, yeah, yeah by that time. I was already out And so how were you denouncing the movement? Where were you doing this? I did a press release and a website and made it public because that's That would be seen and understood now. Well, you concerned at all about retaliation About you being attacked or them coming for you You know, there's always those concerns, but I don't I don't try to dwell on those Those things, you know, I was in a high stress dangerous environment for a lot of years So this is just another kind of a high stress environment I don't want people to think you know be afraid to leave There's there's no reason to be afraid to leave, you know I mean obviously you got to be aware your surroundings and wise to it, but I've you know, I'm always prepared and when you were leaving and you know when you were on your way out and changing your Ideas about the movement and then leaving did anybody come with you? A lot of people came with me. The National Social Movement was the largest neo-Nazi organization of its kind when I left Today it's it's quite small. It's barely hanging on so people in this movement begin emailing me people I didn't even know and ask me is this true because he'd mentioned my name or whatever else and I said yeah And that's and you know they're leaving and I'd call him. I said, you know, do you know so and so? Yeah, he was in my movement, you know, I said well He called me who he emailed me and wants to get out Wow, so how many people do you think left? Oh hundreds left hundreds left. How many how many are in? It's how big is the movement in total We never had a solid number on it, but over the years I could tell you there was thousands and thousands of people that were involved and then You know we would work with other organizations. I spoke at clan functions skinhead functions other other white nationalist organizations functions so because I was that high profile in that world and and I wish the most high profile White nationalist to ever walk away in the United States So I felt like not just walk away, but to now denounce and yeah ship completely shift your perspective So I felt like I needed to do something right to make up for the damage that I had done and and this is one way to do it It's to help other people Break free and get out of that world so and so is this a continual process? Do other people from the movement now start to read your stuff and see speak and then leave as well and you also have a book out Just tell everybody it's called American Nazi from hate to humanity and There it is Did you do an audio version of this it's in the works? Okay. Yeah, it's not out yet So do more people continue to reach out to you that are in the movement because of this and try to get out as well Absolutely and we're helping people all the time there when I bolt or helping people all the time get out and and It's because of that Presence that I had there a lot of people will say you know, I I knew him then or I knew of him So they'll they'll feel comfortable in reaching out. It's kind of like street cred I guess you know like like you were an alcoholic for 20 years and You know that you have a more of a mobility to help other people. Yes. Yes. Yes another thing, you know People like I'd drift and people of that status that you know the high status It takes a while while they may change themselves. It takes them a while to figure out if they can leave Because that's their job in Jeff's case He that was his job for 25 out of the 27 years He was a member to lead that organization and build it and recruit and bring people in he brought in numerous people So number one how do you go back to those people and say I was wrong? You know you got all this power everybody looks up to you. You're they're leader, right? They're cult leader Yes, your girlfriends would tell you so Thanks, narrow But so you know that weighs on you and then You know that is your full-time job while you're in there You know the money you make is from selling not see merchandise t-shirts You know arm bands, you know, whatever else you have medallions etc So now you're leaving How are you gonna pay your bills? How are you gonna support your family? You know all that kind of thing, you know, you need a job Well, you're not trained in anything else number one and then what are you gonna put on your resume? When you go to apply for a job. I was a Nazi leader for 24 for the last 25 years So you know all of that weighs on you and so you need some kind of outside support You know and which is a lot of stuff, you know that I provide because you know You talk somebody and you give them another perspective and they leave you can't just leave them swinging in the win And you go on about your business because you know, they they have to To belong to something or or entry into society and they can't go back. They've already betrayed You know, they are quote-unquote family So they're gonna find something else to get into unless you know you provide that kind of support and what support do you provide them? The shoulder to talk to Connect them. I brought him to New York had him speak to it to crowds and an interesting thing happened I want you to tell the story about Duke um You know show him to other people let him know hey darryl Davis is not an exception, you know Because you know what when I need to do I find oftentimes this you know when I become friends with these people and they The mentality becomes you know, you know, darryl's okay for a black guy All those other black people or all those other Jewish people, you know, that kind of thing so when when I feel I can trust That individual right? You know that they're not gonna bring harm to I'm not I'm not concerned about myself But I know that they're not gonna bring harm to friends of mine or other people Then I will invite them, you know to my home and fight some of my Jewish friends and my other black friends Some of my white friends who look just like them, but don't agree with them So that way they can see I'm not the exception Maybe they are the exception Because now they're being exposed to people who think the same way I do Right now You're doing that for money. Were you running the movement was that your job job? Did you have another job as well? For a lot of years I was uh basically running the record label of the movement and that was that was my job as well So the movement has a record label? Yeah, how are rock? Yeah. Oh Christ. Yeah, so that's that was my job Yeah So you had to find another job, too. Yeah, and you have to find a job where they're willing to hire a Nazi Former Nazi former Come on Joe On a resume. Yeah. What did you want to do and for work? It was tough. It was tough for a while Now I help get people out of extremist groups. I speak all over the country all over the world I've spoke at I've been at Nobel with the Nobel Peace Center with the Akan I just got back from Australia did a book tour over there of spoke at combat antisemitism movement Today I do a lot of work with assignment Weezing Ball Center Educating young people I've done stuff even with the with the government US government I've advised other governments as well on extremism. So this is This is what I do now. What did you do right away though? Like what was the first things you did I really had to do a lot of self work a lot of a lot of processing It was that really what you do to make a living. I didn't I was living off my savings. Hmm. Yeah But you familiar with Simon, Weezing Ball? Yes, okay So Jeff now works with the Simon Weezing Ball Center as a complete 180 You know, he was the most famous, you know, Nazi hunter. I knew Simon Weezing Ball Really? Yeah, I've been doing this for like 45 years and back in the 1980s I went to Vienna, Austria, which is where he lives and I had dinner with Simon Weezing Ball Wow, yeah and picked his brain Wow, how old was he back then? He was old back then. Yeah, I'm not sure how old he was. He was probably maybe in his 70s maybe You know a fun fact if Werner von Braun the The head guy from NASA that got us to the moon if he was alive today The Simon Weezing Ball Center said they would prosecute him for crimes against humanity. Wow. I did not know that Hey, it was a legit Nazi Yeah, Operation Paperclip the United States brought over all the best Nazi rocket scientists to structure our rocket program Yeah fun fact A lot of people don't know that. Yeah, well, they all had those dueling scars on their faces too So when I Got Jeff to to do the Thing up in New York. He asked me, you know, is this open to the public? And I said yeah, you know anybody can come and Yeah, I'm inviting a friend of mine who lives in New York He was who was my chief of security You know while I was in the movement, you know this you know and now now he's out And so you go ahead and tell that this is an amazing story. Right. So It's okay to say his name because he's public out with it, but um, this is Duke Schneider He was my chief of security for a long time and he had left the movement before I did and His story was you know, it's a love-conquer hate story. So he had some kind of Thyroid issues cancer and his thyroid and he was in the hospital and um His father's nurse was a woman by the name of Catherine. She's the African American lady and um, she was there with Duke in the hospital and and he's like Catherine you don't have to stay here at the hospital with me You know you can you can leave you don't need I might be here for a while and she says I'm not leaving your side I'm gonna be here in this hospital until you walk up out of here and you're better I'm gonna stay here, you know, so don't argue with me. I'm gonna be here and At that moment Duke looks to her and he says when I walk up out of this hospital and get better I'm gonna marry you. Whoa, and they have been married ever since and this is one of the I mean this couple If you see them you'd swear they just like high school sweetheart. They're just amazing amazing people. There's Duke Schneider. Yes That's crazy Wow So, you know, this goes to show Joe. I mean we all You Jeff me anybody we know when we were kids were told a tiger does not change his stripes Leverage is not change his spots. That's who they are and that is true, you know So why would we think that a not see or neo-not see or a Klansman would change their robe and hood or their swastika arm band or something Well, that's where we're wrong the the stripes and and spots on the tiger and lion are immutable characteristics They're born with those they can't change them But the the clan robe and hood and the swastika are Are acquired that's learned behavior and what can be learned can be unlearned Jeff is an example of that Duke Snyder is an example of that and when I first got into To wanting to meet these people. You know, I wasn't trying to get anybody out And I still don't really try to get people out I Just went or an answer to that question that plagued me from the age of 10 How can you hate me? You don't even know me just tell me that and that you go your way? I go my way But what happened was during the conversation, you know, you start off this far apart on the ideological spectrum You talk to somebody for five minutes That gap narrows because you found something in common You keep on talking now. You're here You found more in common at this point. You're having a cordial relationship with your adversary You know, you might not be going out to dinner with him or whatever, but you're having a cordial relationship Keep on talking And you found more in common and now it's like a friendship You don't agree on everything But you have found more in common that you have in contrast And the trivial things that you found in contrast like skin color or whether you go to a church of synagogue A mosque or example began to matter less and less because it's caused a cognitive dissonance And so when the first person left I thought this person was a fluke, you know, this guy probably wasn't invested in it Fully but then it happened again and again and again And I thought okay, well now something I must be doing when I'm interviewing these people this back when I was writing my first book What am I doing and I narrowed it down to about five core values that everybody wants between traveling with my parents as a child in the You know, US State Department Foreign Service as diplomats And now traveling as an adult musician and lecturer I've told you before I've been to all 50 states I've been to 64 countries on six continents and I can tell you this no matter how far I've gone from our country right next to order Canada right next to Mexico or halfway around the globe no matter who I meet maybe around the world They don't look like me or speak my language or worship as I do or not worship at all I've always concluded that every person I've met is a human being and as such every human being wants these five core values in their lives Everyone wants to be loved. We all want to be respected. We want to be heard. We want to be treated fairly and truthfully We want the same things for our family as anybody else would want for their family And if we can learn to apply those five core values or any of those five values When we find ourselves in an adversarial situation or in a Culture or society in which we're unfamiliar or uncomfortable I'll guarantee you that your navigation of that society that culture that situation will be much more smooth Much more positive and much more productive and so that's what was happening Because these people have been interviewed before but they didn't leave so that you know Is how you talk to people not more so than what you say to people and how you listen to them? You know and when I say respect it doesn't mean that I respect what they're saying I'm respecting their right to say it Right, right and so I think you know That's been one of the key things That worked with with Jeff and worked with other people and when it started happening more and more I realized I stumbled on to something and I needed to keep doing this and that's why I'm still doing it today and Jeff and I go out, you know oftentimes We know we just came back from India Nappless a few weeks ago. We were in Orlando Speaking to the Holocaust Center there and where where else when you look back on your life and you think about the enormous amount of time that you spent in the movement and now being Essentially of a completely different mindset. Like what does that feel like for you when you look back on yourself? It's like two different people so like a lot of times when I'll speak about that life I'll say that was my past life You know, I know it's not my past life is still the same life, but it Is like looking back at a different person like um when I started doing work with the Weezingthaw Center One of the things was after after talks a lot of people in the Jewish community were like I don't get it You're such a nice guy. I don't get it doesn't make sense So we started showing video clips of my speeches and things that I did when I was in the movement ahead of those things and I was always and and then people were like oh Now I get it, you know because they could see it. They could see how different that was and how different the person is Not the person nice guy that they met, but that's who I was so And I and I always try to get out of showing those clips I'm like could I be backstage or somewhere else because I don't want to look at it like I mean it's hard to I mean I can look at obviously I do it all the time, but it's tough. It's tough because it's like man Does it feel shame shame guilt? You just feel terrible about it. Um, so I think that drives the work a lot of the work that I'm doing now and and Is the help others and to repair some of that damage that's been done. But I think your perspective is very important for people to understand that You know someone can shift their mindset and that just because someone has a hateful Evil ideology they've attached themselves to doesn't mean they're a hateful evil person inherently It's learned behavior and learn thinking and this is the problem with human beings is we're incredibly malleable You know human beings are We follow the leader and we adopt ideologies and We're also very tribal so you become a part of a group whether you call it a family or a team or whatever You hate the other people because they're they're the enemy now It's us against them and we're all in this together and that unites everybody It's a part of the movement and it makes you feel like you're a part of something bigger. Yep Yeah, it's a trap. It's a terrible trap and it's a trap that Human beings can easily fall into and you see it with political ideologies You see it with religion. He's seen with everything. I mean people just we are very tribal and That can manifest itself in some very Disgusting thinking. I want to add something to that. I think you're 100% right for the most part but the travel thing never never came into into play with me and Nor did it come into play with other people who were raised the way I did was I first started traveling abroad overseas at the age of three in 1961 on born in 58 so I'm 67 now and My first introduction to school was abroad the State Department assigns you to the American Embassy in some foreign country for two years And then you come back home at the end of the two years You hear for a few months Maybe a year and then you back over to another foreign country for two years back and forth back and forth my dad's job as a US diplomat Was to foster better relations between a foreign country and our US government, right? So we're just why you know we're overseas. So my first introduction to school was abroad. I did to foster better relations between a foreign country and our US government, right? So we're just why we're overseas. So my first introduction to school was abroad. I did kindergarten, first grade, third grade, fifth grade, seventh grade, all in different schools in different countries. The in between grades I would do back home here, right? My classmates abroad, now we're talking about the 1960s, my classmates abroad were from all over the world because anybody who had an embassy, stationed where we had our American embassy, all of their kids went to the same school. So this little girl sitting at this little desk here might have been from Czechoslovakia, that kid from Nigeria, that kid from Japan, you know? If you opened the door to my classroom, look in, you would say, oh, you know, this is a United Nations of little children. That's exactly what it was. That became my baseline for what school was supposed to be. But every time I'd come home, I would either be in all black schools or black and white schools, meaning they're still segregated or the newly integrated. And just because desegregation was passed four years before I was born in 1954 by the Supreme Court, schools did not integrate overnight. It took years and years, and even in some places today, in 2025, this country is still struggling with integration, right? So that became my norm, you know, this multicultural thing. I didn't know tribes. Everybody was part of my tribe. That's why I didn't understand racism. Because if I had grown up here my whole life, and my first experience with somebody who did not look like me was having bottles and rocks thrown at me at the age of 10 in a parade, maybe I wouldn't be doing this work today. Maybe I would be old. I'm gonna stay away from those color of people. That kind of thing. So I didn't know tribalization simply because of my growing up experience. Very unique experience. Exactly. And most Americans didn't have that. Now today, and back then, you buy your kids in the 1960s, you buy your kids' dolls. I had GI Joe dolls, right? I don't have any siblings, but my friends, they have Barbie dolls. And back then, all the GI Joe's were white. All the Barbie dolls were white. So black kids had to play with little white dolls. There was nothing that looked like them. Today, you have all kinds of color of dolls and nationalities and ethnicities, which broadens the scope of these children. So when they see the real deal walking down the street, well, that's my favorite doll. So I'm okay with that person rather than, you reinforce that tribalism by buying your kids the dolls that look like you and your parents. Yeah. Well, that makes sense. And it also sets you up to be uniquely qualified to do what you do. Like as a person who did grow up around so many different people. So I try to share that, I guess, you know, vicariously with people. Jeff, did you grow up around, I mean, other than when you moved to Detroit, were you around mostly white people? Like, yeah, so where I grew up is like in the middle of a cornfield, basically. I grew up in a little town. It was barely a thousand people. All white, basically. The only interactions you had with other races was typically in the summertime, like when farm workers would come up from Mexico and things like that. And a lot of times people just didn't talk to them. So I didn't really have in any hardly any interactions with people of other races. So where do the negative ideas about other races come from? The movement came from the movement from personal experience. No, no, but I did not have bad personal experiences. In fact, even to this day, most of the bad personal experience I had with other people. I mean, I've had assassination attempts. I've got scars from attacks. All white people. And this is a assassination attempt. Is this post leaving or during, during, during? Why are they trying to kill you? Well, Antifa tried to give me a discard across the back of my head with some tire iron. Where what happened there? It was the infiltrated organization. And this is in my book, American Nazi, by the way. But we had went to Rochester, Minnesota and to pass out leaflets. And it was myself and my roommate. And then two other guys that had infiltrated. And at the end of the night, make a long story short, I'm reaching into the trunk of a car. And as I'm reaching down into the trunk of the car to pick up this box of merchandise from the record label, the guy pulls out a tire iron and smashes me across the back of the head and says, you were here to kill you. And it felt like being scalped. The whole back of my head was scalped, was hanging down. And I just, I didn't get knocked out. I would have been killed if I'd have been knocked out. I just remember stumbling, putting my hand across the back of my head and it felt like a wet sponge. And just kind of staggering. And my roommate blocked another hit. Because the guy tried to hit me again, because I didn't go down. And by that time, I'm just kind of stunned, staggering, concussion, whatever you want to call it. And started stumbling into traffic in the middle of the street. And then he'd gotten away from the guy and pulled me off to the other side of the street. And that was one incident. So there's multiple times people try to kill you. I've been shot at. And this is all that stabbing people try to stab me to. This is also why you're in the movement. Oh yeah. And who was shooting at? Gangs? So people that had just found out that you guys were Nazis and they just tried to shoot you. Well, we were wearing the symbols everywhere. Like, I mean, flight jackets with swastika patches and stuff like that. So I mean, that was going to be a, that was pretty volatile, and especially in different neighborhoods. When you talk to other people that have left the movement, do they have, like, is there a pivotal moment in a lot of these people's lives where they realized that this was the wrong path? Is it accumulation of other people's experiences that they take into consideration? Like, what is a, is there a main factor? It really is different for everybody, but usually it doesn't happen like a snap of finger. You know, like, I could, you know, like we were talking about hundreds of people have left the movement. I can think of just like, on one hand, the people that have left over like one act of kindness or one, one simple thing. Very few people do that. It's usually a process. So they're going through this shift in thinking kind of like I was. And they're questioning it. They're questioning like, well, it's, there's a lot of cognitive dissidents. There's a lot of confirmation bias that takes place and they're having experience as sometimes with people of other races. That helps, you know, where it doesn't fit the narrative of the movement, what's being spewed. So they're, they're fighting with this and they're head for a long time. For different people, it's different things. It's sometimes it's just seeing the humanity and the people that you want to dehumanize. There, this is a heavy path you're on. Does it, I know it must feel very rewarding, but interacting with so many people that have been indoctrinated into hate. Does it sometimes feel overwhelming? No, it doesn't. I mean, I've had some disappointments, you know, people, not everybody's going to change, you know, on either side, black, white, you know. If you had people that were close, they were close to this shifting and they come back to the point. It's like alcohol to fall off the wagon, you know, that kind of thing. But I've had some who I never thought would change. I mean, there'll be people who are on all sides who will go to their graves being hateful, violent, racist, whatever, anti-Semitic. But even some of those, I've had come back and change, but I know not all would do it. Some would just die hard, you know. They're not going to change for anything. And so I don't give up on those people, but I move them down my list of priorities and deal with the ones who are open to talking. Even though they're just as hateful and violent and racist or whatever, if they will talk, there's an opportunity to plan a seed. The seed's not going to bloom overnight, you know. So when it happens, great. Then I move my way down to the ones who didn't want to talk to me or we got into some kind of scuffle or whatever, things like that. But as I was telling you before, when their buddies change and they see that life improve, sometimes it's a wake-up call for them. So initially they think there's nothing this black guy can do this when they help them. Who the hell is he to think to even think, I'm the superior one, he's the inferior one. But when they compare their life to their buddies' life and now he's superior, he's living superiorly and getting along fine, you know. I want that. So now they come around. And for some people it's something staggering. Like I can think of, I'm just thinking of a couple of the cases that have worked on. And like one guy, his son committed suicide and he had brought his whole family into the movement. And he felt like it was the ideology that did that. And that's what helped shift him. And this was a lifelong guy. Like this guy's in his 60s. You know, it'd been in forever. I would have never, like there all said, never, you never think some people are gonna change. And he changed. And there's another family that I helped out this last year. And they've got 11 kids under the age of 18. And they started for them. It was seeing how it was affecting their children. Some of them have disabilities and things like that. And they were seeing how the quality of life, being involved in this is, it's heavy. It's a great burden. It's not something that you wish on your children. It's not something that you want them to move forward with. So for them it was seeing how their children were affected. Well, having children also just changes your understanding of people. start realizing, like babies learn from their environment. And they're all, you know, really innocent. They come out of the womb just innocent. And you see them grow up in a while. And you realize like how much of what makes you a human being is just learned, learned behavior. You know, you're still a working musician. So how much of your time is dedicated to helping people lead these movements. It seems pretty significant. Yeah, it's really flipped around a lot. You know, when I first started this, it was like maybe 75% of music, 25% of other, you know, this work. But now it's probably the exact opposite now. I just take the gigs that I want to do. You know, for something, you know, that I want, I feel like playing. I'll take it. I've turned down more gigs in the last few years than I have accepted. And does this feel right to you? Or do you sometimes wish that someone else would carry the baton? Well, you know, I wish people would carry the baton and improve upon what, you know, what I've done. I'm just one person. But and there's always room for improvement. Somebody can, you know, take my template and make amends do it or whatever. I would hope, you know, people would be inspired to do that. And they have been some. But I mean, would you rather have more time for your music? Like that's, well, I put it this way. Music is my profession for sure. But improving race relations is my obsession. And I would much rather, much rather, be on stage, playing my piano with my band, seeing people smiling and dancing and clapping their hands, than going to a clan rally and watching people in robes and hoods march around and burning cross yelling white power. I know. You laugh. But that's what I do. I know. I mean, it's crazy that you do that and have any feeling of safety while you're there. Well, I mean, there are people who don't want me there and they can send it and they get into it with their leaders and their leaders end up banishing them and stuff. But you know, Jeff can tell you, you know, because he's been doing a lot of clan things as well as his own organization, is run kind of like a paramilitary. All right, so you have two kinds of rallies. You have public rallies and you have private rallies. So a public rally is, you know, you want to have your clan rally, you're not too rally over here in the park on Main Street. So you got to go to City Hall or wherever and apply for a permit, right? That's public rise, public part. So anybody can come. You can come. I can come whatever. Now, if there's potential for violence or whatever, there's going to be a barricade of police in between the rallyers and the protesters. So they can't meet each other, right? You can yell and scream over the police head, right? But if it's in some rural place, like he's talking about in rural Minnesota, anybody, everybody can go. There's not a whole lot of police presence. It's mostly white people. And, but if it's a private rally, yeah, it's on private property. One of the members might have a farm. Okay, you know, you wouldn't have the rally on my farm. We just can't walk onto somebody's farm unless you're invited. So you have to be invited by one of the higher ups. In his case, the commander in the clan case, the imperial wizard or the grand dragon, and so if it's like a Simon says, if the leader invites somebody, then all the members have to respect that you don't bother that person, whether you like it or not. You know, otherwise, you know, you'll suffer some consequences. And why would those leaders invite you? Curiosity, I treated them fairly. I applied those five core values. I'm writing a book. I need to know what goes on at a rally. You all say, you know, you don't do anything malicious or whatever, well, show me. You know, let me come see the rally. Like if you're gonna write a book on football, you can go to the library and get tons of books and research it and write it and have never gone to a football game. Right. Okay, but if you really wanna, you know, write an accurate one and from personal experience, you need to go see a football game. So how am I gonna write a book on the clan from A to Z without ever seeing a clan rally? So that's why I want to do, and I explain that to them and just, you know, so I've been to both private and public. Who's easy to convert? Clan people are Nazi people. I would say probably clan people. They are, depending upon the individual groups, because I don't wanna say that a white supremacist of any group or even individual races is stamped out of a standard cookie cutter. You know, they come from all different walks of life, all different educational backgrounds, reasons for joining, et cetera. But the Nazi movements, not so much the skinheads. The skinheads are very disorganized, disjointed, they go off the rails, they don't listen to anybody, you know, within their own command or whatever, where the clan does have some respect for their, or a lot of respect for their higher ups, you know, the great Titan, the grand drag and the Imperial, Wizard, et cetera. But the Nazi movements, a lot of the larger ones like his, his former movement, is very militarily run, and they're quick consequences if you step out of line. Hmm. So, you know, I don't like Joe Rogan on my rally ground, but my grand drag and want some here, I'm gonna be cool, I'm not gonna say a word here, I'm just gonna stand over there, because I know if I, you know, if he gets in my face, I might say something, and then I'm gonna get banished or whatever. So it's very much run like a military, in a lot of ways. Yes. Is it a train? Did you have like training exercises and different things that you did? Yeah, later on in, in the group, there was a paramilitary training, there was a rank structure, so people, you know, like the military, and it was very, very controlled in that sense. So, when you say paramilitary training, what were you preparing for? In these movements, they believe that the United States government is gonna collapse, whether that's through a race war, a civil war, or anything like that. And this goes far right, far left. Most extremist groups have this, or even, you know, the Jihadi type of religious extremism. They have this idea that they're gonna rise up and be the leaders of the future tomorrow. So, so groups like this prepare, you know, so they do like, you know, what you call like militia training, I guess. James. So now, interestingly enough, right? He mentioned the word militia, okay? So when you have very subtle nuance here, when you have a bunch of white guys who go out in the woods and practice shooting, and they're in their camouflage, and practice survival skills, and all that kind of stuff, they're called militias. But when you have black guys, black groups are do the same thing. They're not called militias, they're called militants. But it's the same thing, but the word militant has more of a negative connotation than the word militia. Really? Yeah. Interesting. Who's using these terms? By who's standard? By the general puppet stand, especially white people, we use those terms that they're referred to to a blads as being militant. Well, you very rarely hear about militias. It's usually cookie white people. It's usually like white people in Idaho or some groups outside of court of lane and the area nations. Yeah, the people in Washington state were history. They have a lot of militias in Michigan. Timothy, in the day, what is quite a video of a militia. And there are other ones. And they have different names to cover up like he used Jeff Stevens to cover the thing. Like there was a Klan group out of Texas. It was something ambulance service. A store window name to cover up the real organization. But speak to the recruitment. Today, I mean, these groups have always, since the beginning of time or the beginning of their inception have always recruited law enforcement and military people into the ranks of the group. But now it's even more concentrated where they really are going after a lot of law enforcement and military, especially those people, veterans, who've only been in the military Air Force Army, Marines, Navy, whatever, for two years. They feel that if somebody's in there for more than two years, they've become loyal to the government. So you really can't start to pull them. And then at the two year point, these people have training. They have training in weaponry and bomb making explosives and survival skills, all that kind of stuff, which is what these people want to prepare them. So you all served overseas and fought for the country over there, now I want you to come fight for our country right here. Because this is going on in our cities. Look what's happening in Washington, DC, in Chicago. The Jews and the blaps are taking over and out of the da. Come fight for us here domestically. And so they get lured in and then they learn these weapon skills. And then they turn into lone wolves. That's why we're seeing so many lone wolves. But what's actually going on here, Joe, is this. I learned this back in 1982. All right. Let me go back a little further than 1982. 1974, I made 15 in the 10th grade, sophomore in high school. And we had a class called the POTC, which did for problems of the 20th century. We had a great teacher. It was a class for seniors, 12th graders, but I was taken as a 10th grader. He'd bring in different controversial speakers, talk about different abortion, all kinds of controversial things back then. And one day, he brought in the head of the American Nazi Party. Now, as Jeff pointed out, the Nazi Party was founded by a fellow named George Lincoln Rockwell. And by the way, one of Rockwell's daughters who long ago disowned her father was a teacher at my school. But there's people didn't know that. But anyway, George Lincoln Rockwell was murdered by one of his own Nazis. My name is John Paulter. It was founded by 35 minutes from my house in Arlington, Virginia. And John Paulter shot and killed Rockwell out there on the street on Wilson Boulevard. So Rockwell's right hand guy was a guy named Matt Cole, K-O-E-H-L. And on this day in 1974, Matt Cole and his right hand guy, they're the heads of the American Nazi Party now after Rockwell came to my school, to my class. And they spoke to my class. Now, you could never do that today. But I'm glad we were able to do that back in 1974. I wish that kind of thing would happen today. So people can see what's, if we had a discussion or that. Matt Cole pointed at me and pointed at another black kid in my class and said, we're going to ship you back to Africa. And then he went like this. And all you Jews out there, you're going back to Israel. Now, I'm 15 years old, right? I just said they're like, look at the dollar. What on earth is this man talking about? I didn't say anything to him. But one of my classmates was a girl, pipe them and said, what they live here? What if they don't want to go? And Matt Cole said, oh, they have no choice. If they do not leave voluntarily, they will be exterminated in the upcoming race war. That was the first time I ever heard the term race war. Now, I was already fascinated by racism since I was 10 years old, right? But the race war, wait, it's this man talking about it, right? And so I began by books and all kinds of stuff, learning different terminology for it, which will come later, like for example, the white supremacist they have two terms for the race war. One is Rahoa, R-A-H-O-W-A, Rahoa, which are the first two letters of three words, racial holy war. Also, they call it the boo-galoo. So if you hear that term, they're not talking about the 1960s, you know, dance music, just something to talk about, the race war. And so Matt Cole talked about the race war. Well, I graduated two years later, in 1976 from high school. I graduated from college in 1984 years after that. And like I said, racism became my obsession. I did not confront Matt Cole in school because, you know, my peer group back then, you know, we're raised, you have respect for your elders as figures of authority, whether you accept them or not, you still respect them. And so, you know, I didn't confront him like that. But now I've graduated from college, right? And I graduated in 1980 at age 22. In 1982, I'm age 24. I developed contacts with different people. I knew where some of these groups were, et cetera. I found out about a demonstration. I'm publicized demonstration by the American Nazi Party. There was going to take place in front of the White House. There is a park right across street from the White House called Lafayette Park. 24-7, 365 days a year. There is somebody in that park protesting something. Nuclear weapons, the environment abortion, you name it, they're there all the time. And they face the White House with their billboards and whatever. So I found out the American Nazi Party was going to have a silent, unpublishedized demonstration, which means nobody knows about it, not even the police, right? So I'm going to go down there and see them. Now, back then, you could drive up and down the 1600 block of Pennsylvania Avenue, which is where the White House sits. And I only lived at about 30, 40 minutes from there. You know, 15 minutes from DC on a non-wesh hour day. So I go down there early. It'll be there at 12 noon. I park my car, a catty corner, to the White House. I wait. Here comes this van. About 13 to 15 of these Nazis get out. All right. And who do I see? Matt Cole and Martin Kerr. The same two guys from eight years ago, came into my school. You never forget the fate. I mean, I can look at my hand right now and see his face right there. You never forget the face of somebody who tells you they're going to ship you somewhere. Hey, whether you want to go or not. And if you don't want to exterminate you, you don't go voluntarily. So anyway, Matt Cole gets all his Nazis lined up. They're not wearing anything that indicates they're Nazis. They're wearing just dark black suits. And they're standing like this facing the White House across the street. Like this, people are, it's lunchtime in DC. People are walking by not to be known who they are. I know who they are. All right. I guess maybe the White House might have known who they were. So anyway, once you got them all lined up, I walked right over to Matt Cole. And I said, Matt Cole. He like jumped. Like, who was this black person calling my name? And he says, do I know you? And I said, well, you spoke at my high school. And what high school would that be? I said, whoo, not at school in Rothville, Maryland. And he goes, yes, yes, yes. I remember you. That was a long time ago. And I said, yes. I remember you. Yeah, you remember me. Yeah. And he said, yes. That was a long time ago. I said, yes, that was eight years ago. He goes, yes, yes. I remember. What can I do for you? I said, well, I'm still here. He says, I can see that. How can I help you? And I said, well, you can tell me just who the hell gives you the authority to make permanent travel arrangements for me. And he says, what's your name? I said, Darrell Davis. And then he did something I've never forgotten. He shook my hand, and he held my hand real tight. And he shook his finger with the other hand, shook his finger in my face. And he said, Mr. Davis, you have to understand one thing. It is in the interest of your race, the black race, to be a strong race. And you cannot be a strong race unless you are a pure race. And you cannot be a pure race if you are a miscegenating with other races. It is in the interest of my race, the area in race, which is what he calls white race, right? To also be a pure race. And we cannot be to be a strong race. And we cannot be a strong race if we are miscegenating with Mongol, I mean, with our mud races, such as yours. We are becoming a Mongol race. So anybody who's not on white is a mud race. And he's fearing that his race is dying out, he's becoming a Mongol race by mixing with other races. So he says, until the race is understand that they cannot miscegenate, we cannot live side by side. We cannot live together. And what do you hear there? Fear. Yeah. Yeah. Fear. So he, you know, I talked about, you know, maybe 20, 30 minutes. I wasn't there to beat them up or custom out. I just want to understand where he's coming from, right? And so a few months later, they applied for a permit. They had their national American Nazi party recruitment rally in Washington, DC. So people came from all over the country, right? And now this time it was publicized. So you had, you know, you had about 50 of them show up. And there were tens of thousands of people that came to protest from New York, Richmond, Virginia, Baltimore, all over. So you have every police department was there too. And there was rioting all kinds of craziness going on, right? You could not get to, I went there with my secretary. You could not get to the Nazi, I saw a mat call and then. And now of course they're wearing their Gestapo uniforms with the essence of Nia's flying swastika flags and all that kind of thing. And you, but you couldn't get to them because if the police have their shields and their batons and pushing people back, all right? So then people, they came with bricks and all kinds of stuff and began throwing them over the heads of the police to land on the Nazis gathered in this opening in the park. And so the cops began teargassing everybody and then it came a full blown riot. People were turning over police cars, breaking up the windows, kicking up the headlights, setting buildings on fire and watching in DC. You can find it on YouTube. And so anyway, that this is before internet, right? 1980s. My secretary and I go home, we watch the news. And there's Matt Cole sitting in the studio of one of the network TV stations in NBC, CBS, ABC, whatever it was. And he's talking to the anchor person and they're showing footage of the riot in DC that day. You see, you see, it's the blacks in the Jews who are turning over the police cars and trying to attack us. You don't see the Nazis turning over the police cars. It was then that I realized what he was doing because he was a pretty smart guy. Just more in the wrong direction. I couldn't figure out why would he have his national recruitment rally to recruit people into the Nazi party and Washington DC. Washington DC is two-thirds black. There are no black people in DC who want to join the American Nazi party. There are no Jews in Washington DC or Jews anywhere who want to join the American Nazi party. So why DC? Because he knew that would happen. And he has the official footage from CBS, ABC, NBC. He takes that footage, goes out there to Cordalene, Iowa. Idaho, or Washington state, the Pacific Northwest. And says, you see what's going on in our nation's capital? Our country is being run by Zog. Zog is a very common term in white supremacy. Z-O-G is stands for Zion. You see what's going on in our nation's capital? Our country is being run by Zog. Zog is a very common term in white supremacy. Z-O-G is stands for Zionist-occupied government. Oh, boy. Yeah. And so he shows this, you know, rioting of all these people who he alleges are blacks and Jews, destroying and denying people their right of freedom of assembly, freedom of speech. So then it's a recruitment tool. So I learned that. And I realized what he was doing. And I've seen the plan do the same thing. There will go somewhere where they know there's going to be some kind of a riot. That's why they want to march in Skokie, Illinois, which was an all-Jewish neighborhood, because they knew it was going to create a disturbance. And they use that. But so I learned a lot from Matt Cole. These are that someone would be smart in the wrong way like that. It's bizarre. It's bizarre, but you find it in any color, every color. You know, people, you know, divide and conquer is how you gain power. And the first thing that going back to the fear factor of that, like we did the exact same thing every time there was violence when we clash with Antifa or something like that, we had people out there filming like NSM at its own media arm. So they're out there filming that. And we would put out those clips. So immediately, especially if there was violence, if there was actual clashes and the police weren't keeping people separated, those always turned into recruits. That's how these groups would utilize that stuff. So you have people that were being like, oh, man, I'm sorry, I missed it. I didn't know we'd be fighting with the red. You know, like I'll be at the next one. And then you'd have applications coming in from new recruits that would see it on the news. So with these groups are always manipulating the media. Some of the rallies that I organized were at places like Valley Forge, Yorktown, Virginia, historic places that you could use those elements. And it would guarantee the press or downtown LA at the city hall. Or marching on DC, places that would guarantee a lot of press. And just like Darrell said, it wasn't necessarily to recruit people in those areas. It was to whip up chaos because that would benefit these groups. How do these groups use the media or rather social media and the internet to radicalize people nowadays it's a it's a it's a double edged sword to media. Because these groups before like, like I was discussing earlier, he had to like kind of search them out or recruit or had to find you or something like that. It wasn't easy to find. Now a for's greater can click on a website and go find these groups. They're easy to find online. And so sometimes they're very overt. But a lot of times there's different censorship things that are in place. So they'll change the cover of the book. So the propaganda that we had in the in the group were making stuff look less innocuous not, you know, using swastikas or things like that. So some groups are very prolific at that. And they'll use podcasts. They'll use videos. They have Nazi podcasts. Oh, yeah. I would say like, I'll get any ideas. Man. They don't get. They don't get as many as many listeners as Joe Rogan. But I was just saying thinking like what kind of how many people are listening to Nazi podcasts? That really varies. You know, but is it still a large movement in this country? Yeah. Yeah. And how does it grow now? Is it grow based on like the things Darrell was talking about like riots and stuff like that with a use that maybe black lives matter riots from the 2000s or 2020s rather? Well, those one of the things that's causing it to grow also, which I was going to leading up to when I talked with Matt Cole, what I learned in 1982 was that these people, meaning the movement, the white supremacy movement, are fearing. He told me this in 1982. They are fearing the year 2042. All right. And it's not a conspiracy. It's for real. All right. The US census has taken every decade. I'm 67. When I was, it doesn't matter how old you are, how old years or whatever. When we all were children, the black population in this country was 12%. Native Americans, 1% right. Latino Hispanic Americans almost 2%. Asian Americans, a Pacific Islander Americans almost 3%. Whites were like around 86, 87%. It's back in I was born in 58. All right. So every decade this is happening. And this is what Matt Cole was telling me that they were fearing. He used the word fear. He said it has to be stopped. He said in the year 2042, if this trend continues, this country will be 5050, meaning 50% white, 50% nonwhite. All right. The last census taken in our country was 2020. Guess what? Whites went from like 80% from the time I was a kid. You were a kid. Now, 59% that was in 2020 is less than that right now in 2025. So in 2040, 40 is going to be this. It's predicted between 2045 and 2050 is going to flip. And for the first time in the history of the United States, whites will become the minority. And while there are plenty of white people who say, hey, that doesn't bother me. No big deals evolution was the big deal. Right. There is a slice of our population. The ones that I deal with who think it is a big deal and they're trying to stop it. And that's why when I first started, I've been doing that. I could say it for 45 years. When I first started doing this, there was just the KKK white power skin heads and some neo-Nazi groups. That's basically it. Right. Today you got the KKK, the neo-Nazis, the skin heads, the patriot front, the van guard, the proud boys, the Oathkeepers, the National Alliance, on on on on on whole slew of groups. And they're all saying, come join us, come join us. We're going to take back our country. Right. So people out of fear of their identity being erased as, um, you know, they're saying, because you're trying to keep the racist pure. Because what they tell me is, Darrell, I don't want my grandkids to be brown. They call it the Browning of America or white genocide through miscegenation. So these people out of fear of their identity being erased because they truly believe that they are patriots and it's their job to save this country. We built this country. We wrote the Constitution and now people are coming into our country who don't look like us and squeezing us out of our own country. That's the mentality and as Jeff points out, they're surrounded by an echo chamber that keeps repeating that. So then it becomes the truth to them. Right. So they run and join these groups to take back the country. But when the group does not act fast enough to take back the country, they get antsy and get frustrated. And so you know what? If the Nazis can't do or the Klan can't do it myself, and they walk into a black church in South Carolina, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. And murder nine black people doing Bible study or the tree of life synagogue in Pittsburgh, kill off 11 Jewish people. The Buffalo grocery store in New York, the seek in the entimple and Oak Creek Wisconsin murders seven of seek Indians doing religious service. The Walmart and El Paso Texas 23 Mexican people were murdered by white supremacists a few years ago. These these people are called lone wolves. And every time one of them gets taken out by law enforcement or gets arrested and their property gets searched, law enforcement always finds a cash of automatic weapons that are being stockpiled for a Raha, or the buggaloo. Because they're looking to have this, this redo of the Civil War to preserve their lifestyle. And so 2042 is going to be a pivotal year. And we're only what 16, 17 years away from that right now. So that's why they walked on the street chanting. They will not replace us. That's what that's all about. Yep. Yeah. This is white replacement theory, right? Which is bogus? Nobody's trying to replace anybody. Just you guys aren't fucking enough. It's so simple. You're already the majority. You need to do your work. It is just not my sister, right? Right. It's just such a disturbing aspect of society that you would think there's going to come a point in time where there's enough education, enough understanding, and especially with the access to information we have at the internet. And this would all go away. But it doesn't seem like that's helping because it seems like the more access to information, the more people settle into these echo chambers. That and also a lot of the old guard realize, you know, this is happening. And if we want to preserve our culture, our whatever, we need to pass this on to young people. We need to get more young people involved. Right. And they begin recruiting young people to disseminate this information and, and, and, you know, galvanize, you know, more of their peers into, into this ideology. And back to, you know, the recruitment of military and law enforcement, because they know this is going to happen and they want, they're going to want those people on board. Do you, do you, to be on that side? And, you know, I mean, you can probably talk about military and law enforcement inside your organization. I can talk about it in the plan or, you know, whatever. Yeah. As far as like the military was concerned, we were actively trying to recruit military. So early on in the organization, it was like 10%, maybe of the members. But it's how my left it was about 50%. How did you do that? Well, we, we, on their applications, you know, we were asking what branch they were in, what rank they achieved because we were looking at all that for potential leadership. So anybody that had military experience, especially in the higher ranks, those, those people would be naturally looked at for leadership positions in the party because they had those. Right. But how do they try to recruit military people? So using the same tactics as everybody else, but the, uh, as far as the organization specifically having that military structure, like we discussed earlier, having that structure gave them so somebody that was coming out of the military that was retired or something like that, it would provide that structure that they were missing. So a lot of times for people that are involved in this stuff, it's like, it's fulfilling a psychological need. It's being part of a mission that's having that, uh, something that's driving them and driving their for driving, a driving force that's behind their, uh, ideology. So finding a place to fit in, having, having a mission, a sense of purpose. Um, I think it's a lot of things that a lot of times you will miss that aspect of it. And I explain it not to excuse it because there is no excuse for it. These are choices that people make. But if you understand the psychology of it, like why someone's involved in it, uh, that's helpful to help pull them out. And, um, also when someone's coming out of these organizations to have a new mission, have something else. So for a lot of people that might be learning play guitar or, uh, doing an extreme sport or getting involved with the church or just, it could be anything. But it has, there has to be something because if they're missing that, that's when they really struggle. That's, that's one thing I've seen a lot of. So what, what is the protocol? Like how do you handle? Like say, if someone is leaving and they contact you and say, I know you left, I want to leave to what, what are the steps you take to make sure that they do find some sort of a new purpose? A lot of times just kind of asking them questions, you know, asking a lot of questions and seeing what they're interested in and finding those things, trying to help them find that sense of purpose and that, um, because, uh, that's missing. So I've had a lot of people say like, um, when they've left, they're like, I don't have that. I don't have that. So we, a lot of times we'll talk through that. Well, what interests you? What do you, what do you interest in? And a lot of times we try to keep them kind of steer clear politics. But for some people, it might be okay. But typically that's, that's kind of a probably a one they should stay away from. So politics, because there's, they have this desire to help fix society. So I think they're going to get involved. I'm not an outsee anymore. So I'll get involved in fixing it in more legitimate way. Yeah. And one of the problems Joe is this, when these people leave the movement, there is a moniker that's tagged on them and a stigma that follows. Okay. You know, when you see their name in the media is never, uh, you know, Jeff scoop blah, blah, blah, it's always former neo-Nazi Jeff scoop and say no more rock musician. Smacky ideas. So let's not talk about that. So that's, that's did my kind of follows, you know, as hard for them to break, right. You know, where, where by most people, you know, when they screw up or whatever, you know, it's forgiven. Like say, you know, you and I are friends. I call you and say, hey, Joe, man, you're not going to believe this last week. And I got, I got, uh, thrown in jail for, for, for D, D, D, D, W, I, you know, you'd be like, well, man, you know, you need quit drinking and driving. You know, why don't you call me? I would come pick you up. You don't have to drive home, whatever. Um, and, and you and I would still be friends. But, but if I call you and say, hey, man, you know, I got arrested for, for murder, for rape, but like why you call me, you know, right, right, right. This is in so even though these people might have been friends with somebody who later became a white supremacist or whatever, uh, the stigma of it, even now that they're out, right. You know, they still are a little leery and want to stay clear because you're judged by the company you keep. So it's always, you know, ex con, you know, blah, blah, blah, you know, it's the same someone so is working here. Yeah. I mean, there's very few people that even want to believe that someone's capable of right exactly the tiger strikes at the left. They would always think like this guy's got to be fucked up. He was a Nazi. Yeah. And it's, it's crazy because I had a reporter one time and I won't say who or anything like that. But he had said, you know, I visit a murderer in prison and I'm okay with that. But I'm not so sure about like your journey. Like, I mean, like he basically what he was saying in so many words was he was more comfortable with the murderer than somebody. And this is a, this is a reporter, you know, somebody a journalist and they were more uncomfortable speaking with a former neo-Nazi. That's fascinating. Mm hmm. Yeah. Were they Jewish? No. No. No. Definitely liberal. Yes. Yes. Yes. I think the stigma of it is just so unforgivable, you know, which is part of the problem. But then why, why if you're not going to forgive that person or that ideology, right? Then why do you want to fight it? Why do you want to combat it? Why not just accept it? Because it's not going to change or at least you're not going to change your attitude towards you. Right. You have to help in if you want these people to leave and reintegrate into society, you have to forgive this. Exactly. I mean, you know, prison is a is a penal institution, not a reform institution, which is why this country has the highest recidivism rate of any country in the world, right? People, you know, to run there and they don't get reformed and they learn from that are people than they were at their crime and they go back out and they do it again. And people don't accept them because they had that stigma that follows them. Well, I can't hire an excon, you know, blah, blah, blah, whatever. Where do they go? Right. You said it's an interesting side note on that. You know, we talk about like some of the hate that I had and I was a raging anti-sister. I said more than a racist by it at all, by all points. And irony today working with the Simon Wiesenthal Center. I mean, there's just so much irony there. And like the Jewish community was the community that I dehumanized and villainized the most. And Joe, they have been the most accepting and welcoming as far as since the change has happened. And that just blew my mind because I had the first time I went to speak at a synagogue, I thought, man, these people are going to want to stone me to death. You know, like I, what should I say? How am I going to, you know, how, what is this going to be like? I never been in a synagogue before and this to place in Skokie, Illinois. And I tell you after after speaking there, I got more hugs and more love and compassion than I'd probably any other place I could ever remember being. That's really interesting. So did they try to understand like why you at one point in time hated Jews? Did they ask you questions? Like what did you think? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, well, they have something called Tashuva, which means like forgiveness or repentance. And and Tikwen Olum means to heal the world. So these were things that were counterintuitive and contrary to everything that I thought I knew about that. Now, Jeff is speaking Hebrew, you understand. Right. Yeah. So, but it was it was really bizarre. It was like when I speak with kids at schools, you know, I said, you know, you guys remember an elementary school and you had opposite day and your shirts backwards and all that kind of stuff, I said, that was my life. Like everything that I thought that I knew about the Jews and the movement, I was an expert on the Jews, the Jewish question, you know, and here. Did you have any experience with Jewish people? No. No. So this was all just based on Nazi ideology. Huh. So you'd know negative or positive interactions with Jewish people? No, very, towards the end of my time when I was involved, you know, I had a few interactions with Jewish people, but that I knew of, but before that, no, absolutely not. Just wouldn't discuss anything with them, wouldn't talk to them and just felt like they were inherently evil. Swallowed the whole anti-Semitic pill, I guess you could say. I mean, I believe all of it. And they were the people that I dehumanized the most. And yet today, they are the people that have been the most open. And you know, for the longest time, you know, Jews have been blamed for everything, things, you know, they had nothing to do with. They say, you know, the Jews run the media, they own the media, they run the banking systems and all that kind of stuff. And so people begin believing in that and they become, you know, persona non-grata. Even though they may not even know any Jewish people. And that's why I say, you know, when I feel like entrust some individual who trusts me or whatever around my friends, I will invite them over or whatever. And I bring in some Jewish friends of mine and other black friends of white friends so that they can see something outside the echo chamber. Another former neo-Nazis is a very good friend of mine. I was telling me that was when he was in funny sense. I was born on a four-haired neo-Nazis. He was a very good friend of mine. A Freudian slip. No, it's accurate. Exactly. So anyway, he was telling me when he was in the movement, he's from Wisconsin. And you know, their football team is a Green Bay Packers and they're just, you know, crazy about their football team. And so he would tell me, you know, they're not allowed to watch football games because there's interracial, you know, black and white members on the teams playing together. So that's forbidden. And so he'd have to sneak around and watch, turn the volume down and watch the gang because he loved the Packers, right? And when the Packers would score a goal, he'd do like this. Right. And so then he tells me that, you know, when he got out and other people were, you know, were getting out, turns out they were doing the same thing. You know, what's the game crazy? He has a great story. Tell me about the guys in camera room. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So I had met some embassy people from the country of Cameroon in Africa and they'd come out to one of my talks. And afterwards, you know, they said, you know, it was really fascinating and America is really far behind on race relations. You know, when we first got here, we didn't realize we were black. And I was like, what are you guys talking about? I said, we got to talk. I got to understand this. What do you mean you didn't realize you were black? And he's like, well, of course we realized we're black, but you see in the United States, you know, or where we're from in Cameroon, we're Cameroonian. You know, that's who we are. Like, you know, we know we're black, but it goes, you know, in the United States, it's different. You're black, American, white American, you know, yeah. And he says, we're true to differently in the United States, even by other black people, you know, we're true to differently. So he says, now we know we're black. I took a minute to wrap my mind around that one. Well, it makes sense. They think of themselves as Cameroonian. Yeah, as they should. Yeah, as they should. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Yeah, that's what's crazy. We need experience racism from other black people. You're like, whoa, right? Well, now hold on. We're discrimination. Well, when you when you experience it from anybody, right? But, uh, understand something. Okay. So, you know, we have a unique thing here, uh, called slavery. And, and Jewish people have a unique thing called the Holocaust. So if you're a white guy and you're walking down, down the street, uh, sidewalk, and some of the white guys coming up the sidewalk, you don't know him. Just a stranger, you know, um, you guys are going to pass and not say a thing to either one, you know, just, just go on by. Right. If it's a black guy, um, two black guys passing, they don't know if you're going to, your man was up. They're going to acknowledge one another because they have a shared experience. They both are descendants of slaves. They both have experienced racism at some point in their life or whatever. If, if two Jews pass, who don't know each other, they know those shallow. Mm-hmm. Because of that commonality that experience. So unless you've had that experience, you don't, um, you don't react to it. All right. So when I lived in Africa on the continent of Africa for 10 years, other than Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea and Senegal and visited many other countries in between, because my dad's job. Right. So I can tell you, you know, all black people don't look alike. All black people don't know each other. All right. And that's funny thing to say too, but you know what? A lot of white people think that that they do a lot. Yeah. That's what your older older ones. Yeah. Now at one time in a city, all black people probably did know each other. Okay. Because they had to go to the same school and there's only one black school in the town. Right. They couldn't do different white schools. Okay. So yeah, you know, you, they can only shop in a certain store. They couldn't shop in every store or restaurant. So yeah, they would run into each other more often. But today, you know, no, but the stigma is still there. Okay. The sentiment, especially with older people. So anyway, um, if I'm walking down the street and I've had this happen, um, and some black guy from Africa is coming up the street. I go, hey man, what's up? You know, I don't know the guy. It looks like coming strange, like, I don't know your way talking to me. Because he doesn't have that experience. Right. Right. So we're not, you know, we're not, we're not monolithic. Right. Yeah. Well, that this is the only way these movements like the neo-Nazis work is if you don't know a lot of people from all over the world and realize the real just people. Yeah. This is, you know, it's, and it is very fear based, right? Yeah. Because I mean, think about it. You're clinging to the lowest common denominator. You all have a certain amount of melanin in your skin and you're all from a certain part of the world. That's it. And it's really not a very good commonality. A terrible bond is terrible. Yeah. Especially when you think about the differences in personalities and tastes and just how people behave. And it's not a good indicator at all. It's the dumbest. It really, it really is. But now there's no bearing on your character, no bearing on your intellect, no bearing on any of the things that we find fascinating and attractive about people. It's just the color of your skin, which is the dumbest fucking thing on earth. Absolutely. And, you know, and we all may engage in it somewhat. Like for example, if I like Chinese food and if I go to a Chinese restaurant, I don't want to see a bunch of white college kids or black college kids for that matter in the kitchen. You're cooking it for me. Right. You know, I want the authentic real deal. Right. You know, so am I being prejudiced? No. That's not prejudice. That you want to experience the culture. The culture. Yeah, like if I go to an Italian restaurant, I'm assuming there's going to be a bunch of old school Italian people back there cooking. You know, I want, I want heavy accents. You know, I want the smell of garlic in the air. You know what I'm saying? Do you know where Italians came from? Originally? Yeah. I mean, I'm assuming Italy. Whoa. I'll do they miss. I mean, what are you trying to say? Well, I'm going to tell you. Okay. Okay. So Italians came from Africa. They came from the moors. Oh, yes. Well, Sicily in particular, that's actually where my family's from. Okay. There you go. Okay. And they're darker in Sicily. Right. Then in Rome and Venice and where we're going. Right. Go right. The further you move from the equator, the darker the skin. Right. Okay. Yeah. The moors came. No. And into there. We all evolve from Africa at some point in time. Way back when. Right. But you know, a lot of people don't realize that. And they really need to check their DNA and check their history rather than just take it from where they started, where they were born. Mm-hmm. You know, that's why I think it's so important to not ban books and ban and rewrite history. Of course. Yeah. Of course. You know, there is some indication that human beings might have come out of Asia as well. In fact, one of the oldest known, uh, human skeletons that they found, which predates. Lucy. No, it's another one. That Lucy is out of Ethiopia. Right. But Lucy wasn't a homo sapien. They found something that is a homo sapien that's 500,000 years older than when they thought homo sapiens existed. This is very recent. And so it was likely that this was taking place in multiple areas of the world. Just like there's different animals in multiple places of the world. There's different primates in multiple places of the world. And there's a bunch of different kinds of human beings, of course. Right. There's Denisovans, which have just recently discovered and then there was the, the Hobbit people in the island of Flores. Like there's a lot of when it comes to the evolutionary history of human beings is very, very odd. But when you talk about like the cultural history of human beings, that's when things get really crazy. Because it was just a lot of people like traveling all over the place and just settling into the climate. And the reason why white people are white is just because there is no sun. It's that simple. And they had to develop essentially like a giant solar panel to suck up vitamin D because they weren't getting any vitamin D from the sun. It's really that simple. And that's when it gets real weird. Which has nothing to do with their intelligence. Nothing to do with their zero. Zero. You know, it's all environmental and over the course of hundreds of thousands of years, people change their appearance. And you know, when you tell people that, they're like, wait, what? We all came from the same source. It destroys. That's why we could all have babies. You know, like other animals that are very different. Like there's certain fish that can have babies with other fish, but those, those fish become infertile, you know, and then like the same with like donkeys. They don't, they can have babies. You know, like it's a, where our mules rather can have babies because it's a cross between a donkey and a horse. And you can do it, but then it can't make babies or a liger can't make babies. Right. Right. People can make babies with people. Obviously because we're the same fuck at that. Any, any, any, uh, uh, uh, culture of people. Yes. Yes. Any culture of people can have babies with other cultures of people because we all come from the same source. Kind of wipes out the whole racism argument. It's just stupid. You're going to think it's adaptive to environment. You're doing a my DNA history nay or 99.9% the same. Yep. Yeah. And that should be taught in elementary school. Yeah. Always to teach it in college when people's lives are already solidified. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. I think that thing too, that exposure that you had to that Nazi coming to visit you, even though it's negative exposure, it's probably good to see. you know, like when I was a kid, I was in high school and I was 14 Barney Frank, who we had. Yeah. Yeah. He, I wasn't openly gay then, but he was like one of the first openly gay members of Congress. He lived near me. He lived near me as well. I lived in Massachusetts at the time and he was from Massachusetts or was representative of Massachusetts. When he lived in DC as a congressman. Okay. So this was before that, I guess then. So he was debating a member of what at the time was the, I believe was the moral majority and it was this really goofy guy who came out and he had like American flag on his lapel and I remember I was 14. And you know, when you're 14 and you see someone who's got this very, like he was very anti gay marriage, very anti a lot of things. But he was a clumsy. Teen, and you see someone who's got this very, like he was very anti-gay marriage, very anti a lot of things. But he was a clumsy, uh, uh, it wasn't very eloquent, not a very compelling speaker. And then Barney Frank went up, you know, so they both spoke, spoke, this guy spoke, and then Barney Frank. And Barney Frank was so much smoother, so much more articulate. It was like, and for every, all the kids that I was in school with who left, they're like, that guy made more sense. Like, this is a good thing to say. It's good that they see someone with a very narrow-minded, bigoted perspective. And then someone who's more intelligent, more, has a much better vocabulary, smoother in their ability to disseminate information and to dissect the bad arguments of the other person. So we all walked out of there, were like, okay, and then, you know, I remember talking about with my friends, like, yeah, like, as a fucking moron, like, first guy. And, but nowadays, instead of that, you would only get one, you would only get the one person talking. But the one person talking without the other person talking is not as good. And this idea of protecting kids from bad ideas, because they don't want these kids to be indoctrinated by bad ideas, it doesn't work with human beings. The way to get rid of bad ideas is to confront them with better ideas. And the fear of having these kind of debates in schools is really dangerous. It's dangerous for discourse, it's dangerous for the development of the ability to have arguments and ideas and to be able to debate. You have to see it done. You have to see bad thinking, good thinking. Oh, I get it. I get it. This guy's, he's more clever, he's thinking better, he's got more information. This makes sense. And if you don't allow people to make those distinctions on their own, if you just baby them, and treat them like you can't expose them to these negative ideas, you miss out on the possibility of accepting nuance and an understanding of how a less sophisticated, less educated person can fall into these traps of these stupid ideologies. You just nailed it right on the head, man, allowing them to see the difference. Because people, how did you change those people, Darryl? No, I didn't change them. They changed themselves because we all know once perception is one's reality. But everybody perceives becomes their reality, even if it's not real, it's their reality. Right. You cannot change their reality. And if you try, you're going to get resistance. Right. Because they only know what they know. If you keep trying, it's going to escalate. You're going to get loud and keep on trying. It's going to explode. You're going to be rolling around the ground hitting each other or whatever. Right. Because all fights start with yelling and screaming. So rather than try to attack somebody's reality and try to set their reality straight, don't do that in your fail. What you do is you offer them a better perception or perceptions. And if they resonate with one of your perceptions, like showing them, this guy speaks very eloquently, that guy speaks like a moron. Right. Just let them see it. That perception then resonates with them and they change their own reality. So don't focus on how you're going to change somebody's reality. Focus on what kind of perceptions can I offer that person that might resonate. Right. Right. And just by example, but who by who you are. Because when people see someone speak and it resonates with them and see someone speak and they, that you can sense how they think of things. You can see the thought process and you go, well, who do I admire more? I admire this guy. He's like, he's thinking like, this is a enlightened person. This is a person who's thinking in a way that I want to be able to think like that, especially as a young kid. You know, you don't want to be a moron. When you see someone, you think it's a moron, like, okay, I'm glad I saw that guy because that guy looks like a an idiot. Now this guy, oh, that guy makes more sense. You know, when when Jeff and I were in that Christmas grill, and he thought he was getting along too well with the enemy being me. And he started beating his fist on the table and that's shown in the documentary. He was trying to get a rise out of me because I wasn't behaving the way he was expecting me to be hate. Right. And so when he went into Nazi mode, I remained the same way. Right. And that freaked him out. Oh, yeah. Yes. Yeah. Oh, yeah. How did it? How did it feel like to you? Well, normally when you escalate, and we call this relational dialogue and we do talks about this as well. But also, is it strategy? It's a strategy. Yeah. So when when I tried to escalate, normally almost 99.9% of the time when you escalate the other person escalates, Daryl didn't escalate. So I'm doing that. And he just goes, hmm. And then just continues the conversation like like, I never even read my voice. So I'm like, you start yelling at somebody, start yelling back and right. Right. Right. Right. Right. So I'm blown away by this. I'm like, why is this guy not reacting? What's going on here? And so now I'm really dialed in because I'm trying to figure him out. And that's when it was soon after that that you explained the story about how the cub scouts and how racism affected him growing up. And then all of a sudden, I'm thinking about what if somebody would have done that to one of my kids? Right. And I saw Daryl's humanity in that moment. So that's how he cracked that window open. Jeff just made a very point that I see a lot of times, okay? Because when things escalate, okay, when you come in to meet your adversary, you know, this person has a difference, you point than you do. And you're not going to let them try to change your viewpoint. You're going to be steeled into what you believe. Right. So your ears are going to be blocking out anything that does not agree with your philosophy. Right. Right. So in order to, you know, if you start escalating stuff that that that that block out becomes even greater. All right. So you want that person's wall to come down. And by not reacting, that person becomes curious. He's like, one of y'all, where's this guy coming? What's up with him? You know, he's not reacting the way most black people would react when I say whatever. So as the wall comes down, the curiosity on his end rises. And so now his ears are unblocked and he's ready to hear what I have to say. But I know if I'm escalating and telling him my story while I'm escalating about getting them thrown rocks, you probably said, oh, it wasn't me that did it. You know, so what's the deal? Well, that's almost all conversations you have with people when you disagree. If you elevate your language and start yelling and they start yelling, right, nobody figures out anything. Right. No, nobody's ever won an argument. It's just a lot of fuck you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Not a fuck you went on. You don't get taught that in school. That's unfortunate as well. You don't get taught like how to control your emotions. And too many people, like when people say to someone, hey, shut the fuck up, like you think that person's going to listen, like most of the time now, like if you're arguing about something and you do it, like it's almost always a bad idea. You know, it just becomes a thing that people say, you know, like someone says fuck you to somebody and then they're, it's not like the person goes, oh, Jesus fuck me. No, they go fuck you back. Fuck you. And then then nothing gets done. You know, and this, this is when you're having, especially it's something so heavily charged like a racial discussion, like it's as a human being, it's so important to think of how the other person is viewing your words, like how, what, what are they accepting? What do they see in you? And if you turn yourself into an enemy and turn them into an enemy, nothing gets done. So, you know, the police show misery loves company. Yeah. Negative he does promote negativity. Right? Yes. Positiveity promotes positivity. So, quick example, you know, you're driving down the highway, you know, speed limits 55 miles an hour, you're doing 75 miles an hour. Right. And you're getting ready to go over this hill and the oncoming traffic, you know, some guy comes over the hill before you crest it and the person is flashing the lights. You don't know, you don't know who's in that car, but they're flashing the lights. Uh huh. So that means usually there's a cop on the other side working radar, right? It could be construction or an accident, something you need to slow down. Right? So, you hit your brakes before you go over the hill. And as soon as you crest the hill, oh, there's a cop at the radar gun. Man, you know, you, you're going to have $150 ticket, right? Ru in your day. Right. And that's stranger, total stranger who you don't know what color he was, what religion he is who we voted for, who his daddy was, whatever. That person saved you from getting that ticket. Right. So as you slowly cruise by the cop, he doesn't pull you over or whatever. Um, you know, you're going to start flashing your lights at the oncoming traffic to save them. Right. But let's say, you know, you're coming up the hill and people are coming over the hill and nobody's flashing lights and you go over that hill. Right. But there he is pulling you over, you know, license registration, remaining your car be with you in a moment, comes back, gives you that $150 ticket until you have a nice day. Um, you're, you know, you're ruined. You lost 150 bucks. Um, your, your, your, your insurance goes up because you got points on your license now. You know, all kinds of crap. Your, your day is ruined. So now as you continue down the street, you don't flash your lights either. That's their problem. So, you know, misery loves company, negativity promotes negativity, a random act of kindness from a stranger. All right. Well, you know, the, the guy could have been having a bad day and you flashed your lights and you saved him $150. Now he's having a better day. He's my flashes lights. That's a good analogy. Yeah. And, and more humans need to not worry about somebody's skin color who's in the car, who they voted for, just do acts of kindness. Don't stop dehumanizing people. You know, the guy in the car is just as human as you are. And you don't even know who you voted for it. But he flashes lights are you and saved you some money. Yeah. Um, do you, are you hopeful with all the work that you've done and all the people that you've removed from the Nazi party and the Ku Klux Klan and, and seeing how your message resonates with people. And like, I know every time I have you on, I get all these messages from people who go, wow, that guy's amazing. Like what an incredible journey. And it's like, I know it resonates with a lot of people. But there's still so much fucking hatred in the world. Do you feel hopeful? Do you think, think things are moving in a generally good direction? I do, Joe. I do. And I'll tell you what, I, I think right now we are in the best time. I mean, it may seem like things are very divisive right now. And they are. Okay, politically, racially, whatever else, a lot of wars going on, religious wars and racism, anti-Semitism, riots and that and all kinds of stuff. But yes, we are in the best time right now because people, they don't want to be in this time. I don't know if I can have kids and raise them in this environment. You know, that kind of thing. No, listen, we're in the best time because people are of the mindset, well, racism is over. You know, we had a black president. There's no more racism is in us. No, there's still plenty of racism. All right, before you could turn a blind eye to it, if I don't see it, I don't hear it, then it doesn't exist. But now every time you turn your head, it's there, it's there, it's there. So you can't escape it. Now is the best time to address it. All right, when it's in your face. You go on vacation, you know, you're going to drive your car to three states away and you get 10 miles down the road and you're car's making some weird noise. Well, you don't want to get out of state and have your car break down. So you turn around, go back to your mechanic. So hey, man, you know, hop in right around the block with me, figure out this noise. He gets in rides around with you. The noise stopped. He tells you, well, I don't hear it. I can't fix what I don't hear. Right. But if he hears it, oh, yeah, you know, that's that's one of your spark blows to lose to something. Whatever. Today, we cannot turn a blind eye is everywhere. So now is the best time to fix it, address it. So I see it because of social media. Yeah, absolutely. And I tell people, you know, people say, well, you know, Jeff or Daryl or whoever, you know, you guys are on the front line. You know, I, I mean, I, I want to help, but I don't know that I can sit down and talk to somebody who hates me. You know, I, I probably go off on them or I'd be afraid or, you know, whatever that they don't want to be on the front line. Right. That's fine. Don't be on the front line. You can be on the back line. You can be on the sideline. You can be online. All right. Pick a line that you feel comfortable on and get on it. And no one line is any more important than any other line. And what I mean by that is this, you can probably tell me your favorite movie. You can probably tell me how many Oscars at one. You can tell me who the lead actress and lead actor were. All right. But those are the people on the front line that lead actress and after you know who they are. Right. But do you know who was the guy or guys operating the camera? Probably not. You don't know their names. Even though they're listed at the end of the movie because the credits were on offer 10 minutes. Right. Those are the people working on the back line. The person hanging in the lights. You know his name. No. How about the makeup artist? No. The person, you know who got the wardrobe together. Those are people working on the sideline who put the trailer on the on the on the TV that you know the commercial to promote the movie or on the internet. Those are people working online to promote that movie. Every one of those lines was important to that movie getting that many Oscars and becoming your favorite movie. So no one line is any more important than in the other line. And so I tell people look, you don't have to be on the front line. Pick where you feel comfortable and let's all work together for the common goal. So someone's listening to this and say, okay, what Darryl saying really resonates with me. How do I get started? How do I contribute? What would you suggest? Email Jeff's group at Beyond Barrier's Email Darryl Davis at Darryl Davis dot com or I co-founded an organization called the Pro Human Foundation. And you mentioned anti-racist. You know people always anti this anti anti that. Right. You know I hear so much of that. I say, you know what? People keep talking about what they're against. Why don't we talk about what we're for? That's more positive. I am not anti racist. All right. Now what does that mean? Because you know anti racist? What does that mean? I, you know, if you use it in terms of a noun, the racist being a noun, I'm not anti the person. I am anti the person's ideology. I'm not anti racist. I'm anti anti racism. I'm anti the ism. I am pro human. So I want to talk about what I'm for. It's all, oh yeah, that makes sense. So contact the Pro Human Foundation dot org. Contact Beyond Barriers and parents for a piece of what we're trying to I'm part of as well. You know, and we'll talk about how you can get involved in being pro and dispel, you know, don't be against the person, be against the message. You know, if you want to disagree with something. I think it's beautiful in this. Thank you. Thank you, Joe. Thank you for everything you do. I mean, you're really extraordinary. And the line you're on is the online. So thank you, my friend. My pleasure. My pleasure. And Jeff, thank you for, you know, first of all, just spreading this message and having the courage to accept these bad decisions that you've made and how you got trapped. And just to let people know how a person like yourself who does seem like such a nice and intelligent guy could get sucked into such an awful ideology. And I think that that's going to help a lot of people really do. Thanks so much for having us. It's been an incredible honor to be my pleasure. All right. So your book, American Nazis available now and Daryl, your book, clan whisper also available. I use one of your quotes there. Thank you. Did you do the audio for this? Did you do an audio version of it? Like Jeff is a working progress. All right. Thank you for that. You appreciate it. Bye.