The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast my night. All day. Thank you very much for doing this. Really appreciate it. Thank you. This lovely to meet you. And I really, really appreciate your life's work. I mean, I think what you've done has been really remarkable, particularly because of the time period in which you embarked in it. I mean, you sort of got involved in psychedelics and psychedelic research at the very beginning of it and when it was extremely controversial and very difficult to do research. Well, I actually got involved in it when it was incredible from. And I was incredibly lucky with my timing, I think, because I was very attracted to the other side, if you like, the mystical. Because I lived in this very, very isolated spot. And one had nothing to do, but it kind of moved around a beautiful place. Have mystical experiences, dream of the future. Is that your fault? There we go. When did you first get involved or even interested in what you would call mystical experiences? Oh, it's just a really serious voice. I don't know how to tell you things off. Don't let me turn on you for you. Please. These wacky kids today and their devices. Sorry about that. No worries. No worries at all. So how old were you when you first got interested in? Very young, I should say. I had a kind of, I grew up in this very isolated place. I was very, very close to my father who came back from the war at the albetic. And she was a very eccentric person. And so from three, I was his carer. So I was like, yeah, which was an ugly role. I mean, I was a little pet dog. I went everywhere with this. I adored him and he adored me. He was a very out of the, he wasn't in normal society at all. How so? It just wasn't. He was an eccentric and charming, did he do something? Artist, a farmer, not really a farmer. He couldn't bear really farming. Yeah, anyway. And I suppose spiritually I had three, my mother was a Catholic. So I grew up a Catholic. And then he was whatever, agnostic is, yes, nothing, except a thinker. And then his best friend was his kind of, he picked up as the person who did all his work when he was at university called Bertie, became a Buddhist monk, rather famous, a Buddhist monk. But so he was a big influence in the absence because he was my godfather. And I said, I had these three influences. So I kind of dreamt of doing magic, mystical things in the world. And had mystical experiences as lots of children do. And so then I, I'm sorry, I can't quite think how to condense it. But anyway, I grew up in an unusual setting. And with the passion for all the states, mystics, I started studying them in November, probably about 10. Really. Yeah. And it became rather a passion in the place we lived with. It got three notes. And it was a very overgrown. And in between the notes, I was a mound, very beautiful mound. Well, I had a kind of pet god who lived in the mound. I could see her. And my kind of mission was making this god figure laugh. Said that was the end of the game. So when you say you studied the mystical states at 10, like how so? How are you doing that? Well, when I started reading, I just thought it was really about it. But I didn't read. I didn't know what I meant by that. But when I went to church, Caltech Church, and my mother, and there was incense and all that sort of thing. And I had kind of mystical experiences with Jesus as very close to Jesus in those days. And then whatever. But it was kind of rather wild, quite a dangerous upbringing. We had to do the farming. It was quite a mixture between all the kind of beautiful setting, but quite a mixture with peasant life, of looking out for the animals and farm animals. Pigs, cows, sort of that sort of thing. And then one point I decided I wanted to leave home. I went to a boarding school, so it was a terrible mistake. And a common one. And actually I won the South in the last 16-1, the sounds prize is quite clever, but I hated it and lived outside the boundaries of the school. And then I wanted to book some Buddhism, because I would put my prize. And the numbers said, no, no, we can't give a book some Buddhism. And so I said, all right, I'll leave. Thanks very much. And educate myself, which is what I did. I left school in 16. Really. And it was because they wouldn't allow you to study Buddhism. Yeah. Yeah. The sort of I chose to study, and they wouldn't say thanks. In the original days of the church, the incense, what they would walk down the aisle with, that was cannabis. That was beautiful. Yeah. I mean, the one thing I left about that common, there was a, in the chapel, that they had even saw, and this Italian nam, with a voice of an angel. And it really with the incense, took one into a mystical space. Yeah. And that was very special. That was the high point of it. They used to use cannabis, and then the host. What did the host used to be? The host. I mean, obviously, originally, it was a psychedelic. Yes. Do we know what psychedelic was? I think different places, they're different ones, but kind of based on mushroom or gut, or there's sort of things. And then I'm rather keen on making sacred hosts. I'm, I'm recently involved in that, anyway, that's a different story. But I love to hear that story. You make sacred hosts? No, I don't, but I'm going to. You're going to. I mean, I want to actually, the story was very much shock, probably, Catholic conference. And I also, well, once I was in Paris, and we were walking by, not to come on a Sunday, and really high, went into the church. And lovely, you crucified. I hadn't heard all those wonderful songs. I loved those Latin, 16th century, with the contemporary chanting. And so I experienced having the host again. And it was so delicious. Spiritually, it was wonderful. And so I can absolutely see, originally, the host was a psychedelic experience. And it's with that music and the instance, it's a beautiful spiritual experience. Yeah. I'm sure that was probably the root of a lot of those religious ceremonies. I think so. Have you read John Marco, a Legros book, the sacred mushroom in the cross? No, it's an amazing book. It's an amazing book. Right. John Marco Legro was an amazing book. Oh, yes, I remember. Do you know anything? I remember his name. I don't think I ever read him. He was an ordained minister who was a religious scholar in an expert on language, and he was one of the the ciphers of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Right. So he worked with that for 14 years. They deciphered the Dead Sea Scrolls. Right. And then he wrote the sacred mushroom in the cross, which was his interpretation of what the Dead Sea Scrolls was really all about. Right. So he wrote the origins of Christianity. We're in the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms and fertility rituals. Yes. Yeah, I absolutely agree. I'm sure psychedelics were the root of all of those spiritual practices and part of them. Most likely. Yeah. So when you were first experiencing these things, like what year are we talking about when you first got excited about these things? Let me just think. Well, I first met cannabis when I was 16. Very enough. The first time I spoke to it, Ray Charles was playing. Oh, wow. And I felt this is paradise. Yeah. And I've met millions of people had Ray Charles and now first sounding of cannabis. But it was wonderful. It's amazing when it does to music. Yeah. Yeah. So I was 16, which was I was born in 43. So I know that was. Anyway, that's when I started smoking cannabis. And it was, they were Oxford at that point with a very interesting group of, they were older than the other students because they had been in Korea. So they were much better educated. And they were spunkers and introduced me to wonderful books like Against Nature and Lottromo. And well, rather wonderful material. And it was a very creative period. And at that point, as I left school by then, I had somehow got the world's leading expert. Like, I was a American one coming out of me. Anyway, on comparative religions, a mysticism, someone called Professor Zaina, who said all selves in Oxford and wrote a book called, Mysticism of the Sacred and Profane. And he became my tutor. So I went and saw him twice a week, which was a very kind of awkward meeting. So he realised very shy, and he was very shy, and it was in all selves. And he both had their cuddling the cats, kind of thing. And then, finally, I decided that the best way of thought was to bring my very, very handsome cousin, who was a student at Oxford, because he was gay. And that kind of... Wasn't everybody else. Yeah. Oh, very smart. And then he became very friendly and fun. Yeah. But anyway, he'd written this book, which I actually didn't agree with, which was saying, psychedelicism, sacred and profane. And he was a Catholic combat, actually. And he thought that he had had one experience with Mescaline, I think it was, and not liked it. And thought that they were a very different bracket to the experience that we had through an endogenous Mescaline experience. Which I don't actually think is necessary. I think they're the same experience, but obviously with different qualities. I've heard you say that you believe that what psychedelics do is make the mind more fertile for these experiences. Yes. Yes. That's exactly what I think. I think you're at that level where the ego control has dissolved to some degree. And so it's like fertile ground. And so if you've, whatever, pre-trained, or if you're ready for a mr. Grapesville and you're more likely to have it in that experience, in that state of mind. So the mind is actually restricting us in many ways through the ego from having these experiences. Yes. I think so. And what psychedelics do is release those boundaries. Yes. I think that due to the evolution of man, whom as appians, and taking the upright position, this is a theory I was introduced to in 1966. And actually I think a lot of the details are probably wrong, but in concept I think is true. Which is the ape standing upright. One thing people haven't taken into account is obviously there are hundreds of assets standing upright free or have listened to run faster. You see further all of that. But in our bright position, gravity is against the blood in the brain. It's in the brain that can influence the volume of blood in the cerebral spinal fluid. Which is water basically, which is made in the brain itself. So it has kind of squatters, right in the brain. So when you're in that great position, gravity is pulling the blood down. So I think probably with that position we lost a small proportion of our blood supply. I mean some animals if you tie them up right, a dog, if it's tied up so you can't get down. You will start how you can go mad. Because it hasn't got the valves to keep the blood up. And we've obviously got a certain amount but maybe we lost some blood at that upright position. And as a compensation for that loss, I think we developed an internal mechanism more than any other animal has. I'm done it. Which is to direct the blood where it most needs to go. Obviously all animals do that. They have the part to send the blood where it's most important to survive or whatever. And I think that through the use of the conditioned sound, the work, we learned to control that process more than any other animal. And over the millennia we kind of build up our power to do that. So I think that's the secret of why humans, you know, we're talking about talking about, talking about control of the whole game. Because of our creation of language which enables us to do these incredible things we do. Yes. But it also has a disadvantage that our basic state is slightly lower in blood in the dominant organ. So we have to keep this mechanism of tight control where the blood is distributed. And that is evolved with the ego. Which is essential. I mean, we wouldn't survive without the ego to kind of direct the blood where it's most needed. People who lose their ego. And in the 60s when people took large doses of LSD as it was then every day. Sometimes they lost their ego. They slipped out. And there was one occasion that someone who knew who was in Ibiza. And he'd flipped out and he put the key in the lock to open the door. Someone was a good night to him. He put the key in the lock and left him. And then in the morning he was still there with the key in the door. Because the head hadn't told him, turn the key to the door. And he said, wow, we need the words to keep us under control. So the words have made us what we are, this incredible animal who can have a nuclear war-free long-term know the atoms in the body. All those brilliant things we do. We're also obviously a very deeply faulted animal at some point. Where, you know, neurotic, psychotic, psychot, you know, all of those things. Because of this shortage of blood and then the dependant on the meaning of the work. So if we have a terrible conditioning, there's a lot of people do. Yes. The separation from reality is in the meaning of the word. So the danger of our society now in a sense is we're getting further and further away from nature. In a sense, and that in a way is why psychedelics can be a very useful medicine. Because they increase the connectivity with the senses, with the internal bodily senses and also the outside perceptual senses. So I actually think that we're entering a kind of new possible age. And that's why for far my call it the psychedelic age. Because for the first time we've got or get it the knowledge by which we can actually understand the brain better. And I understand how we can alter the volume of blood in the brain, which is giving the brain energy. The whole thing is about energy. The more energy we have, the more parts of the brain can function simultaneously. And that obviously can be very creative, stimulating, and passive by just having more of the brain. And so I think that the knowledge of psychedelics, and when I say psychedelics, I don't actually mean necessarily psychedelics. Because as we all know, one can get these experiences and doginously through exercise or holotropic breathing, or other topic breathing. So I mean all the spiritual training, all knew that, that's what they were doing in the spiritual disciplines. Is teaching people how to control their internal ego and also their sense of consciousness. And I think at the center of the spiritual experience is forgetting higher and loosening the grip of the ego. So you're more in touch with nature. Do you think that in the absence of these psychedelic experiences, one of the problems with words is that we develop narratives. And then we use our ego to reinforce these narratives and we sort of deny objective reality? Yes. I think more and more the word can become the reality. I mean in the creation of words which we all have and have to have it, I'm thankful to have. But nevertheless it does create a slightly different world. It's rather like the shadows and play to its fault. One gets one's internal addition of the world, rather than the real experience of the world. And so I think it's good to be contact with nature. And I think it's a dangerous path that we're taking now where it becomes more and more life-based, the screen. But still that's the way we're going. And it has great advantages as well as dangers, kind of thing. But I do think that the knowledge of getting high has always been central to the human evolution. And at the earliest demonstrations of what we've got or the earliest demonstrations of human culture, say the caves in survey, do you know that? Which I think they've never been better. I mean that art work, the brush to it is animals, their lives, you can see the movement. No one ever did it better. And it's like 30 something thousand years old. It's 35, 40 something round there. So I can tell some respects and artists. I know those strokes. What's the problem? Some of those images, Jamie, because some of those images are. There we go. Amazing stuff. They're just incredible. The movement and how they caught it. Yeah, they caught it. They did create a feeling of movement like the animals were running. And the lines. I mean anyone who paints, I mean Picasso, I think said, without them, he would have never done what he did. I can't remember quite. But my model art isn't better. It gets us good, but not really. It's crazy because they're depicting rhinos too. Really wild. That was rhinos in France. Beautiful ones of horses and buffaloes. And that's in the bowels of the earth they're doing. So it was obviously very spiritual because why go into the bowels of the earth? It's just a kind of magical spiritual experience they're having. And I say, I think without doubt, they were high. How they got there was it through singing, drumming, or singing, or was it through taking compounds. Funny enough, I've recently been introduced to men, charming man, who's archeologist in charge of the Chugbe. And I say, I'd love to be able to analyze this if we can find out. Is there any remnants or something? Right. psychodactors, and he said, I'm very welcome to go there. So I'm very excited about the possibility. Are you aware of Brian Murr rescue's work? Yes, I know. And you him years ago, he approached me at the UN. Oh, that's right. And he said he'd do a pro bono lawyer work for me. Really? But I never took it up. Maybe. Yeah. Have you been there if this was on the top of your head? How'd you do that? Seems like it's falling. Yeah, you go. There you go. Yeah. That's what I'm going to call down. Yeah, his work with determining that in illusis were using her gut and somewhat psychedelic. Now, I know the book, and I know him. The immortality. Yeah, yeah, yeah. The people that were. And also, I know from long ago, Carl Rook wrote the original book, do you know that one? No. The road to illusis? Yeah, I've heard of it. Yeah. It's a very good book with Albert Hoffman and the banker. What was his name, anyway? So they know that those people, at least back then, illusis, the industries that they were using psychedelics. And you know, it's obvious from art. What I think is that one can sense when the civilization was added source, the use of all these things of consciousness. I see the civilization rather like the cutting of the tree. You see the rings. Some years are drought and other air or some rain. And they are white and flourishing. Yes. In culture, I mean, that illusis. And then that chove. I mean, there must have been a high to produce that incredible art. And it's saying that illusis and all of that Greek, I mean, it's never taught at schools and things, both by some did classic did Oxford. None of them, it was never mentioned illusis. Do you know what I mean? Yeah. Amazing. That center, the whole classical world, is the mystical experience of death and rebirth. But Harvard's opened up a field of stuff about this. Yeah. It was quite interesting. I knew a student, 20 years ago, who wanted to do his PhD in illusis. And how would told him if you do that, you wouldn't get it. Yeah. That was a giant problem after 1970, correct? After the sweeping psychedelic back where they made everything schedule one, suicide, and masculine, everything. And when they did that, they not only did they ruin the possibility of having those experiences for so many people. Because it was forbidden, because it was very dangerous, you could get arrested. But also it stopped all the research. Yes, absolutely. But 50, it was 50, 60, 70 lost years, which is a criminal thing actually. And the untold old suffering of the millions of people who went to prison usually from minorities. Yes. And had their right life ruined by a record. For maybe having caught for a joint three times or a horrific, what happened? Well, there's people in jail right now for that in this country, which is insane. It's insane. And I started fighting them back whenever when I started the back of the bandage. I saw that in order to do research, one had to change the drug policies. And the two went hand in hand because doing the research would help change the drug policies. And in order to do the research, you had to change the policies. I mean, it was a bit of a catch-22, because in tell you done the research, you can't do it. If you see it in a week, they make it so difficult to do. I think what MAPS has done, which is genius, is their work with MDMA and soldiers, and soldiers having PTSD. Absolutely. Because the general, when you think of soldiers, you think of people in the military, you generally think of people who are right wing, who have more authoritarian leanings. But yeah, these are the people that would be aided the most by these psychedelics, particularly coming back from war. Absolutely. So because of that, I believe they've opened up a door to understanding. I think it's very, very important. And that's why in the 70s, because I was involved in it in the 60s mainly, and my passion to change the world started when I first really knew the value of psychedelics, which was probably in 65 onwards. And as the door of repression came down, I'm going to see it's a disaster for humanity. Yes. But I thought the only way we could overcome it is by using the language of the establishment to prove that these compounds can actually heal humanity, not be damaging for humanity as they were advertised at. But actually, there are how good to heal it and better happiness more fulfilled life. And so I thought that that's why I started doing the sounds to try to, with the language of the modern world, which is sounds, to demonstrate how valuable these compounds are. And I think our first, that's why I set up the Beckley Imperial study. And the first day we did was using psilocybin. these compounds are. And I think our first, that's why I set up the Beckley Imperial study. And the first day we did was using psilocybin. And then we saw that I wanted to do LSD, but we couldn't do LSD in those days. I'm happy to be psilocybin. And there's no one knows what psilocybin is, how it's spelled what it means. It's not suitable. So we got the mission. And I wanted to do brain imaging to look into a hypothesis. I said, what they do is increase the volume of blood in the brain capillaries. And hopefully with the MRI, I wouldn't see that. But anyway, what we did see in the first study we did with psilocybin was a decrease of blood in the D4 mode network, which is a modern expression of the ego, what part of the ego. And that was very interesting because the D4 mode network, I'd ego, is hyperactive, underlying psychological conditions like depression or anxiety or diction or all of those things have a hyperactive ego saying, I need to drink, I'm so depressed. And we saw that psilocybin lowers the blood supply to that part of the brain. And so then actually we got a government grant to help us do the next phase of the study. So I think it's very important showing how because every all-know-where in the epidemic of mental illness now is getting ever more. And rather surprisingly and away rather ironically, science which has been so determined to prove that the spiritual is an old man in the sky. So just total rubbish which he finally has done. Now at the very centre of the new healing, I psychedelic assisted therapy is the mystical experience. And what we showed is the people who underwent what can category it as a mystical experience. I lose the ego of feeling of unity. Those are the ones who have the best outcomes of overcoming their depression. So it's a rather beautiful little a runny-called twist that now suddenly the psychedelics are at the centre of this new approach to healing. And I think the healing of psychedelics goes much, much farther than what we've touched on so far, which is the psychologically based conditions. I think it can be very very useful in different doses because what is so wonderful about psychedelics is have different totally of defects and the different dose. And at the mini micro dose, I am beginning to have evidence and I'm just starting a study which shows amazing potential results of microdose for Alzheimer's. Really. Yeah. Interesting. Amazing. For Markable. Really. Yeah. And I was watching a video yesterday on cannabis and Parkinson's. It was incredible. Yeah. There was a gentleman who had horrible loss of control of his body and the shaking and they gave him cannabis oil and he put it under his tongue and a few minutes later he's lying back on the couch and then he holds his hands out and his hands are dead straight. I might want to explore it. And my partner is the father of my children. He got Parkinson's. So I was very well involved with him. Mowled Parkinson's but still it was Parkinson's. I'm so I had heard how and I studied it. My credosing it became is very good for my minimizing. So I'm wanting to do a mistake of a research into that. Very interesting. I think this is the gentleman right here. This is exactly the video that I saw. This guy has terrible loss of control of his body. He could barely hold the cannabis oil in his mouth. I mean, he's struggling so bad. But now it says 1.37 pm. This is when he takes it and then you see just a few minutes later they show him lie back and this is go ahead Jamie. That's 1.41. Look at this. I mean not even 10 minutes. Look at this. And he's fine. He sits up and he's just blown away by. He's like it's so quickly. And look at his hands. Incredible. I have a friend who has a child that has a pretty severe autism. And when he gives the kid cannabis, when he gives him edible cannabis, it just stops it. It stops at the beginning. Absolutely. Make eye contact. Absolutely. Well I could show you the trouble is I can't show you privately but not the person involved doesn't want it to go out of a one-flow lady of 97 who had Alzheimer's for seven years or something. But she was very bright. She was a pirate and a boyfriend and was looked after by her son. And then he went away for a week and someone else came and looked off. And when he came back, she was kind of acute, rigid, vegetative, apathy. We didn't recognize him. So staring into space. And they discussed it before and she'd said, yeah, she knew he sometimes took a psychedelic and so he gave a microdose of LSD. And a narrator, like what the word, she's a little sparkling out lady with a full contact with him saying, I feel so wonderful. Let's read some poetry now. Wow. You know, just like that man. Yeah. And then he contacted me and said, what, what should he do? So I said, well, first thing would be to get a doctor to help you manage it. And then continue with the lower dose that gets out of effect, which was 10 micro, which is 10 million of gram. I mean, such a small dose. You would hardly think you could have a new effect. And that does something which I'm doing research on now to say, I think it's to do with the connectivity between the different brain centers, which I think it sparks. And it brought her back. And her children, they were just remarkable. It's incredible. You know, and I've noticed the same things I'm very handsome. I've, in the middle of getting going on an autism study, because I think first certainly with level one, the lower degrees of autism, microdosing LSD can be enormously beneficial. And I've got a friend who had experience of that and wrote a very good book about it, actually, called Autism and LSP. And so now I'm designing a study, getting his advice on the autism level of things. And I think that what I think is what I'm fascinated in, and this is where I got this interest right back in 1966, are what are the mechanisms underlying that makes LSD and associated compounds have the effect it has. And obviously then there was no brain imaging. So it was very difficult to see inside the brain. One could only theorize about it, how it might make hypothesis. And I said this Dutch scientist who I had a long relationship with had this hypothesis that it constricts. It's a vasoconstrictor constricting the veins. The blood comes into the couple of years, can't get out. The couple of years blow up and squeeze out the cerebral spinal fluid, and then slowly of the air-house gravity pulls the blood down again. That's and you go back to normal. But during that period of more blood in the brain, you have more energy. Now I'm looking into now, how does it make more energy apart from providing more glucose and oxygen? And I've got a very, very interesting, something which is coming up which I'll tell you on my next talk about. I'm very excited because I think people, anyone you talked to would say that the psychedelics or indeed cannabis, they all work on the same direction. I think the cannabis and the psychedelics have the same underlying mechanisms, but at different levels of, I think the constrictions are zero. The psychedelics are much stronger because you obviously get much higher, you can, on the psychedelic. But they're going in the same direction. And that's what the, and, dogenously, a lot of the third, I'd love to know more about that. I really have got time to do that. I'll start here into the underlying, you know, serotonin dopamine, all the different enzymes, hormones in the body which can do these things endogenously. I mean, we know the saints got top high, Saint Teresa, her description of her orgasm with God. It's just like a description of a psychedelic trip, can you see? So it's the same experience, but I have got endogenously all throughout the ways. I think one of the things that is very interesting about cannabis too is the difference between eating it. Yes. And when your body's producing 11 hydroxy metabolite from the eating of it, it can produce a very powerful psychedelic experience. Absolutely. And my experience with it where it's been very profound with the sensory deprivation tank. Yes. I have a sensory deprivation tank and I do it with edible marijuana. Right. Right. And it's incredible. Right. And I think there's some my good friend who grows marijuana. And I think I'm very interested in the me, who always wants me to work with one of the breeds he breeds because it's like a psychedelic. And I thought I'd call it the, if I do it, the Beckley brain boost because he it brings back his memory and it brings back. I think every, I mean, we only beginning to scrape the top of the knowledge of how these compounds work and how we can use them for humanity. Well, it's just very unfortunate that research was stopped for so long. Yes. And we're very fortunate that there's people like yourself and maps and some of the other groups that have continued research and it's really pushed for the legalization of this. Yes. And I think now we've got a tipping point where I think we've got enough good research which clearly shows without doubt that we can get better results with using psychedelics to help and cannabis than we can get without it. And therefore it's really criminal not to throw them on air. This research so we can get it out to the people quicker because access is what we need for all those people who have got terrible things they're suffering from which could be helped. And I mean, I do as a bunch of research that I can, but I'm a tiny organization, four or five people, and tiny amounts of money we've got. And so to get this study going takes a year of paperwork getting permission to get the compounds which are at the moment doing because I'm wanting to really civilise LSD because I think LSD is actually the purest and a cleanest of the compounds and in many ways the best not against I think the psilocybin are the ones the wonderful and they all have their different characteristics which are incredibly valuable but it's a complete madness that the one which is really in a way the purest is kind of opening up a magnification of what we are with very little external colouring I think last year's and as it is completely non-toxic you can give it to people forever to know it's not toxic they aren't building up to a lot of people microdosing it now it's a very very common thing that microdosing of LSD and this what they're reporting is an alleviation of anxiety a heightened state of wellness and of awareness and of being in the moment clarity yeah yes actually my microdosing. I mean we actually did the first with a scientific research on the microdose I was collaborating with bastrix in Holland and we did it on on five ten twenty I think it was those doses and I mean it was amazing the results it increases mood it increases neuroplasticity it increases neurogenesis it increases anti-inflammatory it increases tolerance to pain vigilance you know all of these very valuable qualities in a microdose and we could be using that with all sorts of indications which you need actually more energy to kind of overcome certain deficits and also to therapy applications because you do it in your essentially completely sober yes in the sense of you can communicate you see things clearly everything is fine but you have achieved a very elevated state absolutely but you say everyone can do it it's only there are very few who now have I know I come across a new mobile people who I know someone who you know who has terrible meekwren and he had a microdose of his teeth and it killed it and he has terrible problems in getting it and it's not easy to get it so do you see what I mean and a lot of people don't want to have to go on to the dark web but don't know how you do the dark web do you know what I mean and what you're opening yourself up to and get on the dark you don't know what the product is I mean what I've said about that I mean I spent 10 boring years talking at the UN in place is not totally but I went there trying to say we should have a drug policy which is based on science on harm reduction on human rights you know and cost effectiveness you know and not one which is it that reverse right well that's sort of the problem is cost the real problem is there's vested financial interest in keeping these things illegal yeah because there's a lot of psychological medications that people are taking psychiatric medications that people are taking that they really don't need yeah and it keeps a comptice and also prisons well the second biggest industry you know because it's free labor and a lot of funding coming in it's very twisted no it's awful that that aspect of it's terrifying it is terrifying and I mean I've been added a report on the whatever you call them the United Nations Convention on Drugs which is obviously created by America but 190 countries follow it actually one in other miracles the one which is breaking it but doesn't allow the countries to break it but not one word has been changed in yeah the last 20 years which is crazy which is crazy especially when considering what we know now yeah about the benefits of it yeah were you friends with Terrence McKenna did you know her I knew him yes yes what did you think of his stone-dape theory um now what was that the stone-dape theory is the theory that ancient hominids um when the rainforest receded into grasslands they started experimenting with different food sources one of the things they started doing was tipping over cow patties yeah defined grubs and beetles and on those cow patties silica bemuschms grow and that they started eating those and that it increased visual acuity it increased their arousal states yeah and that they also think glossa lalia and so many different the formation of language so many things came about from that yes I mean I wouldn't put it exactly the way he put it but I would say that we know animals um we know that rain there eat mushrooms yes and as mushrooms are exactly as they're toxic um the king rindia drinks the pee of the drug which has gone through like the boss of the village yeah get all the lower members of the village to take the silica eber in first or whatever and then drink the urine of cleaned out yeah um got the clean version well that rindia also does that and so animals have taken it and I think I think that psychedelics were an integral part of homo sapiens evolution if you see what I mean I don't think it's the only feature at all but I think it's one of the major you know the development maybe of the mirror and you're on was very important and one of two other things but I think that's a major lift I think at the center of human culture is the experience of alternate states of consciousness hmm he attributed to the increase in brain size he believed that you know because of the neurogenesis properties also of silica eber he thinks that it may have contributed to the doubling of the human brain size over a period of two million years I mean I definitely think all of those things are showing I don't I mean he was a poet he wasn't yeah he was a scientist. So I mean he talked a lot of rubbish I know that because I went to a lot of conferences with him and I knew it was rubbish well I can't remember but exaggerated thing the time zero whatever yeah time wave zero yeah but at the same time he's a very good poet and he had a lot of very you know deep thinking we was very compelling yeah absolutely that's wonderful yeah and he got a lot of people to be interested in psychedelics because he was so interesting to hear and now very good presentation yeah an unusual voice to yes wonderful yeah very good very good yeah but yeah I think these compounds are integral to where a human homo sapiens has got to and I think the disaster is that we started repressing it I mean obviously even at the time of Jesus it was kept secret yeah he was always kept secret even as a luisis which went on for 2000 years they kept it secret probably that's why Socrates had to commit suicide because he had it with his boyfriend parties you know it was only to be used sacredly for the ceremonies yes which I actually think I mean so I think that's an incredibly important part of it the ceremony but I think also as an elixir when we get knowledgeable about how to use these compounds they're just amazing health mental health elixias and I think I mean I'm obviously as I get older very very interested is how one can hopefully delay and it's all based on blood you know as we get older the blood supply gets worse to the brain so how does one keep the supply of energy as as topped up basically in the most beneficial way for the animal yeah and I think for me enough the cerebral circulation is out of fashion and because we discovered about the cerebral circulation whenever we did 100 200 years ago it's considered old fashion so modern sounds really isn't interested in the blood actually you know everyone knows blood goes up blood comes down but there's a very little interest in it I mean I worked with one of the leading Russian scientists who was on their space program and was leading World expert on cerebral circulation involving cerebral spinal fluid and the relationship with a cerebral spinal fluid and blood and we worked together for about six years and then he died in COVID at 80 something which was a tragedy actually because he also was very interested in the kind of related thing of the possible increase in pulsation brought about by termination which is a very ancient practice which maybe brings the level of cerebral circulation back to childhood level which is higher than the adult level we should explain trepination to people because trepination is a very ancient practice of drilling holes in one's head and you decided to do you were in your twenties when you do this yes and what influenced you to do that like what was the vibration well it was the theory of it which it juice me to do it and in a way I prefer not talking too much about it not because I'm not in favor of researching it but because I haven't done the research so I can't say look this is been proven by science which until then people didn't believe psychedelics worked I would say that's a placebo fancy only that when you show in sounds then it you work but anyway the hypothesis is that when we are born as we know now there's the fontanelle of your holes which close soon and you can see the pulsation in the fontanelle hole of the baby you can see friend passing and then the holes close but the sutras the burns are quite flexible so there's still the full pulsation the full systolic pulsation is happening then as you grow and the burns grow together slowly slowly some of the pulsation is suppressed because it hasn't got the room to it so the hypothesis of trepination which has been done now the early scale found is fun enough the archaeologists at Chovei they found to pan scale of 25 000 years old and you can see if the person lived after the trepination because the bone grown goes yes and softens so that's kind of I think I haven't been studying it for the last 20 years because I've been on the psychedelics too much but I long talk because it's very close to what I want to do do we know the origins of trepination do we know that how it was we know it's the ultra's operation in the world that it's done all around the world it's very much associated with religion mr. Seul very often the scholars which are to pan have a special burial they are buried in a pot or with silk around the lion's shag that they were either priest cast or royal cast or something but they're very present in every culture which you're interested not very present but present and the biggest massive to pan scales funnily enough I think it's on the German Dutch border I don't know why but from what time period prehistory I I'm afraid my memory is back and I haven't been studying it lately but the thinking is wherever you look there's this I mean the third eye the thing in your picture I was told by a heart I think is a is a visualization of the third eye and one of the high I can't think of the word the high aims of Buddhism especially is by meditation opening your whole in the scholar and that's in beautiful old Tibetan art showing energy coming in and out of the holy mad so it's always been the priest why I think the priest cast was associated with it because I think that the on the how it was the priest cast took the compounds to get high whatever there are mushrooms or gold and the danger of getting high when you come down you have a bad time maybe flip out but have a bad time and I think it would probably observe that the people with fractured skull or wound or whatever it was the holy mad actually slightly kind of rose to the top in the village in the thing they became the doctors or the shaman so it seems to have an advantage because like in Mexico skulls everyone grows up with skulls you know they have skull there's a there's these day the dead skulls they're not real they're uh no right well I I've seen I mean because that's interested in I've seen quite quite a lot of skulls in fact I've even got one which is I think it's like that can't I remember 400 700 BC and our is chieftain is meant to be and this got actually six house and why anyone wants to do six holes I have no idea some of them are quite large yeah yeah but I think I personally think that the change it happens with one hole all you need is for the member and to pay to expand on the heartbeat and I think what the restoration of the point of trepination is The memory entropy able to expand on the heartbeat. And I think what the restoration of the point of trepination is allowing that expansion on the heartbeat to the full expansion as a systolic pressure, which the child has until it starts to close over, can 13 onwards. The child comes down, 21, the average, the skull closes. And that's often when the mental problems start after 21 psychosis and all of those things. You'll just get a slightly lower level in terms of energy for the brain. And what I want to do is very easy research to do trepination because people are doing it in hospitals every day, by the thousand, if it's any brain operation, first you have to tap down the skull. So it's happening all the time. So we could very easily actually, I worked with some very top level scientists in Mexico, and I wanted to get that study going again, and particularly doing it for headaches and migraine, because it used to historically, in my father's a cyclopedia, which is whatever, 19, 12. I got rid of anyone, something like that. It said trepination is a blabababab in down throughout history, and it is still currently being done with apparent success for the treatment of mental conditions, migraine and dead of the cell. So until in the first world war, they did the first lobotomy, And that stopped trepination as just an old work's tale. So it descends. They threw out the baby with the bathwater. And I think that there is something... It's quite easy to do. So I'm kind of fine with the possibilities. And I really want to do this with such... With trepination. Fun enough years ago, I was at Burning Man, and I had a campaign... Well, it was a bar there. Part there was an old friend of mine. And he got a lot of really important people to sign up that they wanted to be to plant. And we were going to do a... And you know, so getting people to plant the inner research programme. But it never happened. But what I wanted to say is that, for instance, Jamie, my husband got to plant. And how long ago did he do that? How long ago did he do it? How long ago did he do it? Long time ago. I mean, soon after we got together. And very difficult to find. We were looking for someone in Egypt. And found wonderful surgeon there. He did it. And he was very interested in the kind of mathematics of pyramids and things. And he had terrible headaches all his life. He lost a day or two weeks on headaches after he trepination. He doesn't have headaches. Wow. And I think it just gives back to the body and the brain. That extra pulsation, which means... I mean, you have it from all that exercise you do. So, constantly, you're getting that extra blood to the brain through your exercise. But for those of us who don't do that exercise, it's good to have alternative ways of keeping the blood going. And that's got to be a big factor in the runners high. Yeah. Because in runners high, they achieved these states of elevated consciousness that were running. Yeah. I met one, I'm sure you've been plenty. But who runs... I think he said 140 or so. Some enormous number of 100 miles or something. And he said at a certain point, he had a breakthrough where he got into a kind of real altered state of consciousness. And I'm sure, one day, we're into all these things, and dodge it and say... Yeah. I mean, obviously, that's what meditation is doing. is training you to do your own way of getting high. And monks and people, they productively spend 30 years of their life doing it. And I think that's wonderful. But for those of us who would like a quicker technique... I think there's nothing wrong than learning to use a non-toxic substance. Sure. To help us get up there. Yeah. And so I think it's funny enough, I think the new... How I look on it, it's all about feeding the brain with enough energy, metacombrare, working away to produce that mental cell energy. So that we can keep our function close to the optimal. That's what we want. Or anyway, not allowing it to drop to learn. Right. And that's what I think is the purpose, in a way. Not the only purpose at all. Because I mean, there's... I actually think psychedelics have valued in a lot of different non-syspisic areas. One is self-realizations, experience, beauty, love of beauty. Love of sound, love of people, love, eating, I think it increases compassion and empathy and nature of... And all those rather good human qualities. So I think it has the sensible use of the psychedelics. And by that I also mean cannabis. I mean the consciousness, ordering techniques. And I think there's people who do it purely by meditation. Oh, to be very much admired. Because it's wonderful not to need an outside thing to be able to do it within your own self. Like a hot bath and freezing bath, or any of those techniques obviously change your level of consciousness. By bodily reactions. But also I think the use of psychoactive compounds, we can tune it. So it's a very, very carefully regulated, I mean, self regulated operation. You can die over there. Yeah, you can control it. Yeah. And I feel very grateful for many things in my childhood. But one of them was that I was my father's companion, and he was a diabetic. And he was an artist, so he didn't like his sugar level going high, because then you lose your sight. And his terror was going blind. So he always kept his sugar level low. So every day he was getting short of carbohydrates falling in a ditch. He was driving a car, he drove over the center of roundabouts. He did all sorts of funny things when he was short of carbohydrates. My job was putting the sugar in his mouth. And so I got a very good relationship of knowledge of how the glucose level controls your level of concentration, if you like, and how important it is. So when Bart is Dutch, scientist, told me his hypothesis of psychedelics increasing volume of blood in the brain capabilities, and particularly if you're doing a cognitively demanding activity, you use a lot of glucose and the sugar level falls. Therefore you need to keep the sugar level normal by increasing the intake. And actually, all those years before it was illegal, I'm really left on LSD. When I say live, I'm meant on big doses every day. We were... We really lived a day, cycle how I raised myself, on myself I was doctor and patient, and it built a hole of whatever whole Freud bike. Did you take a journal during that time? Not a journal, but I did diagrams of... Yeah, and I watched myself. I overcame for instance. I was very tall as a child. I thought of other kinds of hated being taller than everyone else. So about 13 I started smoking cigarettes behind the bushes. So I was pretty addicted by the time I met Bart when I was 22 or 23 a government. I was pretty addicted and he said, well, a horrible happiness, it is. Well, it's mine. It's smoking. So then I said, well, I'll give up. And so I took a trip of LSD with the intention. I'll stop. It's a horrible habit. Just give it up. And I never smoked another cigarette. And so... Do you remember when you did that, when you took the LSD with the intention of giving up cigarettes? Do you remember what happened to you? Do you remember...? Yeah, I do. I remember smoking during the trip and thinking, yeah, just disgusting. I remember when I was a child, young child smoking. Maybe one feels a bit sick. I wouldn't have to repress if you're in a sickness. And then I was, of course, it makes me feel sick. Yeah. And then yeah, it's fucking... It's fucking you sick. Yeah. I gave up and 40 years later, whenever when I was talking to Roland Giffis, funnily enough, I had, I think it was $10,000 to do a research program. So I went and wrote at that time, said, I got this. He said, oh, what would you like to do? What would you suggest? So I said, well, what about overcoming nicotine addiction? I did that with LSD. We could do it with a cellosite in time. And that was the basis of the study, which is, I mean, I remember the first, because the first law was an 80% success rate. And yeah, 80% success rate. I don't know what it is now. But it's an extraordinary successful, because actually nicotine is more difficult to give up than heroin, because you're always repeating it. So I experimented in those years when we were living on LSD. We worked. That was our passion. We were studying the human brain and the self. And the T-shirt I've got for you is the motto, no thy self. And that was what I was doing, trying to understand how we work better at that level and how we can enhance our working. And I just think there's a lot more to be learned about how we can, if we concentrate more on giving the brain the energy it needs to function optimally, how can we help that happen? Obviously exercise as well. I've always likely avoided the exercise from being there, you see. But I have to say, you know, there are alternatives which can be used to the health of the person. And I think it's a tragedy that one can't want to talk about things more openly. Yes. It's not easy to carry out research because I know having done it for now over 20 years, or over 50 years trying to do research in the psychedelics, how difficult it is. I mean, in order for me to do it, I realized I had to stop being a man of fielding. No letters of my name, no money, so who am I? And become a foundation. Funny enough, it was a very clever conceptual artwork because in England it's very liberal, England. You pay whatever it is. And you've become a foundation of the past, I think something. Suddenly you're a foundation, you don't have to have any money. You're just a foundation registered, a scholar and a registered. And then I got the top scientists in the world, 10-15 of them, including Albert Elber, a half of them, such as children, but the male import buttons were the established ones. I would not always forget his name. He was a wonderful colleague Blake Moore, who was a kind of top neuroscientist in the world at that point. He very much bet what we were going to start a centre-in-law that studied it, but that was going to cost 4 million, and we couldn't get it. And various other high-level scientists, I had a very impressive advisory board. And so then I gave seminars, here is the seminars at the House of Lords, where I had presidents, blah, blah, blah, all the head of an idea, head of the Russian people, and the Austen cells, they could come. So 70 invited people came to discuss global drug policy. That made quite a difference. That went on for 10 years or something. And then I went to the... whatever national I worked with you called it. Anyway, I'd write certain governments and things on drug policy. The United Nations went there regularly, trying to change things. So through this foundation. If you don't mind, when you had your own personal experience with trepination, what was that like? What did it do for you? Yeah. It was... sorry, can I jump on track? Sure. I remember... I mean, no one wants to drill a hole in their head on Saturday or Sunday afternoon. I can tell you it did not something I'm a very cautious person. And so I had a deep interest in it because I had very deep understanding of the hypothesis of blood supply. And I was interested in researching it. Then my partner, Joey Mellon, at that time, he was very keen on preparing himself. And he... I was a second son, so he was a bit more casual, cavalier about it than I was. And so I had quite a few miss shops before he finally got through. And, funnily enough, then I did notice a difference. And the difference is very subtle. You really have to know a person to notice it. But how I'd express it is it's slightly lower than neurotic characteristics. If you see what I mean. They don't eliminate them in any way, but it lowers it. And so having seen the difference, because part was to pam-fying you him, so I never experienced a change. But when I saw the change in joy, I thought, well, it does make a difference. So I had thought I'd find a doctor. So that's been four years looking for a doctor to pam-me. And I had people who said they were nearly, and then they said, I've got a doctor to have a hole in his head. He would have given us one or two. Or, you know, it could be bad for my career, and Harley Street if it came out, or if you died, or whatever. And so it didn't happen. And then I thought, well, I'm a sculptor. I'll sculpt my own scallons and see what happens. So I really studied it, because I'm a very, very cautious person. And in an undernest century, it's a shop. What's called down brothers. So off Harley Street has all the instrumentation for trepidation. They are old shop actually. And charming staff there, would show them in detail how you'd prepare them, because I went in as an interested observer. And so I learned how to do it very cautiously. They're three layers of bone, and etc., etc., and how to do it. So I felt competent to do it. And that took quite a long time deciding I was competent and confident I could do it. So I decided to make a film with it, because I thought that will kind of separate me from the unpleasant effort doing such a silly thing. And so I made, I've been in love with my great-aunt, just died and given me seventy pounds, and I bought a lovely little movie, Super 8 Camera. And it set it up. And I had my beloved birdie always with me. He was an observer of this thing. And there was all sorts of story, which I went with the time, which was amazing, because we were asked to party by rather kind of guardian, journalist, top journalist in England for the Saturday night. I had been planning on doing it on the Sunday, but I moved it forward. So I thought it would be good publicity for the movement. Anyway, I moved it forward. And then there was electricity strike in England. So if I hadn't moved it forward, the electricity would have been cut, which was just a kind of good little trick-off, beating fate to do it. So anyway, I did it very, very carefully with a hand-tra-pan in the mirror, perfect little operation. What kind of was it a drill? A drill. A electric drill. But I use a ball with a flat bottom, so it couldn't damage the membrane, obviously what one's frightened of is damaging the membranes surrounding the brain. I mean, I don't want to go to detail with the door, but all I can say, I did it, I knew the second I was through, because the second you'll through this, no resistance. And it had a flat bottom, so it couldn't. I mean, it's not something the moment wants to do at all. But it's kind of like people go skiing, people go horse riding, just the same danger. It's a danger, possibly, infectious, there's only danger, perhaps. And then I always say no one should do it themselves. It's a foolish thing to do. But then when I'd finished, I bound this dump. We went out and had a stake for dinner to replace the lost blood. And then went to this party. And the photograph, which I didn't know if you know of, is that birdie on my shoulder was the evening, that came out of the super-rape movie. So... I've seen the images. Yeah. But I haven't seen, apparently, you've never released the video. I never released it. And the person who made the film actually has always calmed one. So I had forbidden to let the images out on public thing because I didn't want anyone doing it. Right. And funny enough... Why did you not want anyone doing it? Because I didn't think self-tribonition is a good idea. But you did it. Yeah, but I'm me. LAUGHTER You know, I took trouble not to... And funny enough, then, when I did not work in New York about it, it appears for them. Because at that period, I was trying to educate the world through art. And I had this exhibition, it appears for the slides. It was enormous, great. It was like an Egyptian tomb. It was lovely. The dorms room they gave me. And apparently people were queuing up, including people like Warhol and Ben Ollipet, Luchy couldn't get in and double it. It was a kind of pleasure, hot movie at that point. And people fainted, said in papers like, write plums falling to the crowd. But... Wow. It ends 60 minutes to the film of it, of me and wanted to film me back it backly with Birdie, with my pigeon, who was never in the cage or always free. And, say, they flew me home on corn corks. I was pregnant with my oldest Sam Rocky. And to film me, Birdie. And Birdie was very strong sense of justice. And I'd broken the cold of love by going away. So if I went away, he punished me until the punishment had been done. So when they flew me back on corn corks, he wouldn't come down from the house top. Anyway, they made this film. And he was very pretty, very nice director. And then it was as always when one did something which was well done. It was not allowed to go out. Because the lawyers said they'll be epidemic for people traveling themselves. Were you worried about that? Were people copying you? No. No. No, really. It's just too crazy. Yeah, it's crazy. What was your personal experience? Like, what was it like after it was over? Sorry, you asked me that. How I described it at the time was it was like the tide coming in. There was a kind of stillness in the brain. That internal endless internal conversation of basically the ego calmed down. Now, of course, we can explain all of those things could happen anywhere just from relaxation of having that finished years, long blah, blah, blah. So what difference does it make? I would say it makes a slight difference. It's slightly like the energy. I mean, I watch children. Children have that extra energy. You know, they do those leaps and paths and play around and energy. Adults don't. Energy is a wonderful thing. And when I became 21, I'd had one of my trips to Egypt where I live a wild, I don't know. And I thought I got Bilhatsia, which is a wild you get. And I went, when I got, I was 21. I went, got myself tested thinking, I'd caught it. But I hadn't. Then I realized that that was adult for good. It's a slightly lower level. And very often that's when people have their first schizophrenic experience or some mental thing after that. It's a down, it's a slight down. There's a slight exuberance. And that's what I noticed after. But the difference is so slight. I couldn't swear on that at all. How long did the difference last? Well, you don't notice the difference. You don't notice the change. Do you see what I mean? Yes. So now I can't see it. Have I got any advantages? My whole clothes, because it opened. I can't say. Have you ever got looked at to see if it's closed? No. I tried to actually. And it was very difficult to do. I'd like to do that. It's a very small hole though, right? Well, it was that big. Okay, so quarter of an inch, couple millimeters. It was wide enough. All you need is for the hard bead to express itself. It's all about the expression of the hard bead. And it takes half an hour. If it was shown to increase cranial compliance, which is what I worked on with this professor, Yuri Boskelenko, who was the leading professor. And those things. He thought, yes, it increases cranial compliance. And that's just that slightly healthier state to be in. And so it takes half an hour to do. In hospitals, the last of it, surgeon doesn't have to do it. Do you know what I mean? It's a nothing operation. So if that can slightly raise the level of energy going to the brain, for the rest of the life, it's a valuable tool. But do you think that these people that have multiple holes in their head, is there a point of diminishing returns? I should think they had big rain or some terrible thing, which went on. And they were trying to get it. And tried to, oh, yeah, I think something like that. Because I don't see the logic of it says you only need one to get the expansion back. But that's why I actually don't talk about it now, because it sounds so crazy. That's the problem. Yes, it sounds crazy. Optics. Yeah. Yeah. It's not good optics. And tell you got it proven, which I actually seriously want to do, because what I do it is on research with people with headaches, migraines, phthalics, whatever, some form. Because that's one of the things that all cultures who did it, one of the things they did in fours, headaches, and insanity. In old days, they said, it's letting devils out. And now that indication is letting light in, because all from people in the mystical tradition were to pound. So I actually, before I hit the bucket, I would really like to have done that research, because maybe no one else will be able to motivate it to do it. Right. Has anyone been motivated to do self-trapination that you are friends with? Yeah, I know quite a lot. Not a lot. I mean, and then they started saying, I suspect you weren't going to plan anyone. I wouldn't dream of it. Do you know what I mean? See, that's why I found a very good surgeon, a brain surgeon, and a team in Mexico, who did it, who hated it for certain people. And people wrote back saying it had altered their light. I think, if ourselves, do I think it has effect or not? I'd say I wouldn't be humiliated if it didn't, but I think it does. That's my opinion. For instance, it changed my dream pattern after I had done it. I used a very anxious dream, which very often were about birdie, my beloved birdie, getting killed somewhere, after the germination. I didn't have those hands at the creams. So that's something which I couldn't control if you see with me. Anyway, I think it makes a difference. So I'm in favor, but we need to do the research. Yeah, it's a fascinating subject. It's just fascinating that it's existed for so long. Yes, and very much associated with religious practice. It's a fascinating subject. It's just fascinating that it's existed for so long. And very much associated with religious practice, basically, whatever. You know, very often, funny enough, there's a Mongolia, some Japan's cows, and yeah, I, is a very beautiful, this is fairly, I forget, BC, long 700 maybe, a beautiful basket with cannabis, rather high THC cannabis in it. I mean, I think they go together. The trepination, you know, like in Mexico, there were lots of trepination, and they went with the kind of spiritual practices. It's very fascinating to me that from the moment human beings have discovered altered states of consciousness, whatever that was, that it's always been a part of this desire to sort of escape the confines of modern consciousness or of natural consciousness. Yeah, it's to kind of slightly expand. Yeah. So that you get back the childhood experience. Yeah, joy, wonder. I do think it's that. And I think it's still that. And I think that's a very healthy urge. Yes. And I think therefore we should, I really, seriously think we should do research on trepination, which I can very easily do. It just needs ethical approval, that's the problem. Do you think that it's warranted? Do you think that the use of psychedelics and the psychedelic therapy can replace that? That it's not necessary? No, I don't think it replaces it. I think there, as we were in the ancient times there, the complementary, both moving in the same direction of trying to increase the energies supply to the brain. Yeah. And I think that's very key for our future survival, because at the moment I think we're at a very critical time, because artificial intelligence is getting greater than our own, etc., etc. There's all sorts of forces which kind of build the danger up. Yes. We need internal growth to balance that technological growth. Yeah. It's such a strange contradiction that today, in a day where that growth is so necessary, these substances are so demonized. Yes. It's a tragedy. And I really think it's determined America is a force which forced it upon us for all the wrong reasons and we all know it and America knows it. Yeah. It was during the civil rights movement. They were trying to arrest black Panthers and the civil rights activists and all the anti-war activists and that was one of the ways they could do it. And it's the way to enter any country you want to, like Afghanistan or Latin America, any country you couldn't go and raid and spray and kill and capture. You know, it was wonderful to see I loved it. And you know, and so it was... Which is so ironic considering that they did so many LSD experiments. Yeah. And then through the people who were troublesome out of the window and said they wanted to fly. Yeah. That was such a difficult... I mean, it's a tragedy, the history of all the states. I mean, like the... What you call the midwives used psychedelics to help stop bleeding. They realized the vasoconstrictive property of these compounds. So they were used in childbirth. And the midwives were very old for the people who were burnt for wichery. And the ironic thing is when the wichies were burnt, then the villagers got a plague. They called it the witch's curse of sin-vitis's dance where you shake into the worm, then you finally die. And that's... That's ergot poisoning. Because the witchies went out with their hats at the full moon. And the hats would show the glow of the ergot from the light of the moon on the ergot. Had the hats through that. Well, they were kind of all their hidden. I mean, that's I think where the hat story came. Because they collect the ergot by night because it's phosphorescence from the moon. And then the burning of the wichies, which was part of Inquisition, basically, then they had these awful plagues of sin-vitis's dance, which was called the curse of the poiled witch who had been using their medication to help childbirth. So it's quite ironic how the authorities translate it wrongly. I mean, basically it was because the witch wasn't gathering the ergot off the wheat, so the villagers were eating the poison, and therefore getting sick from the bread. Yeah, that's ergot. That was to be one of the most fascinating things about the Salem witch trials. Yeah. Is that they found that there was a late frost. And when they examined whatever crops that they could find back then they did find ergot in them. Right. And they think that that was partially responsible for that whole hysteria. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it was very much intermingled with the Protestants, the Inquisition between the religions and the whole thing came at the same time. Yeah. So there's been a kind of tragedy. I mean, the point is those in power actually don't want other people taking these compounds, like the Americans didn't want their soldiers taking acid. Right. Because they made the soldiers say, gosh, actually I prefer to be in the park with my girlfriend. Right. They're in some bloody wood far away, getting shot. Right. They're in a pretty common sense. Yeah. They're in one common sense. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a tragedy of the human fate. I mean, the tragedy of humanity is that we've developed this compensatory mechanism which have made us the genius that we are. And we can do all these brilliant things we do. But it also has made us this psychotic animal which is capable of great self-harm. And somehow we need to balance it. Yeah. And that's why I rather like the phrase, the psychedelic age. In the sense, I don't mean everyone taking static headaches and having a party. I mean learning the art of how do you control your level of consciousness. And then how do you control that level so you could keep your concentration. I don't go in for a very long time, and I drop out. I say, turn on and drop in. Do you know, do you create it for? That was the problem with Leary that his philosophy and what he was espousing to people was, people felt like it was dangerous to civilization. That people are going to ruin their lives, they're going to drop out, and they're going to become part of these hippie communes. Yes. It was all bad publicity, badly played. Yeah. And in those early years in the whatever, mid-sixties, when I started taking psychedelic seriously, we took it for working. I mean, the stones would be playing half a mile away from our flatware lift, still live for London. We didn't bother to go to them because we were having set fun doing our work, which is studying the brand on acid. Do you know who goes? My brother. I think that the use of the soul, you and other people know how incredibly inspiring for work, the use of psychedelics can be. You couldn't see things you never saw before. Because suddenly having more of the brand simultaneously active as our images showed, the two, you can see this is the ordinary brain, this is the brain on psychedelics. I've got those beautiful things came from our study. The circus, do you know the ones? I've got the picture of it from my back. You can see the difference in the brain. And that can be used for whatever you're doing, for whatever. Creative, thoughtful process. You suddenly got all that extra brain power to dedicate towards what you feel passionate about. It's a superpower for stand up comedy. For stand up comedy so many of my comedian friends use it to write. Yes, absolutely. And I have an intimate relationship with Jamaica, and the deep, deep divers. There's someone on the beach who said the one who wins our prizes, his best friend. And she can stay down there much longer than the best friend can. Because he smokes very heavily before he goes down, cannabis. And he said that enables him to stop breathing for a much longer period. You know, I think whatever you do, you've got more passion or energy. That's the adult brain. On the left. On the left. What are these lines representing? It's connectivity between different centers in the brain. So this is when you're on a psychedelic, it doesn't matter if it's a synocide, but it's not a listing. When you're on, you certainly got this much more intimate connection between the different parts of the brain. And so I think it needs training to learn to control that increased. It's like writing an incredibly powerful horse. You have to learn how you control it. The brain is the same thing. If you just don't take that, you can have a wonderful look, experience it looking at the stars, or having another fail, listed to music, all of those things can be wonderful. But if you want to use it for cognitive discipline, which actually uses a lot of glucose, because it's very late in development. So it's not part of the autonomic nervous system. It's a part of the cognitive nervous system, which burns glucose to get the energy to concentrate. And so that's important, taking the vitamin C and keeping the sugar level normal. Can I ask you a question about that? Yeah. What about ketones? What about the, I know many people, they get on a ketogenic diet, and their brain produces ketones, and they feel like intellectually that's a superior fuel. I think probably it is a very good fuel. Yeah. I think there's a lot more will constantly be learning about how you can energize the brain in better healthier ways. Yeah. But I think a secret, a basic secret, which I felt feel I was given the keto in 1966, when I had learnt about how one can increase the blood supply to the brain, and therefore give it all that extra energy to do have all the brain functioning. And then it's a whole new art. How do you use that? Yes. Productively. But I mean, that's like being a magician, magician, a brilliant magician, it's all, they have to practice. So it's a skill. Yes. I always say to take psychedelics, you have to be much more disciplined than not to take them. It's much easier not to take them in a sense. I agree with that. Yeah. I think people have a misconception about what you're doing when you're taking psychedelics, or when you're taking including cannabis. Yes. As I think the common misconception is that you are avoiding reality and that you are somehow under the giving yourself a crutch. Yeah. I don't think it's that at all. Yeah. And I think that with discipline, the use of psychedelics through discipline, it allows you to experience these states and get something from them and pull something from them and apply it to normal consciousness. I totally agree. It gives you an extra power like writing a more powerful course. Yes. You've got in your brain power, there's more there. Yes. And so I mean, I find if I'm in a really beautiful place, if I'm in Egypt or all those wonderful places with incredible beauty. Yeah. It's almost in its mouth to the place, not to be at your optimal. I see that all the time. Yeah. I see that because when I go to art galleries, I never go to an art gallery. No, I quite agree. Yeah. I always get on. No point. You don't. I also feel that, I mean, it's just people don't like this, but I'm going to say it anyway. I like to be high around my children because when I'm around my children, I'm fascinated by them. Yeah. Maybe we'd be frustrating perhaps if I was sober instead or charming. Yeah. And I find them interesting and I'm fascinated by their mindset and talking to them. And you have much more in common with them because you're on the same wavelength. So you stay in contact with them. I had a dog having my children and the greatest pleasure. And I remember being at one of those conferences in Palais, Kale, something psychedelic and I think it was Tony's McKenna's wife actually was giving a lecture, or giving a talk very nicely. And when she was pregnant, she gave help there. And I couldn't, I hate public speaking. I remember putting up my finger because I wanted to say, well, actually, when I was pregnant, I didn't because I actually think it's good for my health. Yeah. I've taken enough of it that I really think it's actually good. It's not like alcohol or cigarettes. Yeah. And my children, I'm proud of my children. And they are children of parents who understood the benefits of all the states of consciousness. Yeah. I've had those conversations with my children, my youngest who are 13 and 15. And they're at that age where children want to experiment with alcohol, they want to experiment with drugs. And I have conversations with them about ones that you should avoid and the dangers of things that may be contaminated with fentanyl. Yeah, absolutely. And that these organic compounds, as long as you know the source that you're getting them from, whether they're so aside or particularly marijuana, these, they're not what everybody is telling you they are. Yeah. And that's what's criminal. And I do think criminal about the government because they're all the governments that knowledge is out there. These are non-toxic, the ones which are non-toxic. And like in England, people on the mass can only buy the illegal marketing cannabis is taken over by certain breeders who breed only rubbish, self, an incensible person when they're a dream of smoking, very high THC cannabis, which is shit. And it's not good for young people to smoke that. And it's the authorities which are forcing the young people into that if they choose to smoke. And I did a paper for design for the government saying that if they, as I hope to do, regulate cannabis, they should make very low tax for THC CBD balance. And as it gets more and more strong, tax it more because in time people just stop smoking, just extremely high-toxic. Do you think there's dangers and smoking? Yeah. I mean, not full grown-ups who know how to handle it, things. Right. But I think it can be dangerous. I believe so too. And I think there's also some correlations between that and schizophrenic breaks that people who perhaps have a tendency towards schizophrenia when they have high doses of THC, they've had very traumatic experiences. Yeah. I think it should be encouraged a nice balance of THC CBD. Yeah. Well, it's one of the good things about the legalization in California in particular because they've relegated these edibles in particular to 10 milligrams, which is a very sensible dose. Right. It's just comfortable, not too bad. Yeah. And that especially in conjunction with all the cannabinoids with CBD and it's wonderful. Yeah. And that's such a wonderful step forward. And it's wonderful. It's happening in America, but also quite ironic that America is still forbidding the rest of the world. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. And it really does need to change because it's holding up humanity in a sense. Well, I'm hoping that with education, the younger people are realizing what it actually is and as these people go into public service, they will go into public service with this new understanding of it. Absolutely. And I think I absolutely commend you on the wonderful information you give to people by having such a wide reach and letting people who you think will write say what they think and slowly, slowly, it will seat through and come to the top and be the dominant. Well, there's a propaganda narrative that's just very unfortunate that is permeated our society and it's incorrect. Yeah. Exactly. And it's a narrative of the brain, LSD and a cooking, the brain and the frying pan. Yeah, this is your brain. I remember having lunch with Peter Thiel and he was saying he was grown up with that and couldn't get over it. Right. I mean, what? Robby. Robby. Robby. I think there's another compound I think which is so powerful, which is less toxic. It's a classical to me that that all took place during the 80s and the 80s culturally, some of the worst artwork and music that the Americans of the society's ever produced during the influence of the just say no era. Yes. And the 60s were a period of cultural growth change and people always put down the 60s. But actually, all the things we love, not all the things, but all of the things we love came out of the 60s, spirituality, Eastern spirituality, yoga, health, music, comedy. Yeah. Even the automobile design. And it was all on Ellis. Yeah. It was fueled at changing. And so I promised Albert Hoffman, I said, oh, I can't remember what the other thing. But I'll read the state, your favorite child. Hmm. And this is a wonderful creation because it's non-toxic. It's so controllable. You know, if the governments were doing what a government should do, which is basically looking after their citizens like a good mother or father looks after their children, and therefore teaching them what they need to know like our children. I'm never frightened my children might become addicted because they know that from our earliest days they know that they've been addicted. Yes, they've been addicted. Yeah. You know. Yeah. Right. And also they benefit from you discussing your addiction to cigarettes and how you got over it. Yeah. Yes. And they saw how one, when one did, when it was legal, you see compounds were most productive with it. Yes. Passion. I mean, I'm a workaholic. So as am I. Yeah. And I'm a user. Yeah. So it makes one want to achieve the work one can do. Yes. Yes. I'm fascinated with American automobile design. I'm a collect old cars. And there's a time period between 1965 and 1970 where there's some of the most amazing cars. Really, however. And it's directly correlates. And it's drops off a cliff after 1970. How interesting. It's fascinating because those cars from 1965 to 1970 to this day are the most cherished collectors. It's got to be the most beautiful designs. Yes, that's very interesting. Funnily enough in this talk, I'm giving a few days a time at Denver. I'm saying you can see the markings of civilization. You can see which civilizations had integrated altered states of consciousness, which hadn't by their creativity production. Rather like in a tree, you can see by the rings, which are the years of drought and which other years of rain and sunshine. And that's exactly it what you're saying in that in the peak of beauty. I want to show you something just so you can see this. I want Jamie pull up on 1969 Mustang and then I want to see a 1980 Mustang. The difference is so stark. It's amazing. And it's so clear that that time period directly correlates with the sweeping psychedelics of 1970 where they stopped people using these things. They made them forbidden and dangerous. That is a 1969 Mustang. It's one of the most beautiful things that anybody has ever designed. It's gorgeous. Yeah. I mean, I look at that thing. I'm like, my God, it's perfect. It's not working. It worked. Now, show me a 1980. Now, this is just disgusting. Look at that conical piece of shit. What is that? What the hell is that? Imagine that you went from that to that. What the hell happened to us? Something's wrong. Something's very, very wrong. And people attributed to Satabhi. God, it's so gorgeous. And people attributed to so many different things. And one of the things they attributed to is gas being more efficient, gas-vig, but not true because you could still make it beautiful. And that is not beautiful. That's ugly piece of shit. You're absolutely right. And I think that's such a beautiful... And I think you can tell it in culture. I mean, like, whatever. Well, the beautiful cultures. Sure. You can see they were high. They had that... There's lines in survey. Yeah. Couldn't have been done by people who went high. You know, it's too... Absolutely. It's an intuitive expression. I think one of the things psychedelics do is increase the intuitive part of the brain. And now I've got a new program at the moment I'm doing, which is looking at LSD, both in high doses and micro doses in the best and latest technology in the world can give. And the high doses, I'm wanting to do a research on the mystical experience and anomalous experiences. And it will be the first research to use a Tesla 7 to know what I mean by MRI. Yes. It's usually a Tesla 3. All the research I've done is with a Tesla 3. Is this FMRR functional or whatever? And then one does whatever, how many people say 20 and one averages the results between the 20. What I'm going to do in this other one is use a 7 Tesla and personalize the data. So it will only be person by person looking at the data. And then it will be 7 Tesla and a meg. Meg is the one which does that electrical. You can see which centers the brain are communicating with each other. And then we'll have a very deep psychological one. So you'll know when the person has some expression of the mystical experience or some other experience. And you can see what's happening in the brain waves and the blood and markers. So one will have it much more carefully analyzed never before. Because the tough just pure fascination interests. It's valuable to know how do we encourage people who are having a psychedelic-assisted experience to overcome treatment, resistant depression or whatever to have that mystical experience. So the more we can learn about how does that grow, how does one help the fruition of that experience, the better. And then so that's at the top level looking at those experiences. I mean it's going to be so exciting which parts of the brain to look at. And the whole different areas of hemispheres, the blood supply, the rich parts of the brain are actively activating in the highest way in that experience. I once didn't experience with a very high level Indian meditate lady. And she really wanted to help me. And it was in a mega one of those ones, the head were. And she told me after she came up, she'd had the most wonderful mystical experience while she was in the machine. She said, your best experience has had with God for the whole time, with me. And it showed a great burst of gamma in the right cerebellum, which is very fascinating. Because everyone thinks cerebellum is just nothing basic balance and all those sort of things. But actually I think it's a very highly much more fascinating than that. And so a mystical experience is rather like a toad in the sound sitting on the cell, in a state of blissful happiness. And it's very fascinating to actually know about more of these different experiences that we can assume as experience. And how hopefully we can map them and therefore learn how to get them all. One of the things I was fascinated about with you is your discussions of your experiences on LSD playing go. Yes, that's very exciting. Which is really interesting. You said it made you a better player and go with an incredibly complex game. And that's why, well for the last 50 years I wanted to and I will do a research on go. But it's very difficult to find go players who are used to functioning on a high level LSD. Because people don't hold the hold. Right. Because go as you know is a pattern recognition. It's an intuitive game of pattern recognition. I've never played it. It's all. Oh, as you know, it's a pattern recognition. It's an intuitive game of pattern recognition. I've never played it. It's a wonderful game. Once you get into it, you really get addicted to it. Because it's behind everything. You can play life on the go board. And you have a handicap, so you know exactly where you are of the person you play a kangest. A numerical handicap? Yeah, the better player plays with white stone. So the worst player has a black, which is slightly more obvious. So it's a better visual, but it's slightly less good psychologically. And then they have handicaps every three games you win. They get one stone, put down on the board first, advance. So anyway, we played passionately in the early 60s when LSD was legal. And at the end of day, we were doing brain studies all day, or whatever we were doing. And then go and we wrote down every game we played. So we knew who won the one score. And anyway, I was a slightly better player than my opponent. But if I wasn't LSD, and he wasn't, his handicap went up from three to six. So that's a lot of winning nine games. That's a big change. And then it would come down again as he saw the patterns. Because it's a pattern recognition game. Right. And it's a wonderful game. But I gave it out because you have to be passionate about it to keep playing. Right. It's very taxing, right? Yeah, very taxing. There's a similar result with psilocybin and the game of pool, pocket billiards. Right. You have more feel, and you know where the ball is going. Right. It's a different thing. Right. And you can understand angles and patterns. Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. And I think sportsmen. I mean, like Joe, the father by children, he loved cricket. And he said he was a better bowler. Have you heard of the pitcher who pitched a game on acid? No hit or game on acid? No. Who was that again, Jamie? It's a very famous story of a guy who he made a mistake and got just too high. Yeah. And it didn't wear off. And he went to the game. Here it is, Doc Ellis. Yeah. He took acid and pitched a no hitter. So I don't get his ball. Well, he was on acid, which is so crazy. Yeah, that's exactly it. And you know that picture of the spider, which came out in the 60s, the spider's web. Yes. And I'm trying to recreate that study. I'm seeing the spider. They gave the spider elasticity. Yeah. And the caffeine one was absolutely chaotic. Right. Look at it. The cannabis one started off rather well. Then you're chaotic, just like cannabis does happen. But look at the LSD one was perfect. Better than perfect. Well, look at the normal one, though. The normal one's pretty amazing, too. Yeah. But funny enough, now I know the leading web person in the world is a donlet, Oxford, who I've been talking about six years now to do this research. But you wouldn't believe it to give a spider LSD when a shirk ethical approval. Oh, that's hilarious. I mean, that's funny. And for eight, six, eight years, we haven't yet got this. Claproof. There's nothing ethical. Well, being a spider. I know. You can't believe it. Their whole existence is unethical. They're trapping other insects. Exactly. Anyway, so far we haven't done it. But I really want to do it this year. Because I mean, maybe they were pulling our legs. Very interesting concept. Sure. That even at the spider level, it improves function. Yes. It would make sense that caffeine would be all over the place, too. The heart rate would be jacked up, or whatever their central nervous system. Yeah. Yeah. But it's very, there's so much we could do. And that's why I actually feel having lived with these substance. It's just my passion for 50 or 60 years. And particularly, LSD, because I don't get so clean as to know the best. I've got a very good instinct how to do it. I've designed several studies. I haven't talked about it, but I don't. They shouldn't come out. But I can see how it can help, like the old woman without time of speech. I'd like to just show you not to go on. Sure. So I want to show you. Yes. Because the difference is so big when I showed it to the professor of geriatrics in Switzerland. Within an hour, he said he wanted to do collaboration with me to do an Alzheimer's study with it. Because you can't fake someone's expression. Say from deep apathy, it goes to a sparkling little lady. And there's nothing conventional that would replace that. There's no conventional medication. They're not making any sort of apathy. And actually, I'm working with one very nice man, who's a sincere of the biggest care hermings, which is a national helpful. And he'd heard about my research in vain. He said 70% of his residents have Alzheimer's. And there's nothing you can do. And the suffering it causes them and their relations and their carers is devastating. And it's getting worse and worse as we live longer and longer. And it's stunning that there's something available. Yeah. Yeah. And well, after I'll show you, because it is miraculous. And so I've also got a very, very good concept for the perfect place, because what I would like to do is with these conditions, like I'd like to do Alzheimer's, I also want to do autism or Parkinson's. You know, I want to be able to fast forward these researches with the best doctors available scientists. You know, I can design them. I know them. I know that I know how they go. And what I can see is it's very similar to a condition, which we know historically, which is called terminal lucidity. And I've been studying that for the last year or two. It's a well known fact that people, quite often, just before death, who are in coma or paralyzed or one of those conditions out of the picture for years, suddenly will come back and just for the day and make jokes about when they were in the nursery. And people who know that know, they're there, shop. And I think what can happen with a microdose is that you light up the connectivity between these different brain centers. It says suddenly the brain is functioning again. I mean, not probably functioning like this old lady. She came back. Her children said it was remarkable. It was getting our mother back. She had her wit. Her love, her dently. She said, I feel so wonderful. Let's read some poetry. Do you know? Wow. From having been this. Vegetative story. Yeah. And I think we can now get that going. And what I want is the freedom to design to make the care home, who's the Beckley Harbor, where people can care and be treated with these compounds to see if it suits them and see if it has the same effect that had with this old lady. And then we collect the data. And then I would have wonderful trained doers who entertain them, and make it a wonderful place to be. We'd have dogs and children. It would be like home. It's incredible. You know, with the light being at home, with lovely people who look after your emotional human, and your given microdose, personally fitted to suit you. And what is the period experience that would be to the traditional nursing home? Yeah. And then we'd find out, does it suit? And then one could collect in a year, and not a very big nursing home. And this wonderful man, England, said, so long as it's legal, he'll give me the nursing home to try it. So I want the permissions to be able to do this. And then one could get a lot of people coming through, and then one would give them home care. So one would have someone visiting them at home, as much as they need to maintain a safe and good program. Yeah. Anyway, we could do that. Yeah. You know, this is incredible. So, but it needs one, the regulatory passport to do it, and two, the funding. And both of them, I mean, there's so much money around it. And everyone's getting to hold either the parents are home there. And we should do these things speedily. Yes. Not wait 10 years until it takes two years, even to get the paperwork done for this research. One year. I wanted to talk to you about near-death experiences. And there's a lot of speculation about what happens in the brain during near-death experiences, because many people report things that are very similar to what is a breakthrough psychedelic experience. Yes. Yeah. Well, what I think is near-death, the body is in a state of extreme turn on. And it naturally and dogenously lets out these compounds, oxytocin, all the different compounds in the body, which DMT may be, maybe there's probably more than we've even discovered, which give us a shot of something serotonin, which is very similar to a psychedelic. And that's why people can suddenly come out of a vegetative state, shortly in four deaths. And that's what I'm saying. I think that what I'm doing with microdancing is creating that effect without having to wait for the person to die, poor person. Yes. Right? One can do is on a protocol. And that's what I'd like to research now. Oh, it'd be amazing. You know, it's obviously, I've got proof of the thing that it happens. You can't fake it. You can't fake someone coming back to life again in the look in the eyes. So it's there. And just let's get the space so legally, I can set it up with the best people. You know? Yeah. I can set it up and we can do it. And then if we get successful data, we can open clinics, care homes, which service is. And then hopefully the people can take the treatment home with them. Hmm. One of the more bizarre things that comes out of psychedelic experience is contact with entities, contact with what seems to be some other form of consciousness. What do you think is going on with that? That I love you. I love you. I love you. Flashing across the ceiling. Oh, that's a shooting star. Yeah. I have to tell people about that, especially people that have had psychedelic experiences. I think they're having a flashback. Sorry, I didn't want you. But what do I think? Certain compounds create it more than others. DMT, much more, LSD doesn't really produce entities. Right. Strangely. It's, I think it's a... Yeah. And you saw a sibern does. Yeah, but that's got DMT in it. Rides. Which, LSD. That's why I love LSD. I think is more like a flower opening up. I, it's more of yourself. Right. Where as DMT, whether it's a wasker or a siller siberd to a lesser degree, has this slightly boom, boom, boom, like a dominating sound. Slightly, I don't really like the colours as much as I do. You don't? Not quite. These kind of moves and browns. And I prefer that LSD colours. You see, you see moves and browns when you do DMT? Well, I'm not a DMT person. I mean, I've done it. Yeah. But I don't. Because I've seen very bright vivid colours. I've not seen moths. Having this seen darker colours. I've found it slightly dark. It's really interesting. It's interesting. I was once in quite recently in a room of a session when people were doing it. They were in a very 10 people in the room. Three of them were in a battleground. A poor boy had had much of a smuttle and screaming and yelling and getting burned. And the person who looked after him was a very practiced person in these things. He'd never said to be, well, actually, I was a massacre myself. And you know, I mean, you know, he was... Well, he looked after the person, but he's very well contained with his massacre. So he was still married to look after him. But I actually thought, I don't really... So choose compounds which bring the tendency of those sort of experiences. But I know people have wonderful experiences. Yeah. I've never had those negative experiences like that. No, my experience has been very vivid and bright. Right. And enlightening. Right. Yeah. And the entities are very colourful. Right. And the ones that are very colourful and wild, beautiful, loving experiences. Right. How lovely. Yeah. Well, that's very lucky because I knew people who had horrible ones too. But I mean, obviously, they come and they get. Do you think that that's people struggling with the experience and trying to control it? I'm sure trying to control it is... Is... That's not a good detrimental. Yeah. And I think people are very lucky who've never had a really bad experience. I had a really bad experience when someone right back in the first year of my taking LSD, someone who had actually turned lily on to LSD, who was a kind of freak, not a nice person. I told her. Anyway, he had a vinegar bottle of sand loss, vitamin C. Wow. Not the LSD. And he offered me so much, I think. I didn't want him to do anything. Anyway, I didn't want him around. And then he poured it into my coffee. Oh, God. Without telling me. Oh, God. And the thousands of trips. Oh, God. And so I had a dying experience. That was a really bad experience. And once you cut a thing in the soul or the body, you retain that. The pathway. Yeah, that pathway. So I think people who've had really bad experiences and have got pathways cut are more likely if they're given a psychedelic or fearful of getting down that route. Right. Do you think that's a memory retention? Like perhaps they remember the bad trip and then they start manifesting it. Yeah. And I think they definitely remember the question is whether they can remember it in which it's a cool way to have gotten the word. Epidogenics says, maybe you can go on for generations of memories. Oh, man. But I don't know if that's... Yeah. But I quite agree with you. I mean, if you're someone who's never had a really bad experience, you're much less likely to have it. And that's a great gift. Yeah. And that's what we want everyone to be like. More thoroughly. Yeah. What do you think you're encountering, like especially on DMT, what do you think the entities are? Do you think that's a figment of the imagination? Do you think it's the consciousness expressing itself in different ways through the visual cortex? Yeah. What? Yeah. What do you think is actually an entity? I know Sean, of a wasker here. And he says he always considered in the dummy, sent it to him, he charged. their, consider entities a deflection of attention. It's better not to go into the world of entities. Well. But a lot of people love the entities. Yeah. And I said, I didn't know my son was had an entity experience with wasker. And the entities toast him. Why do you have so many... Is that a collection of sneakers? I use a sneakers. Yes. But he's done. He got a passion of sneakers. That's funny. So I don't know. I'm not an expert on entities. I was wondering if maybe that's your own consciousness recognizing that you're obsessing about a thing. Yeah. I think there's that element about it. I think, I mean, I think there's, I'm hoping this researcher I'm doing on the mystical experience. I think a normalist experiences like telepathy, telepathy I know happens to my own satisfaction. I mean, no doubt. How so? Because with my pigeon lover, we were lovers for 15 years. Passionate lovers. In Tesla wasn't Tesla in love with the pigeon as well. Yeah. And he was. Well, it just so happened that his mother died on the window ledge. And Joe went to collect her body. We were trying to feed her. And there was a little day old fledgling without any feathers. And he raised her. And he shouldn't have lived because he didn't have that age. But I fed him. Warmer milk and me, weetabix on the paintbrush. And he became, I mean, he was, he became just obsessive. And he became the boss. And Joe said to me, let's get rid of this pigeon, this creature. We're going to have him, and let's put him out. We're going to have him forever. And he can ruin our lives. I put him out. I'm not going to put him out. My beloved girl, Papa. And I went and brought him in again. And sure enough, we had him forever. I wasn't going to be late. He lived for 15 years. Wow. But he was then killed. I always knew he'd be killed. Somehow. And the interesting thing I went to the story because it's too long. But I knew before he died. And I said out loud to him as he flew by. I said, buddy, I love you more than anything else in the world. That was the last thing I said to him. And then he died. And I knew he'd dead as painting a picture of him as he'd painting a picture. I suddenly had this thing. But I did that. And so I did what I had never done. I stopped painting and went down to look for him. Anyway, it turned out my father, who was also very kind of in on those sort of things. But he was very fond of. Had lost his tempo with the old come when we had for 50 years and told him to go and cut these, having nettles somewhere in the nettles was birdies still warm body. So I knew before it happened. And he knew within 10 minutes of it happening. I mean, how many dead birds do you get? See, how dare I? I mean, birds dying all the time. The key. You never trace them. Birdie. And then once we took birdie camping, yes, before that, anyway, it's a dull story. But he flew off. And then I did a national, I got on English, BBC, News. I said he was a hero and ten years new film. And because I put adverts in the time that they were looking for, but I love it great, I love them pigeon. I got thousands of people saying they had it. We went all over England collecting these wretched pigeons which were meant to be birdied. And then I went up to the television and did this petition for birdied on the television on the news because I said he was the star of Antonyone's new film. I asked Antonyone if I could do that and he said yes. And so the BBC was jammed with telephones seeing the people finding the same body. And then I was really upset because they said they never introduced whatever people who bring in to people looking for fear of something. Anyway, so I was incredibly sad because of what the point of the whole thing, the whole point was to get birdied back. And then there was one telephone call which came from the police station. And because Birdie had landed on a washing line of a man who didn't have a telephone, so he didn't do his own telephone, he sent his son to the police station saying he had birdie. And because it was the police's line, it got through to me and that was Birdie. Oh. You see what I mean? Multiple things of telepathy. And other things, I mean, I mean, no doubt the telepathy exists. Are you all not? I think it probably does in some way. I think it's an emergent property of human consciousness that's not quite fully formed. I think it's there because of our egos and we don't sense it. I mean, because animals know when there's going to be a serious army, no animals die. And this is army, they all got the mountain. Well, humans don't have that sense. You know? Yes. Because we've got too much noise in the brain. So I think we've got the sense, but we don't use it. Right. You see, oh, don't know how to use it. So I think it's there. And I love those sort of things. I'd love to know. I think they work with the same centers in the brain as their mystical experience. Say by learning more about the mystical experience, one can hook on to learn more about anomalous experiences. You know, like I know a Buddhist monk who can shoot electricity, kind of thing. I mean, strange things which are unexplicable at the moment. But it'd be very interesting to find out. So you think that these are probably abilities that we have, but they're stifled by ego. They're stifled by noise. They're stifled by anxiety. They're stifled by. I think they're probably skills that you have to design. I mean, it is a funny thing that animals aren't ever killed by sis army. Right. They just have their just being to go up, up, everywhere. Yeah, it happens. That they have some under sense of sense. I think things like telepathy happen with two things. Passion, love, love, passion, eye connection, and threat. I think they put the tendency, the sense of more likely to sense it if it's like that. I mean, that's why I had passion for baddie. And it was when he was in danger on several occasions that I found him when his wings were trapped. Do you see what I mean? Right. Like, you sensed it. Yeah. You had this connection with them. Yeah. And I've had it with humans too. But it's usually a threat to life, a kind of a drenal threat, which obviously sends a message if you're there ready to receive it. One of the things about ayahuasca was when they were first recognizing it, they tried to call one of the compounds of it telepathy. Yes. Yeah. But then they realized that it had already been named. It was already harming. Right. Right. We did the first. I did the first research with Hamim, which someone called Jody Reba, who's a wonderful Spanish scientist on Hamim and neurogegesis. We showed that it increased neurogegesis. It has those soo-sibin, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting. It's very good. We're going to find out so much. And he committed so-so-sibally, which is a tragedy because he was a great scientist. But yeah, they so much to understand. And I think we're at such a incredibly interesting sphere of investigation. Yes. Because he sings all over on the cusp of where we are and where we can go to the future. Yeah. Well, I think that's why it's so wonderful that someone like you was out here with this passion for doing this research. And one for your spreading information about these things to people. Because it has to get out there. That people are actually interested. And then force our politicians in a nice way. But you know, to change- Well, Lisa, it really needs to be changed. It does. And because I do think, I think the use of cannabis and psychedelics can enhance one's relationship with one's partner. One can help see the other viewpoint. It can get over difficult periods. Yes. I think you can do that with walling countries. Yes. I think, you know, empathy increases empathy. It increases the possibility we know from the fact we've done and other people have done too. That amygdala is lowered, particularly with M.D. of air, of fear. So you can approach things which are fearful, like trauma, better. I mean, there's so many different pathways that these compounds can help enable humanity to get to their healthier, nobler, more creative expressions of themselves. I mean, the number of people I know, and I bet you know, many more, who've said it changed their lives, their experience. It changed mine. Yeah. And mine. And mine. I mean, I didn't think, I know I couldn't have done what I've done without what I got from these compounds, giving me that strategy and understanding. And that's what I think should be there. I passionately think psychedelics are a gift of the gods in inverted comms. It's a... It's... Which should be there. I passionately think psychedelics are a gift of the gods in inverted commons. It's natural gift which shouldn't be expensive. We must keep it so it's affordable to the poorest and the rest of the world and the passion we devote. Because nothing. I started, I've tried started a legal, a becca in labs to make top-level compounds. Both times something happened. I never had the money to have a legal, so I never had a legal agreement. Actually the person who was did the dirty old man, just got going. Never happened. But I wanted to happen because the purpose was to keep it low price. People have to make money, getting a compound through phase three, because hundreds of millions. As governments aren't paying, they're lucky to have people who invest money to do it. But then one wants to try to make sure that the investment doesn't stop other people being able to have been able to do it. How we work out, how you do the research, get it done. The whole thing is maintained in an ethical way. It's not going to be a sport of rich people only. It's going to be democratised. That's the benefit of the rich people as well. And the rich people are the ones who hopefully are those who take the risk of, as the governments don't do it, of putting their money in to make the studies happen. The really governments should be encouraging. To give the British government, they did fund depression studies, second time round to give them their tooth. I know that night is now, Pardonnay. But I mean, it's a pitense. One's needing a lot of money to allow, I mean, I do studies. I do them fantastically cheap. I think since I started the Beckley 25 years ago, I think, between my 20 years, I think she said, I've had about five and a half million pounds in total. For 25 years, it's amazing. I've done a lot of the breakthroughs. But I'm now late, I am. And I can't go on paper working 15 hours a day. I would like to be able to do what I can do now, which is a lot because I know the compiles say, well, I know well, they'll strengths where to use them. And it's such fun doing business, like playing golf. One's not staying there. And it's a much more interesting game because then maybe one can help deal with Alzheimer's, maybe one can help all these conditions, which I think these compiles can help. Just elevate humanity in general. Yeah, exactly. And not only for treating people, but elevation, I think that's absolutely as important. And that's why it has to not have to be only be a medicine. It's a medicine, which is essential, but it's also an Alexia to make the human animal love bright talking ape a bit less of an idiot. Yes, yes. I think that's a great way to wrap this up. Thank you very much. I really, really appreciate you being here. And I really appreciate everything you've done. It means so much to just to the whole world. Well, thank you very much for asking me. If someone wants to learn more about your research, where should they go? Well, to the Beckley Foundation, but we have, you know, we have a tiny organization. So we can never, I mean, I have to have a look at the website. And do you see what I mean? Yes. What I would they can help because I can do a lot of one for such. I've got a very good, tiny tea, but I want to do more research and make things happen. So you want people to contribute. So there's a good idea. If you go to the Beckley Foundation.org in the upper right hand corner, there's a donation button. You can support psychedelic research. You can donate from anywhere in the world, UK tax deductible donations, US tax deductible donations, donate via bank transfer, cryptocurrency, Apple Pay. Amazing. Well, I've never seen it, but well done. It's really competent. But it'd be lovely if it starts to work. Because it's particularly difficult now that business, because people think why put money in the bottom as well, but one could put it in a well, which could spread. But I think there's an advantage in philanthropy because one's not guided by profit at all. When it's private, guided by the knowledge we get. And then that can become profitable. Yes. Thank you very much. Thank you for being here. I really appreciate it. And thank you for asking me. My pleasure. Bye bye.