Good evening and welcome and happy anniversary tonight is the one year anniversary of Trump's second election to the presidency. It was a year ago tonight. The Donald Trump not only won but won a majority of the popular vote. And not only won a majority of the popular vote, but one with a coalition that was broader than any Republican coalition probably since 1984 with the Reagan landslide. So a 40 year coalition. And at the time looking at not just how many people voted but who voted, it seemed really obvious if you were interested in keeping the left at bay and the Republicans in power for say the next generation or two. You would copy exactly what Donald Trump did because no one else has done it in 40 years. He created this amazing not just landslide, but it was an amazing victory in an environment in which most people assumed you couldn't have an authoritative victory because the country is just too closely divided. So it was an amazing thing that Donald Trump did a year ago. So the election was a year ago. That means the midterm election is a year from now. The next presidential election tears after that. So it's probably not too early to start thinking through what comes after Donald Trump, no respect to the sitting disrespect, the sitting president. But of course, there's going to be something after him because he can't run again and leads to say people are thinking about that and know what they're thinking about. They're already arguing and fighting about it. There is what political is calling a civil war in the Republican Party. And it's over of course, identity because the only wars we have in this country, the only sanctioned wars we have domestically are about identity, BLM, anti-Semitism. Where's this not really what they're ever about? These are proxy wars. These are wars waged on behalf of people who aren't directly participating for reasons that are never openly stated. And this war is actually about what comes after Donald Trump. Does the Republican Party, the party that now has power and a lot of money, revert to what it was before Trump, or does it continue to evolve in the direction that Trump has steered it? That's the question. And on that question hangs a lot. Well, control of the most powerful country in the world. Control of the free world, such as it is, the shrinking free world. And you know, an awful lot of jobs for people and an awful lot of military power. So there is a lot at stake in this contest. So consider the two choices here. You can go with the Republican Party as it was, which is basically neo-conservative foreign policy, libertarian economic policy, the Republican Party of the think tanks in Washington of the Wall Street Journal editorial page of all the deep thinkers and the Republican Party deep thinkers. The ones who are always invoking the same three Reagan quotes and quoting toke villain correctly and doing their little where area diet impression or does it continue to become what it is currently becoming, which is the party of Donald Trump. Well, what is that? What is magga exactly? How do you make America great again? Well, Donald Trump in his signature way, which is to say never quite spelling everything all the way out is not very ideological, but instead sort of leading by implication and by action, the position of Donald Trump in the last election was America first. And what does America first mean? America first means very simply the US government should act foremost on behalf of American citizens, which is to say every big decision the US government makes should keep in mind the top of the list of concerns. How does this affect the people who pay for this and who I represent? And again, most people thought that was their system that we already had turns out it wasn't Donald Trump awakened all of us to that. The system was not acting in the interest of the country was acting really without reference to the people living in the country. It didn't care. And it was acting on behalf of a bunch of other different imperatives and Donald Trump steered it back to where it was supposed to be in the first place, which was acting on behalf of America. That's America first means. This was not just a popular message. This is the most popular political message that any candidate has delivered in many, many generations. And it's popular because excuse me, it's self-evidently true. Who wouldn't want that? And that exactly that message is the message that drew a record high number of famously black voters, Latino voters, voters of all kinds, just American voters united by a belief that the US government ought to represent them and drain the swamp and no more pointless wars, etc. But they're all branches of the same tree, which is America first, which is not only a non-threatening message, it's really the only legitimate message that a leader of America can send. And it's the only legitimate principle that can guide any American leader. So that is the winning message. If you're hoping to keep the Republican Party dominant or make it into something more positive than it currently is, cleave to that. And you will win. It's super obvious. There's like no person who thinks about this for six minutes who could disagree with that. On the other side is a return to the Republican Party that we had before, which is a party that has all kinds of other agendas, most of which are never publicly revealed. And that spends a lot of its time policing and so in members. Now, what is it attempt to achieve by policing them? Well, it attempts to achieve silence. And want some to shut up about what is actually happening, and what is actually happening, is that on the foreign policy side, which is the side that Washington cares about because it's got the most money and the most power, you can literally kill people and there's no power greater than that, our foreign policy is not wholly dependent on the whims of Israel. Of course, we have acting a lot parts of the world that have nothing to do with Israel. But it is unduly influenced by the concerns of Israel. And in some cases, the US government has acted and these are all well-known. The Iraq war, for example, has acted in ways that hurt the United States in order to help Israel. It has put the aims of the foreign power above its own interests. And that's immoral. It's illegitimate. It's extremely unpopular domestically. And it just doesn't work over time. That's not sustainable. You can't. There's no way to justify that. So rather than trying to justify it, they scream at people and tell them to be quiet and read them out of the movement and call them names and threaten them. But ultimately, because it's not a winning message, it cannot win over time, particularly if people are allowed or somehow managed to describe it accurately. And unfortunately for the guardians of the old system, the older public and party, people have been allowed to describe it accurately, mostly because Elon Musk opened up X. And when you did that, you get all kinds of filth and nonsense and lies, but you also get some truth, actually quite a bit of truth. And one of the main things that people are telling the truth about that they didn't tell the truth about before is that our foreign policy really doesn't have much to do with what's good for the United States. And once those words have been uttered, they can't be taken back and they change people's minds and the polls reflect the fact that they have. People's views are different. So in the face of this kind of inevitable change of heart, collective change of heart in America, both parties are like, wait, why are we doing this? The people who are benefiting from the older arrangement, which only continued because it was maintained by threats and silence, those people are going absolutely bonkers. And they have been a week in their claiming it's about one thing, Holocaust or something like that. But no, really, it's about who controls the public and party after Donald Trump. That's what it's really about. So ignore the moral posturing. This is a power struggle as all political parties have from time to time. And this one just happens to have a lot of emotionally unbalanced hysterical people with no limits who have access to social media. So they're scared to crap out of everybody. But it's it's really kind of a conventional power struggle. So who are the players in this? Well, some of them are in the pundit class. They're more ludicrous ones are in the pundit class. But some of them are actual sitting politicians. And if you were to choose one who symbolizes what we're actually debating and the stakes of this conversation, it would have to be Lindsey Graham. Lindsey is a Senator, a senior Senator from the state of South Carolina, one of the most conservative, reliably Republican states out of 50. And he has been in Congress since 1994, so that would be 31 years. And he is running for yet another term as a US Senator. He's 70 years old. He'd like to serve till he's 77. And he has the support, not simply of the White House. He has an endorsement from the president, but he has more donor support probably than anyone who's ever run in this tonight's states. I mean, Lindsey Graham has so much donor support and donor is just as a numerical question probably represent, you know, 100th of 1% of the American population, but I have a a great deal higher proportion of the money. He's the most popular candidate they've ever backed. He's like a higher IQ less grading Nikki Haley, run to Santa's. And so they'll be backing him. And all things being equal, he will be reelected. And so why does this matter? Well, it matters not because Lindsey Graham is like a horrible person. I mean, maybe a horrible person. The truth is Lindsey Graham is actually a very charming person and a very interesting dinner partner and a fun person to be with hilariously funny. I met him for the first time. I was his seatmate on a campaign bus in 1999. He was a member of Congress and we spent a couple of weeks sitting next to each other. And by the end, I thought to myself, I love this guy. He's hilarious. Always a joke. Always such a drinking his hand. Like he's a, he's genuinely a cheerful person, probably fun to play golf with. So the reason that this is an important race is not because Lindsey Graham is like Markle event, you know, someone you, if you're stuck in elevator with him, you'd have to obviously kill yourself because you couldn't handle. He's not that you wouldn't show you didn't enjoy being stuck in an elevator with him. The reason that's so important is because Lindsey Graham is the living symbol of the older public and party, the Republican party that did a lot, almost as much as the Democratic party to destroy the United States. And so if he is reelected next November, that will be a sign that actually the Democratic system doesn't work. When's he grimace, who use are not popular, they are despised in the state of South Carolina. His views, if you're a disaggregate Lindsey Graham from what he believes and just pole Republican primary voters in South Carolina do agree with this, Lindsey Graham would be less popular than the Democrat because his views are repugged in to Republican voters and to Trump voters. And so if he were to get elected anyway, it would tell you that the system doesn't respond to the concerns of voters. And therefore the system isn't working and isn't legitimate because the point of the system is to respond to those concerns. And so a lot is at stake. If Lindsey Graham wins, it will be the most dispiriting thing to happen in American politics in a very, very long time. So Kamala Harris, what word of wind in the last, you know, you're good at night, it would be horrible. It should be an awful president, but we even worse than Biden in secure, fragile, weird, dumb, you can just imagine, nightmare. But at least you could say, well, she was elected by a party that kind of agrees with her, you know, Kamala Harris got elected because the Democrats are saying, okay, what's the excuse if you're a Republican voter, if you're a Trump voter for electing Lindsey Graham? Hmm, hard to think of one. So just want to spend a couple of minutes before we go to one of the men challenging Lindsey Graham in the Republican primary next June, Paul Dan, so we're going to talk to in a minute. We want to go through a couple of things you should know about Lindsey so if Graham gets reelected, it'll be because the true Lindsey Graham has record his views, his priorities, his dark impulses are all lost in the haze of propaganda that surrounds him and people only know through the political ads that, you know, his donors paid for. So we think it's important for people to know who he actually is. We're going to start with a clip. We could do this for like eight hours, but we're going to do this for like 20 minutes because we want to get to the guest. We're going to start with a clip from this past Saturday, I think, this past weekend and Lindsey Graham was giving his speech to the Republican Jewish coalition, I think in Vegas. And he was one of many speakers who were getting hysterical and threatening violence against Republicans who don't agree with them and jumping up and down and raging about the Nazis, the Nazis, you know, 80 years after we defeated them. And Lindsey Graham was probably in some ways less hysterical, but he was the kind of most important office holder at this event. And he sent a couple of things that really reveal the program precisely. Here is Lindsey Graham this last weekend. He recognized Jerusalem, this capital, Israel. Why? Because if you got a problem with that, take it up with God. He's the guy. Did it not Trump. So I just want to say, I feel good about the Republican Party. I feel good about where we're going as a nation. We're killing all the right people and we're cutting your taxes. So other couple of things to notice about this that really tell you everything you need to about Lindsey Graham first, he's in and we left the contactor. He's defending Donald Trump. He's saying not defending Trump is probably pretty popular in the room, but he's saying, you know, remember, Trump's like a great president. Why is he great? Well, because he moved the US embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. But I mean, okay, you can be in case for it or not, but like why should I care exactly? It's a purely symbolic move. It has actual consequences internally in Israel, but it doesn't even pretend to improve your life. Graham didn't get up and say, you know, you may prescription drugs cheaper. He's got a lawyer, health insurance, you may be easier for your kids to buy a home. He got the cities under control. They're now safe. You can use the parks. He's improving the schools. You couldn't send your kids to public school. Now you can. You couldn't use the emergency rooms again because he's deported 10 million illegal aliens who were hogging the space, which is where we currently are. Now, the reason you should love Trump is because he moved the embassy, the US embassy in a foreign country from one city to another. Huh? Why does that matter? Well, Lindsey Graham explain why matters because God commanded it. Oh, if you don't like that ticket with God. So God, it turns out, and this may be in one of the non canonical books in the scriptures, God wanted the US State Department to move the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. I mean, it's like kind of a basic tenant of our faith that it may even be in the catechism. What? And of course, given the venue, no one raised hands that I'm sorry, Lindsey Graham, not a Bible scholar here, but how do we know the God, one of the state department to move an embassy? You know, 80 miles or whatever the distance is from one city to another. How do we know that's God's preference? But Lindsey, this is kind of a ticket of Lindsey Graham. So he explained recently that if you have a problem with ins Israel, God will kill you. Now, when he could the United States, he said, almost quoting him here, the United States, abandoned Israel, God will abandon the United States and kill us all. We'll die if we don't support as he calls it Israel. Israel. This is the Mike Huckabee pronunciation. Israel, which may be some kind of like dog whistle meant to telegraph that like I'm really on your side. It may be like the chief rather than Kiev. When you call it Israel, it's like, yeah, I got it. We're on the same page. But anyway, so the first thing we learned is the most important fact to know about Trump. The reason you should love him is he supports Israel. Second is God demands whatever sort of like policy of the moment is God's will. Lindsey Graham who like just guessing probably not a Bible scholar. And if he is he's skipping over certain parts of the book. Excuse me. And the third thing to learn, and this really is the heart of Lindsey Graham, is that the Republican Party is doing what you voted for us to do. And that is what I'm quoting now, cutting your taxes and killing all the right people. So that's like that's the perfect distillation. Lindsey Graham is clever. He's hardly a genius. He's not like a philosopher or anything. But he has summed up the Republican Party that Donald Trump overthrew more precisely than any person I've ever heard in my life, cutting your taxes and killing all the right people. Because that really is the crispest way to describe the marriage of libertarian economics and neo-conform policy, cutting taxes and killing. And if you think about it, who'd want to be associated with that? An argument for higher taxes, higher taxes can be bad. But cutting taxes is not a virtue in itself. The point is if people are overburdened by the tax system, I was hurting them. And we're not getting a lot out of it if it's growing like you know some completely impenetrable democracy that's hurting the country, which it is, by the way. Then of course you want to cut taxes, I guess, to start with the cancer or whatever. You can make the argument. But cutting taxes itself is hardly a virtue. It's a contextual matter. Sometimes it is. Sometimes it is. It totally depends. But in Lindsey Graham's simplistic, but heartfelt formulation, cutting taxes is just a positive but always. And so it's killing people. Killing people is going to sum up foreign policy, killing people, killing people, killing people. Killing the right people. No, they got to be the right people. But killing people. Killing people is just a good thing. Like it's honestly you don't need to describe. It's like sex with your wife. It's just good. Have you killed someone today? Oh, good. You have. Okay, good. That's how we think of it. And if you take three steps back, I mean, you're sort of tempted if you've known Lindsey Graham like I have for 25 years, you're like, yeah, that's Lindsey Graham. I mean, I was always saying these provocative things. But if you think about it for a second, you're a sick fuck if you say something like that, much less if you believe it. Killing people, if you're met anyone who's killed someone, you probably have. You may be someone who's taken a human life. It's a very heavy thing. And it's something that even if you win the fight and walk away and the other man doesn't, it stays with you for life because it's the heaviest thing there is. And it's the most forbidden thing there is. It's the darkest thing there is. We don't create life. And except under very rare specific circumstances, we're not allowed to extinguish it because we're not God. And so if you're casually encouraging other people to kill. And if you're gleefully in front of an audience, applauding like seals bragging about the killing that you are doing, you know, you're not on the team you think you are. That's really evil. And if that's what your party amounts to, cutting taxes and killing people, who's for that? I mean, some people are for it, all the the ghouls in the room or for it. Do they people? Okay. But most people, especially when they have time to think about it, like you're on a plane, you have time to stare at them and think about what something means, you're repulsed by that because it's repulsive. It's the most repulsive thing. And in fact, a good government, a government that really cared about its people would do everything it possibly could to prevent people with that attitude like Lindsey Graham from ever holding power or wielding it over others because they're monsters. Sure. Full monster. Hilarious monster. Good nature monster. But monster. There's kind of no way around it. And in a moment where people are being, you know, deep platformed and censored and screamed at and called names for their opinions. Some of those opinions are good. Some are bad. Okay. We can debate opinions. But just not we're not debating opinions. We're just crushing people for having opinions that, you know, we're characterizing a certain way and calling them bad to announcing them. Here you have a guy who's really never denounced by anybody bragging about killing. You know, the little ghouls are applauding. It's amazing moment. Breaking news, beams, cyber sales open for early access to the people who listen to this show. The select few, they're best offered for the year. It lasts for 48 hours. Let's start. So this show get up to 50% off by using the code Tucker. That means you can get beams dream powder for just 32 bucks and 50 cents. That's only $1.8 per night for the best sleep we've ever had. Visit shopbeam.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker. This is the lowest price dream has ever been sold anywhere. Probably sell it fast. Dream is packed with ingredients your body needs to sleep. Natural ingredients. Nothing weird magnesium, melatonin, but dosed intelligently, not like the drugstore garbage that knocks you out at least you groggy. It's like a head injury totally different. Better visit shopbeam.com slash Tucker use the code Tucker get up to 50% off during being cyber sale. You can grab dream for just 32 dollars and 50 cents. But only until it sells out. Think about it. How much did you pay to get a great night's sleep? 8 hours uninterrupted with beam cyber price $1.8 per night shopbeam.com slash Tucker shopbeam.com slash Tucker. But if you're a Republican voter, if you're a Trump voter, for example, a Republican donor or someone who thinks of himself as like kind of boxed in by the system and unable to vote for anybody but Republicans, you need to do whatever you can to make sure that that's not your party's platform cutting taxes and killing people. And you need to make sure that the guy who's joking about it on stage and beaming with joy as he talks about murder is not one of your leaders. You really have to do that for your own sake. And for the sake of your country. Now, are we taking that out of context? Is that just like something we pulled and he was maybe drunk again? And it was a joke and we're being unfair and no, no, no, no, no, Lindsey Graham of all members except maybe this, that weird guy from Florida Randy fine. It was like openly endorsing genocide. Lindsey Graham of every member of Congress can be relied upon at every public event, every photo opportunity every time you run into him on the street to be calling for the murder of somebody. Killing is the point of Lindsey Graham's political career. Trying to convince the rest of us to get in board with killing when we won't screaming at us and calling us names and you're the hater because you're not in board with killing this or that person. It's all about killing people. I want to give you a second example. This is Lindsey Graham who's from the very beginning been a staunch supporter of really one of the most brutal dictators that just say it out loud in Europe in 80 years. And that would be Zelensky, the unelected dictator of Ukraine, especially devoting half of his life to extinguishing Christianity in Ukraine, all of us are supposed to ignore that, but it's actually happening, putting priests in jail. Killing is political opponents, murdering critics. That's happening right now. Lindsey Graham, of course, loves him because he's doing a lot of killing killing the right people. So let's see put it. Here's Lindsey Graham in a conversation with Zelensky, and sorry, another parenthetical note, Graham and Zelensky, both of whom are hardened warriors run around in military and the former is talking about a tough day or neither one will ever sit for an interview. That is an a kiss ass interview. I've made about a hundred requests to each of them. No, so they interview each other. But here's Lindsey Graham talking to Prime Minister Zelensky about killing watch. Three or a half for your death. Now we go free. Yes, and we will be. And the Russians are dying. It's the best money we've ever spent. Thank you so much. The Russians are dying. It's the best money we've ever spent. Again, just encouraging you to think about what you're hearing for a second because all of a sudden we live in a moment when a lot of people are espousing violence. It's funny a year ago, if you would ask a year on election night, if you would ask a lot of Trump voters like, why are you voting for Trump? They would give positive reasons. I really think that the American government should serve American citizens. I believe in America first. But they would also, I think, say, I'm really afraid of the other guys. And two of the things that bother me most about them is they don't believe in free speech. They're constantly pushing for censorship. And the rhetoric is violent. The rhetoric, they're encouraging violence. They encourage to be a lemur. I it's the encouraged violence all the time. And yet a year later, here you have all these leading Republicans doing what are they doing? Oh, demanding censorship should be fired for saying that. You shouldn't platform someone, meaning you shouldn't let it talk. And you shouldn't be allowed to talk to people we disagree with. Well, I said, we're in charge of who you talk to. That's not totalitarian or anything. I can choose who you talk to. And we're going to just openly say that people we don't like should die, should die. And here's Lindsey Graham taking joy in, and I'm quoting, Russians dying, best money we ever spent. If you can spend money to make people die, that is money well spent. You freak. By the way, it's not, you know, here are the five generals or 10 generals or list of people we think are responsible for war crimes in the Don boss. Okay, okay. I mean, we can debate whether they are or not. Probably not. But maybe they are. And you'd say the person who committed the crime is being punished. But Lindsey Graham, who has a completely non-Western understanding of justice, is saying because they are in this group, they must die. So that's the distinction. And this is the actual fight. It's a fight between people who understand justice the way that Christians understand justice, which is on an individual basis, we punish the guilt, we punish the person for committing the crime. We don't punish his kids. People who share the same last name or live down the street from him or look like him or are somehow related to him speak the same languages him because they didn't do anything wrong. We don't punish the innocent in Christianity because we believe in the human soul, the individual we don't think we're judged as a group. We think we are judges individuals will stand alone alone before God to account for what we did. Now for what our kids did, not for what our grandparents did, not for what our neighbors did or our countrymen did or our leaders did, but for what we did. That is the basis of Western justice as being abandoned. And without a fight because people don't understand what is happening, but make no mistake, the attitude that you just heard from Lindsey Graham is in eastern understanding a non-Christian understanding of justice. The Russians, what does that mean? What Russians? Just Russians, they're dying, best money we ever spent. So you're watching two things. You're watching someone who's embraced collective punishment as Israel has, as most of the world has, by the way, it's such as the Israel and it's such a slingsy graham. It's most countries that most times in history, believed in collective punishment and collective reward, you're the favorite group, you're the tootsies and you get a better deal or whatever, you're the chosen people in whatever society or religion, but you're the brahman's, you get because of your DNA, a better deal. The diversity, DEI affirmative action, there are all species of the same kind of thinking, which is collective thinking, which denies the reality of the individual human soul. And it is therefore anti-Christian. And the entire West was set up as a bulwark against that kind of thinking. And that's why it succeeded. And that's why it's been free and prosperous and happy. And people like Lindsey Graham don't acknowledge that and instead they worship death. And he has noted a long career of doing this. This is not a conservative principle. This is not a Christian principle. This is a left wing atheist agnostic at best principle. This is the I am God. I'll kill whom I want when I want principle. And it's been on display his whole life on January 6th. Lindsey Graham said to a capital police officer, you guys have guns. Why don't you shoot them all in the head? I wish you had shoot them all in the head. These aren't Russians. These are Americans. These are like 60 year old ladies with pocket constitutions in their handbags and diabetes and bad knees who thought their election was stolen from them because they believe in the system. And so they marched on the capital. They didn't know at the time that they were like 230 FBIs. Whatever they were, agents, provocateurs that the whole thing was managed. Some of us sensed that immediately Lindsey Graham could find out to be he has his in care. Those people in some cases lured into this trap allowed into the capital by security. That's on. M could find out, he has his in care. Those people in some cases lured into this trap allowed into the Capitol by security. That's on videotape, we're not guessing. Those people should be executed because what? They made him scared and he was scared. A 911 talk to his colleagues, I have. Lindsey Graham was terrified. Lindsey Graham was a physical coward, of course he is. All the chicken hawks are. That's why they don't fight the wars, but they're also. Victims in this. When you call for the deaths of others, when you regard other people's lives as meaningless, when you think it's the best use of federal tax dollars to murder them as he does, you become more afraid for your own life. It's always true. Dictators are always paranoid and afraid. They're never brave ever. And Lindsey Graham is no different. Shoot them in the face. So the idea that Lindsey Graham is a conservative with the caveat that like who even knows what a conservative is now conservative is. Mark Levin, a conservative Dave Rubin, whoever that is, is he conservative? Okay, I guess. Whatever, but if those are the people, Ted Cruz conservative, I don't want to take a closer look at Ted Cruz's life. What's conservative about it? Let's take a closer look at Lindsey Graham's life. Is that conservative? And what's the reference point for that? What do you even mean? People like that have a completely different set of values on the deepest level, not on a surface level. We're not arguing here about tax rates. You know, and whether we should allow reimpartation prescription drugs. I mean, it's not a policy debate. This is a debate that flows from deepest level convictions from foundational beliefs and that is evident in the way that people live. If I took a microscope to your life, what would I find? And in the case of almost every single warmonger you find chaos and sadness and alienation and weird behavior and abuse ofness and alcoholism, it's like if they're a disaster and so they're projecting outward the hate that they feel on in some cases in dire populations and increasingly on the American population, on the American population. So when you think of like a conservative as buttoned down and has its act together as committed to his family and his grandchildren, it's like this is not that conservative. So are they conservatives who knows what they are? But the point is Lindsey Graham has sided with the Democratic Party from his earliest days in the Congress. I mean, this is literally the guy who convinced John McCain to turn over the ridiculous rushigate the original rushigate private investigator slash Intel agency files about Donald Trump, the P tape at the rest to turn it over to the FBI's if it was real. Lindsey Graham believed that the 2020 election with the 2016 election was controlled by Russia. It was never any evidence for that at all. But he believed that he said it. He believed Trump was a Russian agent. How did he wind up and then he'll start out? I mean, God knows what's actually going on. But the point is if that's the future of the Republican Party, it's going to be a very small party and it's going to be a small party where like the worst people in the world are all like clustered together and jocks nipping yelling at each other. Who knows what they do? But if you wonder like who Lindsey Graham actually is, what his gut instincts are, take a look at his first reaction to the death of George Foote. In case you don't remember that story, it was Memorial Day 2020. This convicted armed robber, home invader, drug addict from a porn star tries to pass a counterfeit bill in a convenience store like this. Percubina store owners in Minneapolis and gets arrested for it and then promptly dies of a drug OD. That was all pretty obvious from day one actually. But that wasn't Lindsey Graham's view at all. Here's what Lindsey Graham said about George Floyd. The topic for the country is what to do after the death of Mr. Floyd and what does the death of Mr. Floyd mean? Well, it's a long overdue wake up call to the country that there are too many of these cases where African American men die in police custody under fairly brutal circumstances. Mr. Floyd's case is outrageous on his face, but I think it speaks to a broader issue. I think this committee has the potential to reinforce things in society that will lead to better policing. And hopefully one day if you're a young black man and the cops pull up behind you, you be wondering if you were going too fast rather than you're going to get beat up. Like it is liberal white women like Lindsey Graham who are the real problem. I mean, here he is. What's his first instinct? By the way, that's June of 2020. That's like days after it happens. Congressional hearing Kamala Harris is looking like, hmm, as a fake black person. I'm really, really concerned about what you're saying, Lindsey Graham. He's saying exactly the same thing she would say. Exactly the same. What's the core assumption that everything you saw in NBC News is true? The story that you were fed was absolutely true. And it was a cop problem. It wasn't George Floyd's, George Floyd had nothing to do with it. He was just like some random black guy who got pulled off the street for being black and executed. Thank God on camera so the rest of us saw it. But for being black. And this is like endemic in our society. It was like happening to every black person in America. It's just like murdered by the cops. He's damn white cops. Making $50,000 a year. They have all the power. Yeah. So that was his gut reaction. He bought the whole thing. And there he is lecturing cops. Really, the problem is we need better policing in this country. Really? And of course none of that turned out to be true. And it was obvious to some of us on day one that this was BS. It was a manufactured crisis designed to affect broad social change. It was a revolution. And it was. And it did affect broad social change. And hundreds of thousands of Americans have died of crime or drug Odies ever since because of the so called reforms that people like Lindsey Graham screamed about, screeched about he and the other liberal white ladies demanded that we reeducate the police because it's their fault. Imagine having that response. He also the response to K. Haley had the response. Nikki Haley, all from South Carolina, also a crazy nail con. First thing she said, the riots happening are good for America. We need to watch what's happening and feel the pain because we deserve it. It's our fault. Really? When a convicted armed robber tries to pass a counterfeit bill at some convenience store and then dies of a fentanyl OD, it's our fault. Tell me how that works. But no one challenged her, no one challenged him. They immediately joined the chorus of the worst people in the world whose first instinct was to blame people who did nothing wrong. In this case, the cops. And the consequences were terrible for Americans. Study no one ever called them to account for it. Now, why did they do that? Partly because all the ladies in a certain income class or many of them have just like the same gut reactions and it's resentment toward men and itself hatred and it's guilt and the desire to seem virtuous and public, etc, etc, etc. Books of it written about this though long enough. But really it has to affect. They don't care what happens to the United States because it's not really that relevant because that's not their goal. Their goal is to improve the United States, which is why they haven't not even a little bit. Their goal is to be power players and global politics because it makes them feel strong to kill people because you get a real electric charge from that and to serve the interests of Israel. Well, it's an answer to my next word. No, it's what they say out loud all the time. Here's Lindsey Graham is an amazing clip. I don't know what even noticed this. Watch this. Lindsey Graham describing his personal travel schedule and how often he's in Israel. Watch this. Well, this is my fifth visit, I think, since October the 7th and I'm here for a reason to show support to you. I'm good friend, the elected leader of the state of Israel. I'm here also to take on and I will talk about this tomorrow. A form of blood level in 2024 that the state of Israel is using starvation as a weapon war. It's like an infant. It's like a badly shot infant for prostate health cures or something. Super beats, like standing there well, doctors don't know what they're doing. It's unbelievable. He is doing PR for a foreign country. And even Netanyahu, the prime minister of another country, not our country, another country, looks a little bit embarrassed. Like, who is this weird kind of falling guy? Is he going to touch my chest? It's uncomfortable. You can feel that. The whole point of Lindsey Graham being there because he tells us is the point is to defend Israel from unfair criticism on the internet. Hmm. Is that his job as a U.S. senator to be unpaid and we're guessing about the unpaid part, but I do sense he'd do it for free to be a PR show for a foreign prime minister, not even really the nation, another politician who's not an American. What the hell is going on? Then he just said, myths out loud. This is my fifth trip to Israel since October 7th, fifth trip. Huh? So this was in March. So that's five months after October 7th. This is in March of 2024. October 7th was 2023. So five months, five trips to Israel. That's one trip to Israel a month. Huh? Is there any chance that Lindsey Graham has been in the, I don't stay capital? Of South Carolina, Columbia once a month during that time. No, there's no chance. In fact, he hasn't. By the way, Lindsey Graham was that same year in Ukraine more often than he was in Columbia, South Carolina. And what's he doing there this time? Well, he tells us he is there to refute the blood lie bolts. Exactly. Not exactly what that is, but something to do with like anti-Semitism or it means you hate the Jews or you're defending the Holocaust or something horrible. You're a Nazi, something like totally beyond the pale. And the blood lie bowl is that Israel is using starvation as a weapon of war. Now who would say that? It does seem like a kind of a tough criticism. Let's see, was really cabinet ministers, smotchers and smotridge and Ben Guevira, a boost said that out loud. And they're cabinet members in the current government. And they have said, yes, start them out. Start them out. Kill them. I mean, they're all the same. They're Palestinians. They're crime. Is there genetics? Their blood is tainted. We have magic blood. They have tainted blood. God loves us, hates them. And when they die, it's just a virtuous thing because they're not human. There's no doubt always in everywhere that that kind of thinking, thinking about other people in terms of the group into which they were born rather than in terms of what they do, what they're like as individuals. But that kind of thinking leads to mass killing genocide every single time. And not just in Germany in the 40s though it did lead to genocide there, but also in the Ottoman Empire in 1918 and also in Rwanda, 1994 and actually throughout history. When people start thinking of other people, not as people, but as components of some larger whole whose value is determined by their blood, you will inevitably wind up killing all of them if you can because they're not really people. And you will also wind up saying out loud that it's okay to starve their children to death as they have said repeatedly. And not just some random guy in the comments section on the Jerusalem Post, but at least two current cabinet members of the current government. But Lindsey Graham is telling us that's a blood libel. Why are you telling me that? I have internet access. Why are you saying that? Because you're a liar and nothing you say is true. Except what you say about yourself. And that's that you love another country more than you love your own and you love killing more than you love living. And that's enough to know. You can't be a leader in the party I vote for. I'm sorry. And so with that in mind, and we hope you agree with that. We're sorry to say it, but this is not a very safe country. Walk through Oakland or Philadelphia. Yeah, good luck. So most people, they think about this want to carry a firearm and a lot of us do. The problem is there can be massive consequences for that. Ask Kyle Rittenhouse. Kyle Rittenhouse got off in the end, but he was innocent from the first moment. It was obvious on video and he was facing life in prison anyway. That's what the anti gun movement will do. They'll throw you in prison for defending yourself for the firearm. And that's why a lot of Americans are turning to burn up. It's a proudly American company, burn up makes self defense launchers that hundreds of law enforcement departments trust. They've sold over 600,000 pistols, mostly to private citizens who refuse to be empty handed. These pistols and I have one fire rock hard kinetic rounds or tear gas rounds and pepper projectiles and they stop a threat from up to 60 feet away. They're no background checks or no waiting periods. Burn a can ship it directly to your door. You can't be arrested for defending yourself with a burn up pistol. Is it burn a BY RNA dot com or your local sportsman's warehouse to get your stay? Burner dot com with that in mind. Paul Dan's is running against Lindsey Graham in the Republican primary, which is in June of next year. We don't know a ton of bad. We're about to find out. But that's all we need to know. This is unacceptable. Ladies and gentlemen, Paul Dan's I'm grateful you're here. Thank you. And I'm grateful that you're running against Lindsey Graham, not just as a protest candidate or some, you know, 80 year old. I'm fed up guy, but as someone who understands the policies has been involved in making policy and who has a realistic chance of beating Lindsey Graham. And I just want to say out loud yet again, my motives are not personal. I've always liked Lindsey Graham. But I think he's very obviously evil. And if he is the face of the Republican party, normal people can't support it, including me. So it's so important to send the statement that we are not for killing a innocence or blood lust or whatever weird demonic trip Lindsey is on. And I'm just, I'm really praying for your victory. So how did you decide? Let's just start at the end. How did you decide to run against Lindsey Graham? Well, I'm original magga. You know, I kind of go back to even eight Ross Perotays and we'll get a little bit about how you supported Perot? Oh, I was a Perot pro is my first vote for president. I came from a kind of a traditional ethnic, Catholic family working class. My parents were the first to go to college. Yes. Actually speaking English, my siblings were the first. They, my parents spoke Spanish and French at their households. But you know, my, why am I running ultimately against Lindsey is for God family country? I don't think we have a choice at this stage. This is about the future of the movement. Whether magga America first lives or dies. We have to start thinking post Trump and this is going to be the fight for the future of this country. I've, I've, I stand on the shoulder of giants. My family's tradition coming here is immigrants living the American dream building, working for it, fighting for it, dying for it. And I can't sit on the sidelines with all the gifts. You know, the Lord has, has given me at this point in time. I'm a dad of four now to be five. And we have a fifth child. I do. It's quite incredible. My wife is 22 weeks pregnant and it's a blessing from God. You know, this is, so what happens when two folks try to work from home? Is that what I was saying? I had five. I met him. My wife's a famous ballerina. So she's, you can imagine she worked as a workout at home and everything like that. But I've been very supportive of her, of her business and, and I was, you know, working in the trenches, if you will, for the last five, seven years really with the Trump admin. I was the architect of Project 2025. And you know, right now, this is, I believe God has a plan for us all. And this is a calling, but it's, it's also that I have the life experience. We, I cannot sit back and watch somebody like Lindsey Graham represent our state. No. I live God family country. And when you live those values, that's how you can actually happen, make them happen and watch. Well, that's exactly right. Because it's sincere. Because you're defending your religious faith, your family and your nation. It's not theoretical. It's not an ideology. It's not a personal fetish, which I think in his case it is. If I see one more homoerotic picture of Lindsey with Ukrainian soldiers, I'm just, I'm, I don't know what I'm gonna do. And I'm not attacking, you know, or attacking gays or anything like that. But like this is just, this is a one man sick fetish being imposed on a nation of 350 million. And I'm just sick of it. But it's one thing to oppose that. I'm not running in Lindsey Graham. Like how did you actually decide to put it on the line and start a Senate campaign? Well, like I say, I was a Trump guy before Trump knew he was running. I am, and we can talk more about my family's bio because I feel that that informs so much of who I am. But, you know, I was hoping Trump won ran in 2012. And I'm one of these guys who is kind of curious about the birthplace of a former president if you will, which Trump was asking on those questions. I remember him going up to Vermont to a new Hampshire here. And I thought he was going to announce, and famously he called on for the birth certificate. But, you know, Trump was a Trump even then in 2011, 12 as a potential political leader. Absolutely. You know, my dad's family came up from a co-water flat in New York City. And my grandparents built that city. They were emma-grays. They were born in the US, but their parents weren't. And to see that city grow, you know, my grandfather was at sea for 40 years as a marine, merchant marine. And my grandmother was an interpreter. She spoke eight languages in the city. But the delays that happened in the 1970s, they never thought would change. And then it did change with Rudy Giuliani and Trump and this belief that we could rebuild in America. And so I knew of Trump long before that just from hearing the stories from my grandparents about, you know, facing being mugged on the subway and all the, how the city has lived down and finally people were digging out in New York. And he's famous for the woman, rank there. Yes. But it's emblematic of somebody who basically comes in and reorders the system and the kind of is a strong man in a way as a mayor or somebody who can actually come in and get things done when bureaucrats are running around doing nothing. Exactly. It's funny that you saw that so early. I didn't at all. And when Trump called me in 2015 to say he was running, I knew him. Of course I always liked him. But I said, you know, that's a dry left at him because I didn't get it at all. And I didn't take it seriously at all. I'm asking change my views. But I just, it's interesting that you saw it so early. Well, like I say, you know, we, we graduated my, you know, if we can go back to, to kind of how I evolved as, as, as to be like a Republican. My family, uh, Dan says Spanish is Gallego and my grandparents were living down in the cold water flat. That means there's no hot water. This is a tenement that they tore down. They moved my family into housing projects. And ultimately my dad was, was, was only child, but he was, you can think of it when we said to do key house or a guy who was raised by his maternal grandmother because everyone's working. She was a cleaning lady. And he made it to a military school, graduated college in 19 and then Columbia Medical School of 23. He became like a leading man in medicine. He was in the Barry plan, which is the doctor's draft back in the 60s. They need the doctors for the military. So my dad was drafted into that to this Vietnam service in the NIH. But this was, you know, at the time my grandfather was at sea. And this is when New York was really it's Todd Mercantile existence where there were actually factories in New York City. He was later on on the Murmansk run, which is the famous convoys in the North Atlantic and Grandpa was an engine room, which, you know, this is, if you want a definition of what a man is because I know our culture struggles to define a woman, but you can imagine somebody like Popeye. I think my grandparents literally looked like Popeye in olive oil, but he literally had a tattoo on his forearm. But these were the people who were just brave and did it, you know, and he went to see and were to, you know, Nazi torpedoes sunk in his boat. These guys, when they came home to merchant Marines, these were hard-scrabble people. They didn't even get veterans benefits. So my family tradition is kind of like giving everything for this country and getting kicked in the teeth for it and then coming and loving it even more. So ultimately they did give veterans benefits in 1989 and I believe that go water, Barry go water was one of the chief champions of this. So my grandparents became go water conservatives. That's how they evolved to be Reaganites. So they were kind of these hard-hat outer borough New Yorkers who moved from, you know, Islam 10 minutes to public housing and then ultimately to a little piece of the rock up in the Bronx. So that's my dad's side of the family. And you know, my mom's side is even more, you know, maybe not more patriotic, but the same sort of crew that came from working class stock. They were French Canadian immigrants. My grandfather was one of 22. That's kind of, I guess, runs in our blood. My mom was the youngest of eight in a town called Woon Sake. They worked in the Texaco Rhode Island, Woon Sake Rhode Island, textile mill workers, right? And these guys were the mechanical geniuses. Five of her brothers went off, fought World War II. Their first language was French. So they actually went behind enemy lines. They cut the supply lines. They landed on D-Day. And these were the simple guys who kind of came back to the machine shops and stuff here to only see the factory town move abroad in the 19, 19. This is sort of all New England. Yeah. The French, you know, the the arcadians coming down to staff the factories and then just getting marooned. Yeah. It's the story of all over this country. Yeah. And we had moved around, like I say, my dad was in military. I know Lindsey's team likes to tag me as a New Englander, but I lived in Boston for all of two months when I was a baby. My dad was on orders from the military. So, you know, it's kind of like he's a Vietnam vet and we're a military family moving around. We moved to Colorado in the early 70s. And this was post-hip, be Colorado. And dad wasn't quite a social justice warrior, but it was a little closer to kind of Archie Bunker dynamic where he they were kind of questioning the Vietnam War. Dad had done his service, but there was something sitting right about it. Ultimately, he stood up the first migrant health clinic in kind of because his first language was Spanish. So, as well as like VD walk in clinics. These were my dad revolutionized a lot of how medical care is given that we take for granted in the old days you only had a primary care physician. Yeah. So we came east in the in the by centennial year in 1976. And that was kind of my wonder years. And I think that's what really built the whole patriotic feeling because you know, these were all I knew were these great quiet men and women who sacrificed for the country. And you know, living in the footsteps of Mount Vernon, we came east. That was a health policy fellow on the hill and got the taste of kind of public policy. And we got to go around Washington in the by centennial year. My parents were my mom was chemists. And she and my father were introduced by the parish priest in 1966 in Washington. So they were Kennedy asked. They were the people who came to Washington and were not asking what their country could do for them, but what they could do for their country. So literally I'm on the spawn of two NIH scientists and very patriotic background. We, you know, learned back in those days we used to sing songs, patriotic songs, the second grade and third grade. And kind of came up through that. Dad ultimately got recruited to Johns Hopkins where he stood up the first ethics and medicine course. Dad, mom, we were very faithful Catholics and always going to church. I was an altar boy after all. But that's how we kind of grew up K through 12 public schools. My mom went and worked in the underprivileged schools in Baltimore. And I went to MIT. I was recruited to go to MIT. And there I kind of encountered the first taste of globalism and what was happening. It's kind of struggle to hold on to your working class value roots and your family in the face of kind of what they're telling you, a more global picture. And that's that rubbed me the wrong way. And that's how I got to each rush. You never felt for it at all. No, I didn't. You know, I think it was I was blessed with great parents. You know, I really respected mom and dad. And ultimately I think when you look at a politician, you want to, you should have a a right to value that person say that person could be a role model. I struggled on life. But I was blessed with the right direction early on. And I know a lot of people haven't been in those situations after overcome things. I certainly overcame a lot in my childhood as well. But you know, you have the grounding that you get and those values carry you for the rest of your life. And I didn't fall for it. And I saw my twin brother identical twin, Tom went to Brown. So he's going to Brown at the same time I'm going to MIT. And I'm hearing about this kind of this more than incubated cultural Marxism. My two sisters both went to Princeton. So we were like this kind of family of nerds, right? That my dad was a professor. My mom was a public school teacher and we were all about education, you know, gifted and talented, and always always striving. But we began to get this dosage of cultural Marxism. What was interesting though was we came up at the end of kind of the Cold War period. So in public schools in Baltimore County, they actually were teaching Russian. And my three siblings learned were Russian from probably retired CIA agent. But they were the last off the production line of kind of, you know, red blood of Americans who could speak Russian. And you know, my parents had this just a great ability to in, in, in coke that's with values and arts. And my mom was a PNS. She turned down this scholarship to Eastman School of Music to go to college and Trinity and Washington, the first of the post scholarship. So that's, I never fell for it. And I felt quite the opposite. I pursued economics at MIT and then ultimately a master in urban planning. And that's where I became, if you will, a community organizer later on, knocked Obama was the community organizer in chief. But that's where they were training, also starting a lot of this kind of indigenous people work in kind of questioning of American society from a social organizing sort of point of view. But to backtrack to the economics, this is at MIT in the early 90s was when they were putting up the. point of view. But to backtrack to the economics, this is at MIT in the early 90s was when they were putting up the theoretical basis for globalism. And I remember, you know, MIT economics is probably the top in the world that's where all the Nobelists hang their hat. And my macro-icon professor, Sola, was literally receiving the award that year in 91, I believe it was at 90. And he was beginning to put the theoretical underpinnings for if we moved production out of the United States, but as long as the return to capital came back to United States citizens, we would be all said. And what they never factored in is what they call the externalities. And the externalities are the mom and pops in there, all the families that have built their entire life around this factory town that have all their equity in that house, that have their social fed. The idea was you could just move. And if you make it easy for capital to move, then human beings will move. And you'll have much more efficient system. And you'll take out all the friction and everything will be great. We'll be return happier. But it was obvious immediate because Gary and the end had already happened to trade had already happened. So we Baltimore had already happened. The steel miller closed in Baltimore. So it's like, you knew what would happen if you took the manufacturing up because it had happened. I'm sitting here at all. Well, I used to take the train up from Baltimore to MIT. And that's how I talked about seeing the passing scenery of these derelict factories. And I'm the guy who's staring out the window the whole time to imagine going, what's happening here? And I'm knowing about my own family. My uncles, they've fearlessly fought World War II. They came back and the mill closed and the mill moved. And now he's literally a Maytag repairman. And you know, the kids are getting into alcohol and drugs and this and you can kind of see it happening in real time. It's kind of weird for circa 1990 anyone to be trying to expand the disaster that led to the pro campaign, ultimately led to two Trump presidency. Like we knew and I lived here were the same age. I remember very well thinking, well, that doesn't work. If it worked, then what is the explanation for Gary and Deanna? Yeah. Well, I mean, the giant sucking sound from the South when he put that in place, it's for us for Odid and basically talked about NAFTA and the fact that he's moving all these factories over over the border. He was pressing about it. And to be sure, we were, we were coming out of this peace dividend. Clinton had just come out of her own president and we were talking about base closures and realignments. And this is kind of like we had a great opportunity to make this the country of milk and honey. Like you have to back up and say, why aren't we not overflowing here? Why is why do we live in a society where people are literally knuckle dragging right now with fentanyl and filled off here and walked around like, how could this be after we fought those wars and invested all that blood and treasure? Yeah, I thought we won. You would have thought, right? But the struggle, the fight never ends. And that's the point of why I'm running that we need to there's just so much shared sacrifice over 250 years from not only my ancestors, but pretty much everyone listening to this. They have a story, some route back longer. A wise family came 300 years ago and they were farmers in the eastern North Carolina and kind of hard-scrabble life. You want to listen to the stories of my mother-in-law talk about the wall and like the deprivation after the civil war even. But you know, it's to forget all that in a generation or two is absurd. And I have the ability now that I've worked on the front lines. I was a top attorney in Manhattan. I've facing off with the progressives. I understand how they think. And then I went into government and was able to reinventing in a way that now has allowed President Trump to come out, you know, as gangbusters. That's why I'm standing up. It's important as it is, politics is not the answer to this country's or man's greatest problem. The only solution is Jesus. Sorry, that's true. And it's core politics is a process of critiquing other people and getting them to change. Christianity is the opposite. Christianity begins with a call for you to change. Me to change. It's called repentance and it brings you back to God. When God is at the center of heart's change, only that will lead to the end of abortion. The greatest atrocity of this country is ever participated in. The normalizing of killing babies is a stain on this country. Our friends are pre-bored and doing everything they can to stop it by providing free ultrasounds to pregnant women. Pre-bored is rescued over 380,000 children. There are a lot of nonprofits out there, a lot of them call themselves pro-life. I wouldn't trust all of them. Sorry, I do trust pre-bored. I know them well. What they do works. Once some other he or her child's heartbeat for the first time, she becomes twice as likely to have the baby. The ultrasound saves lives. It's 28 bucks for you to sponsor an ultrasound and join pre-borns movement. Just call pound 250 and say the keyword baby. That's pound 250 keyword baby. Or pull it up at pre-born.com slash tucker. That's pre-born.com slash tucker. Defend the pre-born. There's nothing. Nothing more worth it. I hope you'll join us. It's interesting though because you you look back not to dwell in the past, but to say 1990, 1992, Clinton's election, 1998, I think Lindsey Graham's election. It just seemed like it was liberals versus conservatives. It was like normal people versus Clinton or later normal people versus Obama. You didn't really understand or I didn't understand that there were different kinds of Republicans. Some of them are actually aligned with the Democrats secretly. Lindsey, being the obvious, and others were really for the country and for fixing the country. I didn't get that. You clearly did. If you're supporting, tell me why you supported pro, for example, in 1992, his first run. Well, I think it was that my parents were this kind of push and pull with Reagan. I mean, you're credit. You guys saw Reagan early on and my grandparents are Reagan early on. I was John Anderson. If you want to really go back and forth grade, we did our mock debates. I was, there was Reagan and there was Carter and I was John Anderson in that. So I guess it was that independent streak was early on in me. It was really searching for the values that I was never part of anyone's club. My dad was an academic medicine. We weren't wealthy, but we did well enough. But we were public schools. I was a nerd, basically. I had glasses, I had headgear of anybody remembers that. I had a tough time. I had dyslexia. Headgear and dyslexia. Can you explain what for those who are not 56, what headgear is? Well, that was an orthodontic thing where I was also an aesthetic thing. Yeah. Growing up in the 80s was a magical time. I wouldn't trade it for the world. I think there's a lot. I even talked about going back to the future now. But it was a little difficult junior high, but I was nurtured by my parents. I was not so linger, but on headgear, for those who don't know, they're like, why are there's that went around the back here, neck on your teeth, right? This was a kind of a passage of adolescence. But it was pretty, it was extremely worth the dodgers. It was the orthodontic equivalent of the halo you get when you break your neck. It was not flattering, but it makes a tough man. No, over time. I ultimately became an all American lacrosse player. We had this nurturing. The guys who ran our school system were the Korean War vets. I really credit them in this kind of Cold War Baltimore upbringing where they were like, weak American teenagers. I remember my gym coach there and junior high talking about we had to push-ups and we had to showering and going out there and playing football and just kind of like stuff now, these people would be like, no, that doesn't work. But they would take wrestling and they'd be like, you and you wrestle now in the center of the thing. That was kind of what we were growing up with. My principal there in public school was this quiet man. In terms of humble, a war hero, didn't have use of his arm, but he was Dr. Kato would say he saluted excellence. This entire thing was at Delaney, we do things just a little bit better and he'd get on the internet on the intercom and basically salutes every time a student really excelled. So he was merit-based. It was all about excellence. It was always about pushing yourself just a little bit harder. And that's what I came up with and that's the sort of values I think that both our country. We need them back. Okay, so to be fair, Salinzi, if you were to ask Lindsey what makes you qualified to be a senator, he would say, well, fundamentally, I'm patriotic. I love this country. I'm from a patriotic family. I believe in the same values that founded this country. Like he would say the same, I think any politician would say the same on certainly in their public property. But what is it about Lindsey that gives you the impression he's not telling the truth about that? Well, look, he has a 32-year record. He's actually elected in 1994. So he had a four full terms in the house and he's done four full terms in the Senate. And so let's like break down his record here. When he came to Washington, it was $5 trillion. Now it's $38 trillion. So his entire time has been deficit spending without any regard for this death. He also, he has marked with these endless wars. Everything he's supported from Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Libya. You name it, he wants to invade it and bomb it. And then just this last couple of weeks, obviously Venezuela and Iran before that. So this notion of patriotism for him only runs towards kinetic fighting abroad. We have to ask what is the purpose of that? Because every time we extend ourselves abroad, we are necessarily diminishing our ability to build this city on the hill back home. He's never championed any of these things. Here, I have this life experience where my parents were NIH scientists. I looked, I was at my mother's deathbed when she died of cancer, breast cancer at 65. And I'll never use the term death throes when you've actually seen your mom passed. But why do we still have breast cancer? Why do we sell $300 billion to Ukraine? Why, you know, and likewise with my dad, like great man and modern medicine at Hopkins, I had to say goodbye to dad in the moon suit with COVID in February 2021. This is right after Trump left office. But the whole COVID thing was just so ridiculously foisted on us. And we need to get to the bottom of that. But I walked in there on day three and they said, you can say goodbye your dad for like 15 minutes. And then I go, well, he doesn't really have COVID. Could you test them? And they refuse to test them. They kept, you know, this testing really working after fact. And they told us all this transmission, the ability lies. But, you know, dad ultimately expired seven on day seven. And they're like, well, you can use a laptop if you want to join him or whatever. You know, I've suffered a lot of this personally, where I feel like we need that fire and the belly to get up there and use to use this person in Congress in the Senate to really drill down on these people and get American's answers. What happened? Do you see Lindsey as like an effective voice in any of these issues? The ones that matter to Americans? Not at all. No, I think he's quite the opposite. He's running our fairance for the deep state. I like to call him deep state Lindsey because if you trace back, look, if Lindsey had his way, there never would have been a Trump. And we can't be gassed to forget all this. He was the one the most most stiffer is attackers on Trump early on. He said, Trump, it would be the worst nominee in the history of the Republican Party. If you want to make America great again, tell Donald Trump to go to hell. And, you know, he voted for the CIA's stage. And then, like, Malcolm, Evan McMullen, like he didn't even vote for Trump guys. And then, what happened? He voted for Evan McMuffin? Yes. Yes. He probably admitted it. You know, this is a guy who is, I think, and McMuffin was like literally connected to the CIA and Mindy fan or whoever that he would be, when he ran the same. We can't forget history. I mean, we shouldn't forget COVID. We can't forget 9.11, but you can't forget what Lindsey Graham's been about. He did not change his stripes. This guy is a vehement, shape-shifting anti-Trumper. In 17, when we had both houses of Congress and the presidency, and remember the seminal promise was to build the wall. What did this guy do? He went and reinforced that bogus narrative that the Russians had hacked the election. He literally had subcommittee hearings where he said the purpose of this hearing is to reinforce that the Russians had interfered with the election. And that had the point of caring water for the Democrats to delegitimize Trump. So, instead of building a wall, which now fast forward 10 years later, there's 20 million invaders in this country, this is how this guy used his seat in Congress to actually delegitimize it, to basically support Ray. He voted for Ray. He voted for Comey. When the president threatened the firemuller, he threatened the president. Every option that he ever had to do any oversight on this kind of spying mechanism, kind of deep state, he always abstained. So, even you see a great thing where he was chairman of the Judiciary Committee in 1920. And Maria Bartiroma was asking repeatedly, when are you going to issue subpoenas? When are you going to get to the bottom of this? And he said, you know, I will send a strongly word in letter when they're wrapped on their investigation. So, it never happened. And you know, this is a guy who's basically running interference for the other side. Well, he is pure talk customers are proud of their wireless company. Think about that. You never hear anyone with Verizon AT&T say, I'm really proud to use Verizon AT&T. No, they're a little embarrassed. They may be satisfied with the service, but feeling proud? No, probably not. And there's a reason Americans with pure talk feel proud to use pure talk. It's not some soulless global corporation with call centers in Pakistan or Bangladesh. It's an actual American company built by Americans on American values. And they work to support veterans. This month, pure talk is using a portion of its sales to support Tainines for warriors. It's an organization that rescues and trains dogs, then pairs them with veterans. And there are many who are struggling with PTSD. It's a great mission. As a veteran led company, pure talk is happy to partner with them and many others like them. So choose a wireless company that shares your values with plenty of talk, text, and 5D G data for 25 bucks a month. Actually, 25 bucks a month. So you could save a lot too and feel good about doing it. Visit puretalk.com slash Tucker to make the switch today. It's pure talk dot com slash Tucker and switch to America's wireless company pure talk. I remember walking into the monocle, which is a restaurant right after North Capitol Street on Capitol Hill in Washington. It was right across the street from Fox. We eat throughout great restaurant, great great owners, great people. But it's basically the Senate dining room, you know, they're there every day. And I remember walking in for lunch one day and there was Lindsey sitting in a booth with James Murdoch, who was Riverman, our son, very left-wing son, vehemently anti-Trump spent a ton of millions of dollars against Trump. You know, huge donor to the ADL like really, really a dark figure. And there was Lindsey drunk, by the way, I don't think that uncommon for him to yapping away, laughing with James Murdoch. And I was like, holy smokes. And I worked for the morocks like, I knew James Murdoch is he hates me. And there's Lindsey like clearly plotting with him. And then Lindsey sees me and he's very friendly. I will say, and he comes up and he's like, well, like, drunkenly talking to me about like, you know, what James Murdoch like, he is the deep stater. There's no question. Well, I mean, I think when he tried to stop Trump the first time and then he was beholden to John McCain, when John McCain died, that's when he flipped and he changed tactics. And it was like, he was going to literally grab his golf bag and try to cozy up to the president. And he saw 2020 coming. Look, the whole state hates Lindsey. I mean, he's he's been booed in his own hometown for six minutes straight. He won't get on the stage with President Trump because he knows how faced this booing. They literally turned their backs on him. But he knew that everyone in South Carolina was rabid Trump. And that was going to be the only way for him to reinvent himself. But so how is he getting reelected? Well, you know, in 2020, I think it was a fluke. I think it was undercover of COVID. And you know, the point was that we had there was no viable challenger. There is a machine in South Carolina. Yeah. You know, and I'm running against the machine. I've never been part of anyone's club. And that probably goes back to the headgear in the glasses. But you know, I'm an outsider and I attack. But you know, there is serious money involved and again, they have to be with donors like Lindsey. Well, do they play a role in this? Yes. I mean, it's incredible that I'm here to wrestle this Senate seat back to the people of South Carolina. Is it the donor shouldn't be totally in charge of the country? Is that what you're saying? That's my proposition. Look, it's extraordinary that he got reelected in 20. And you know, in short order, he was turning his back right on Trump. He famously, you know, in on July, January 6th, he incredulously said, to the Capitol Police, we gave you guns. Why then you shoot more of those people in the head? This is a guy who, you know, not with you guns. Why didn't you shoot more people? And I'm really trying not to be vicious or use slurs against guns and grenade. He's certainly used them against me. But I want to be a, I want to be Christian. I don't want to do that. But boy, it's tempting when you hear that because that is so evil. Why didn't you shoot these Americans? These are American. These are protesters. They're exercising the First Amendment rights. They're also like most decent people in the country. They're like toting their little pocket constitutions. Like they, they believe in our system. They believe in the, in the order that our founders created and Instagram doesn't, and doesn't care. And he's calling for their murder. I mean, he's unbelievable to me. He's always calling for violence. It's almost a bizarre, you know, it's killing at the top of his mind. He just did this. I think, I don't know if it was violence against me. I know he was attacking me. That's not why I'm doing this. I don't care what he thinks to me. But I just, he was calling for violence. Wasn't he calling for violence this past weekend? Yeah. He was speaking. It's actually disqualifying speech. If you look at it, it's so unbecoming of the United States Center. And I think it's one for the books. But he got up there in Las Vegas, the Republican Jewish coalition. And he definitely seemed to be under the influence of something. Well, he's drunk all the time. It seems to me. I have noticed that. Look, I'm not calling. I'm not calling myself. I'm just saying as, as an alcoholic myself, who's covered, I would say every time I see him, he's drunk. So there's something while he was feeling his oats. And he got up there and literally said to the audience, who are Jewish in the main? And I think that this is a great slander in terms of characterizing your character, sharing your audience. He said about the administration, we are killing all the right people and we're cutting your taxes. Killing all the right people. When you find yourself, I mean, he's seven years old. He's have to face the consequences of this at some point. The internal consequences. If you're bragging about killing people? Well, I think there is a six commandment against such a thing on the instruction. You did from Lord. Many millennia ago, but let's break that down to his constituent parts as an attorney. If I were taking a deposition of him under oath, I'd say, let's break this sentence down. Okay. We are killing who is the we in this? Are we talking now about the United States government? Are we talking about the Ukrainians? Are we talking about the government of Israel? Who is we? And then killing, you know, it's like, okay, well, are we talking about bombing people or how exactly are we killing them off? Doesn't matter. And then all the right people, and then you say yourself, well, all the right people, or you mean people on the right? Charlie Kirk was just killed. You know, like, can you have a little bit of space from the man's actual weight before you're in toning violence? And then he turns in the next sentences to actually threaten violence against the right. Now, this is a guy who just said, shoot people in the head on J6 is now saying, if someone stands for office and critiques Israel, we're going to beat their brains you said that. Yes, he said, beat their brains in and then he later on use, we're going to gossip them. Well, he said, cream them as well, which is, you know, kind of an unfortunate turn of phrase for him. But, you know, beat their brains in. And it's just like, who are you talking about? Like, why I'm talking about a mayor, he's talking about hurting Americans killing Americans on behalf of another country of foreign power. Okay. So like, I don't even know what to say to that if you're not a person by that go ahead and vote for him. But we're celebrating this whole rant. It's extraordinary thing. And I guess you haven't seen it. But then he goes on to that. I have not looked at both President Trump. We're all out of bombs. You know, we didn't even run out of the bombs in World War two. It's like China, if you're listening, you're sitting in the United States Center just told you that we were all out of the bombs. And like, we know that we can't restock all those, there's, you know, shoulder fire missiles that they take seven to 10 years to build that we have no industrial base. But he's literally bragging about the fact that all of our munitions have been passed to defend this eastern border Ukraine for what? None of this benefited America, none of this to anything to do with America. It's absurd. He were invaded while he was in the Senate. He said, well, benefit is some people in America. If you happen to own the defense industrial stocks and, and you know, he's not in the rich in the Senate, I haven't even checked. Well, I who knows that's it's a good question to ask. But doesn't matter. He's 70 with no kids. So like, what is he care? Well, you know, I think that the point is that he has been supported this Senate seat is kind of wholly owned by a foreign interest or kind of in defense industrial components. And, and it's so far removed the people of South Carolina are, are a mirror kind of imposition really devoted us. And it's like, we will deal with you once every six years. We will gaslight you. I'll get a couple photos of me behind President Trump and, you know, just kind of move along. But you know, meanwhile, South Carolina's 50 out of 50 in roads. Okay, people die on our secondary roads. The actual infrastructure is 30 years behind, which roughly maps the time this guy's been Washington. He's never brought the bacon home. He's when if unless you think of home is Ukraine or some foreign interest. But certainly, you know, South Carolina, you go off the main highways, which by the way, if anyone's driven through on the 95 or on the 20 or the 26, they're too lying, too late death traps. They've never been expanded. Now they're being beginning to be expanded. But, you know, people's roofs are falling in rural America is decaying. The industry moved out. And this is what we get. We get a senator who's obsessed with foreign war. You know, I think it's half of 1% of the South Carolina population is Jewish. So yes, I mean, look, I reaffirmed the for Israel to exist. And, you know, and certainly always defending the Jewish people in the wake of the Holocaust, particularly. But I don't derive my foreign policy views based on my my theological understanding of the Bible. I'm America first guy. This is the country. My family fought for, worked for, died for, and everyone else did. So this frame that a US senator would spend three days in Washington and then run off to Kiev or Kiev as we used to call it and hold hands with a foreign dictator who suspended elections, who's in prison the opposition, who shut down the... What about a weirdly hot foreign dictator in a tight-fitting military uniform or a tracksuit? I mean, that I'm just saying they're mitigating circumstances here. Kind of a young Fidel or like Che and the Sierra Madre 1958, you know, cigar, clamps reslutley and his teeth. Like, there is a kind of appeal there. Well, maybe that's what the Venezuela thing can be explained that way. There's a lot in, I agree. I actually said to myself, don't be a jerk during this interview, but of course I can't. I have no self-conscious. Well, look, I mean, his sexuality is his own thing, but if it's based on kind of his psycho sexual urge for violence, that's a problem. Let's just be... Let's stop lying. Okay. I'm not being... This is a very recognizable phenomenon that has reoccurred throughout history. And it is tied up in your personal life. And I'm not not in any time, but his sexuality is being the way that you live reflects your values and it affects your opinions on everything. And so if you have children and grandchildren, you have by definition vested interest, instability and peace, you're instinctively opposed to violence. You lie awake as the head of household thinking if there's a home invasion or do I do, that's how your brain works. Absolutely. If you don't have that and if you're about grinder or whatever, what is going on here, then you've got a completely different set of values. It's just a fact. I'm sorry, that's true. Well, look, I mean, Steve Whitcock, who has helped me to piece there, that's an unstable piece, but made a piece, he tells him the 60 minutes piece how he first found common ground with his adversary on the other side, would say, we belong to an unfortunate club where both of our sons have predecestized us. And so it's like, he found common ground as a dad. But look, I just say, if Steve Whitcock, who I know well, Steve, if you watch Steve Whitcock's relationship with his two surviving sons, you see like where Steve Whitcock's instincts come from. He's very close to his boys. And one of them I know well, it's like a, like a genuinely great guy. He reverses dad. The dad loves the son. That's, that's the goal. And Whitcock looks at the world that way. It's like, I have grandchildren. Like I want, I want to continue the good things in this world. I don't want to blow it up tomorrow. Right. It matters what we need in the states. We need, we need somebody. Look, I live these values. I have the family. I have the stake in the future. I've lived the life. I've lived with a woman. You know, we've, we've suffered. We've survived. We've thrived. And that life experience, you know, watching my mom die in front of me, going in with the moon suit with my dad, you know, seeing kind of the setbacks, my grandparents felt only to see, you know, them, the ultimate succeed. These are things I going in with the moon suit with my dad, you know, seeing kind of the setbacks my grandparents felt only to see you know them Ultimately succeed these are things I every day a walk in office on the shoulders of them But I carry that weight the shared sacrifice and and when you go abroad and you're with a culture that has you know Maybe nothing to do with us. I'm not looking to convert them I'm looking to find a little bit of you man the common ground. Yes, and that's where you say look Parents love their children, okay in all cultures and and that's an immediate thing where you can have some respect for life You know Look he is the worst Lindsey Graham is the worst emissary or real avatar for any of these values if whether it be kind of peace and and the United States values or what he's doing now with in general I think anti-Semitism. He's actually making well, that's worse all these advocates for Israel I mean from BB to Ted Cruz to Lindsey They're all making people hate Israel. I mean that is a fact as someone who's never hated it. It's been wrong I've never hated Israel Education there But these people are changing in their advocacy Rabbi butt plug all of them They're all making people dislike Israel big time. Well, I mean he's I was just helping his speech was shameful And it you know, it should be repudiated to call for violence the way he did against the right a sitting United States senator in the way Katarley Kirk it's you know It needs the presence to distance himself from those remarks But you know here again like he intrudes into like women's health like if there was ever one cohort in the United States Who should sit this one out? It's a seven-year-old warm-onger who's never shared a life as we can tell with a woman You know, it's like the he does more damage than good and with respect to those issues for life It's like being pro life means also not killing people I mean to borrow a little bit from the Pope agree, but like having a sensitivity towards that as well and you know Well why because we think human beings are the most valuable thing God created That's what we believe and if you don't believe that you shouldn't be in charge of human beings, right? Well, we're committed we are created in God's image So every time I look one of the great things my parents did was was name me after St. Paul I'm always trying to to walk in his in his way the instructions, but one of them You know that we learned you know to have a mutual respect for our common man to look at the beauty If you look at a person you say like you were creating there's something amazing about you it may not be evident on the surface, but I know that there's something and you you may have had a troubled life, but You can always improve and and to be able to to have that kind of fundamental respect You know, I come from a long line of of janitors and chambermaids and people did the dirty jobs and I never felt I'd never feel like I'm superior to them I think that that's really the Marka liberalism progressive government is that there's a small group of us who know better than The rest of the world how that's something that's credential from a credential factory. So I couldn't couldn't agree more There's a real lack of nobility among people like that with Lindsey Graham a true lack of nobility and And that's fine and he's gonna have to answer for that But to have him in a position of leadership Particularly in a party that you know, I voted for don't have much option actually This this is a not acceptable look we look this is a post-Trump election This a Senate term is six years present Trump, you know, the 2028 trolling stuff is funny by the if a keys he's out of office in two years after this election That's okay a lame duck president the day after the election kind of cementing his legacy and this is where does this movement go? All of us who fought in the in the early trenches look That this whole thing could just be sucked right back into the swamp with the shape shape shifting establishment really neo-con Deep state guy, you know, who's managed to somehow Pull in Trump a little bit or at least the inner circle around Trump Do you think it's weird? I'm sorry to jump around but I'm just thinking about you reminded us all that Lindsey said on After January 6 we gave you done to shoot them all Of course none of the processors had guns not not a single gun no guns except for the 200 and something undercover FBI Agents all of whom are but no actual protester had a gun Lindsey Graham is Only speaks in Marshall language kill them crush them bomb them. You know, he's tough guy right? He's like some preservice or some fake rank in the military and whatever But he's terrified Terrified on January 6 He's like afraid of unarmed protesters Half of whom are like over 16 have diabetes and bad knees and he's terrified coward I mean, I talk to people his fellow senators who were there. He was scared shillos. What is that? Well, you know the guy who's always calling for violence against other people is a physical coward I think he knows what the 2020 was infirm It was a rigged and stolen election and he did nothing really for it He did a lot of pretense You know, that's the famous call look. I was there. Okay. What what Paul dance has is battle scars from every major maggah battle. I was there in 16 in Pennsylvania in moon township when everyone had walked away from the president They thought he was gonna lose and We pulled out the wind there. We brought Pennsylvania over the wind column double the vote there and the good people in Allegheny County And you know, I was there in 20. I went down the Georgia I was at the time I was chief of staff at office of personal management Talk a little bit about how project 2025 came to be and how I got to serve in the Trump admin, but I had been there again in Allegheny County for the day on election day and you know We've been saying those of us in the admin. I think we got this as long as they don't steal it from us And thinking you know that the RNC and the Trump campaign would have taken corrective protective measures well um, you know, it's in the White House that evening and PPO it's a presidential office of personnel and We were getting getting excited for a period of time there. It seemed like we were gonna pull this out They actually turned the volume off of the TV and put on some music and then ultimately everything slowed down It's clear that something was totally awry and Ultimately two days later. I would go on on pay leave leave my group I basically ran this agency called office of personal management and Go down and use my my work is in the attorney to help out But I got down to Georgia on the Friday morning Thursday night was where they famously started counting ballots in Fulton County in the middle of the night kind of I decided to take my car from DC and just start driving and I'd see my wife in South Carolina and the kids and pick up some clothes and Just get get there. So I got there by nine in the morning I kind of kicked myself from not flying because who would have known that they were counting ballots, but the bottom line is uh It we were overrun. Okay, that they had nothing in place. They knew this was coming and If you dug in a little bit you could tell that it was almost an inside job um, you know, Rayfis Rayfis burger the Secretariat state there's something odd with that dude and and the guy Gabe Sterling There's something really off But they had to be sure said, you know, this was the cleanest election they fought before they had finished counting the ballots so The Secretary of State of Georgia was adverse to the president nonetheless. We got down there There was no infrastructure in place the president didn't even have a law firm retained There was no national law firm. Yeah, and this was this was the whole thing There was a debacle but I seen it with my own eyes. I stood up there People knew what happened in that bucket. It's called. That's where the GOP headquarters were um, you know all eyes in the whole world had turned to bucket this one office building where I was and um We didn't even have a desk there was a law firm. I went out and bought myself a computer sat down there and It's Saturday of of the election Both Senate seats are now underwater so the US Senate's in the balance as well and uh, you know finally we're beginning to get some sort of ground control where people are now Reinforcements are coming up from Florida of the lawyers. We can kind of get some command the control and I have to go on get lunch with the guy pizza. I come back in the office is dark It's just like everyone left. It's like we're just like we're in the middle of a presidential election The things obviously kind of rigged and stolen you think people were working 24 hours like I've worked in these big law firms in New York I worked 18 hour days like we were just humming the whole time. Where was it? The office lights are off Um, they were at the Georgia football game Go to huts. Yeah, so there there was like a gut level commitment to the cause it sounds like no people had left and it was like What is going on here? So I I reached out to to Johnny Mac at the White House. I said we need a field general down here Get me Doug Collins get him on, you know and ask the president to put Doug in and sure enough they you know the next day People has snapped too. They had kind of word at the White House and everyone who walked out You know the idea was we're gonna take a breather I think the word had come down from the RNC headquarters to cut bait on the president In some time mid Saturday morning. They had no famously Trump victory Had you know shifted into Senate victory and they cut Trump off and so he thinks people are fighting all around the country No, I remember well people are walking out on a real time And I'm there's a reason he hired Rudy Giuliani because there was no one else left Yeah, I mean Paul dance is standing in the balance and and that's where you know I'm like what is going on here? That Sunday morning Finally people kind of began to come in and it's kind of like in it till most like when Christ was crucified and who were the people who who came first were without fair were the women and That's where I met MTG for the first time at Marjorie Taylor Green on the Sunday morning in Buckhead And she could have been up in Washington She had just won she could be measuring her her drapes and everything that woman wanted to get to the bottom of what happened on two That's what she's like. So it was her it was clear that it was Jenny Beth Martin These were the people standing up and we had no infrastructure in place. It was basically They had cut bait on the president. So I've been there when everybody gave you What was Lindsay doing this point? You know he was making feckless phone calls or something and he ultimately had this famous phone call with Raphis burger which if he would actually been a lawyer you'd be like That's the last person you should be getting on the phone call Told the president to get on the phone with because that guy's adverse to us Yes, they're gonna tape you you know They're gonna try to set you up. Don't you understand what went down here? So it was almost extraordinary That he could kind of pant a mind that he was doing something on the election integrity But he was undermining Trump. Yes, ultimately he was leading. I think that this man's MO is when he couldn't frontily attack Trump He said I'm gonna infiltrate Trump and then I'm gonna walk him in down the path of danger and like hey Mr. President why didn't you call up the secretary of the state and see if you can find some votes That's a great idea sir. Why didn't you do that? And it's like it's like a setup artist almost But you know for anybody with their head screwed on it was it was asking for trouble And of course, you know then j6 precipitated after that and so by the end of Of the term there everybody walked away from the man and You know I was there January 20th Joint base andrews to see President Trump off. So I have I have got so I just want to replay what it would he said or just say it out loud After January 6 like Lindsey just absolutely abandoned Trump like immediately Yeah, he blamed it. He said it'll be a major part of the presidency was Trump's fault would happen on January 6 Of course now we know with 230 FBI agents in the crowd maybe it's not that simple But we don't know that because Lindsey pointed that out I mean Lindsey could have at any point tried to get to the bottom of how many federal agents were in the crowd in January 6 Everyone knew that was happening. I said it probably got fired for it Among other things, but it was just obvious from the very beginning. Yes Was a setup no he gave his famous on done speech and you know the first part of the speech is interesting because he knocked South Carolina He likes the first start up. I say my state's often the cause of the problem So first he throws South Carolina under the bus and then he basically says he's done with Trump and you know the meanwhile Those of us are like in the engine room like my grandfather trying to keep this ship going Maga keep the US government running. You know, we're in full peak COVID and you know like I say To have this guy now got full six years in the Senate Got everyone to say vote for him. I mean, I have my neighbors coming up to me and saying Paul should we vote for Lindsey Graham? Can you really do that? I mean that's that's a heinous decision when you go into the ballot box in 2020 in your And you look at the Republican line and it's Lindsey Graham and you're Republican and that's why I'm never gonna let that happen to me again No, no, please that's why I'm just ending up but like Because it's just all fake because this is my last series of questions which is Like I have I asked around before this interview because I'm not a political expert despite being around my whole life I don't really understand it that well. I don't understand how Lindsey Graham could have a shot at real action I called around. Oh, no, Lindsey's in good shape. I think it's a measure how much money he has people assume the more money you have The more likely you are to win. That's not true as Jeb as Jeb Bush, but He does have institutional support like there there are office holders in South Carolina who are endorsing him right? Well, not that many look we are gonna do this. I want to make clear to people We we announced in in August one or July 30th and our numbers have already doubled Ultimately, yes, we need to get the financial backing to get people your listeners to get behind this like if you have your So we're taping. That's the first Tuesday in November. So you've got two ninth 2026 is liberation day for South June 9th is the primary primary and We are moving up on this guy if the election were held tomorrow We'd be in a runoff like South Carolina if you get less than 50% it's an automatic runoff state There's a reason why President Trump is doing his first fundraiser for Lindsey Graham Not with saying the fact that this man has 15 million in the bank. Where in South Carolina is that fundraiser? Correct, it's in it's in Florida interestingly Yes, they're gonna do it on a golf course in Florida away from away from the actual South Carolinians Look, we need support. I'll be frank But I think people bemoan the money that Lindsey has and I know that I've had confidential discussions with people saying that various you know Interest groups already come in for this guy to the tune of tens of millions whatever it takes whatever it takes but You know, I think I was thinking about the parable of of this three servants really and that you need as Christians We need to invest our money, you know in in people who are gonna fight for values And that's that's where I'd ask folks out here listening like invest in our campaign Get behind us. We are our message is really clicking with both the youth the under 30 people who who they need to own a part of America Not only do we need to end these endless wars which I'll do right away, but make this life this American dream affordable again for this generation To come let them dream of having a family and actually be able to do it and then like I say get to the bottom of J6 get to the bottom of covid get to the bottom of the Russia hoax get to the bottom of 2020 Let's actually get accountable in government from a guy who who stood up project 2025 And and I changed the world through that, you know that that as the architect of project 2025 Yes, and just stop the humiliation, you know South Carolina is one of the best states That we have people move there family and move their people just like South Carolina. It's great pretty well run pretty reasonable beautiful of course The Republican primary is the election or Republicans gonna have that sentencing. We know that So it should be a great Republican. It shouldn't be the worst Republican probably second worst after tight cruise because at least Lindsey is charming but It shouldn't have the best date shouldn't have the worst senator like this is a humiliation Exercise meant to demoralize the rest of us. I really think that well if you want to honor Charlie Kirk's memory This is the best way to do it Charlie was in South Carolina three weeks before he was killed saying exactly that He said he said South Carolina You need a new senator and he'd said that you know turning point action was gonna be on the tip of the spear Oh of turning out rhino senators and Lindsey Graham. Well, Tron. I talked about this topic quite a bit quite a bit until right before he died yes and and so I hope that people will get behind your campaign You know because I think it's important that your obviously much more qualified and much closer to the spirit of most Americans But it's also just so important to stop this just to say no like this is if you don't stop people like Lindsey Graham And he can go be on the board of Raytheon and go to bathhouses across East v. Nure whatever his future might hold probably a lot more fun than serving the Senate And get sober my gosh, but If you don't stop this if you just like allow the guy to get reelected to the Senate at 71 years old with an anti-American platform That's like assigned to everybody else that like oh, yeah, you can just piss on America Like it there's nothing that people can do about it. Yeah, there's no changes possible This is the barometer for whether America lives I totally agree with that. This is this is really look I built project 2025 if you like what present trumps done in these first nine months It's because I organized a couple thousand volunteers under the ops auspices of the Heritage Foundation brought together 110 member coalition of the right and basically made these building blocks He's prefabricated policy and personnel to go in and hit the ground running and that's why he came out gangbusters And they allowed him to get this head of steam going and get world peace Like this is why he's a world beater because we actually prepared I was I'm the one who was able to use this platform and take my MIT training this You know, I was trained as a city planner and then in the vision of Daniel Burnham who's the famous architect who did Did a union station it was this notion of we need to make no little plans We we are saving this republic we the lack the Magic disturbance hearts we have to give them a bold vision and that's what project 2025 was it allowed the president And now we know so much of what he's doing is coming right out of that book for sure the known wants to admit it um Yeah So how can final question? How can people who support the program you just described and Think that it's so essential to stop this insanity before We have like World War six How can they support your campaign? Look get get to Paul Dan's dot com You know, we obviously love you to invest in the campaign supporters if it's $20 a month if it's a hundred or You know everyone get get behind this like this is the time you need to invest in your country Lindsay is not a South Carolina problem. He's an American problem. Definitely and all of us have to drive them out There's good patriots all over the country They know what Paul Dan's did to build project 2025 and they know that that is why So much of what Trump's doing right now is coming directly from our work to you know Get behind us on the media if you can't afford it like push out our message You know it shared on Facebook shared on X and and Prayers finally three prayers will take prayers But this is this is all within our reach. This is gonna happen I believe and we have a welling up of support particularly the youth they really need a future so many People can't even envision getting out of their garden or apartment or being alone anything let them get married and have the family That's that's elemental American dream and that we are sending our kids forward into this is outrageous I have to stand up in this moment of time look I'm leaving five kids on this earth one day and They they need the future that was that was their birthright and that everyone who laid down They gave that ultimate sacrifice whether they died on the battlefield or they died building something or they just Labored as anonymous woman they deserve a future in this country and that's that's what we have to pass onto the kids Do you have any billionaire oligarchs backing you? Well, hopefully if you have them are listening to this show But look I you know, I would say Lindsey has that that's one thing he's got look What Lindsey did you made a fortune? I don't know Undet You know putting people into slavery or like hooking them on gambling or something You're Definitely using your Billions to support Lindsey Graham. Well look this man got us a 38 trillion dollar breaking point This country is in physical fiscal dire straits if we collapse The whole world goes down with us This is all these foreign adventures that this man has led us on in the 32 years of is is endless More cheerleading and the deficit spending those are coming home to roost and it's you know Life is tough out there not with standing with some people in the White House are saying it's expensive Things have not like I go to grocery store every day. You know, I fill up and and If it's shocking me, what's it doing to the people who pay check to paycheck and we have to get real like today's election day Let's see what happens tonight because the kids in the generation They're moving left because the left is actually talking about real pocketbook issues You know the promise here with Trump was to return the government to the people and And it's time is burning like we need not only action It's the justice department and getting answers and actually doing things But we need to like actually Stop spending money on these follies abroad and start building America. Let's let's get the demand the country of milk and honey Phone here. You got my vote. Thank you. Toss our weather, but all this. Thank you very much My pleasure. I appreciate you We've got a new website. We hope you will visit. It's called new commission now dot com and refers to a new 911 Commission So we spent months putting together our 911 documentary series and if there's one thing we learned it's that in fact There was for knowledge of the attacks People knew the American public deserves to know we're shocked actually to learn that to have that confirmed But it's true the evidence overwhelming the CIA for example knew the hijackers were here in the United States They knew they were planning an act of terror in his passport Is a visa to go to the United States from America A foreign national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell and later said he was in New York quote to document the event How to know there would be an event to document on the first place because he had for knowledge and maybe most Amazingly somebody an unknown investor shorted American Airlines and United Airlines the companies whose planes the attackers used a 911 as Well as the banks that were inside the twin towers just before the attacks They made money on the 911 attacks because they knew they were coming Who did that we have to look at the evidence the US government learned the name of that investor But never released it maybe there's an instant explanation for all this But there isn't actually and by the way doesn't matter whether there is or not the public deserved to know what the hell that was How did people know ahead of time? Oh, I was no one ever punished for it 9 11 Commission the original one was a fraud It was fake its conclusions were written before the investigation That's true and it's outrageous This country needs a new 9 11 Commission one that actually tells the truth to tries to get to the bottom of the story We can't just move on like nothing happened 9 over Commission something did happen We need to force a new investigation into 9 11 almost 25 years later Sorry justice demands it and if you want that go to new commission now Dot-com to add your name to our petition We're not getting paid for this or do this because we really mean it new commission now dot com