I'll tell you, this is a long way from being in mate number 40892424. Well, you're I must say your prison story. I've heard a lot of prison stories. One of the most incredible I've ever heard. Yeah, I'm writing a book about it. You should. And it's an unusual story. It's a story that starts with one president. Obama, he started the whole thing because he was sent someone to me to make a political deal for the senator and with Trump. Okay. And in the end of the day, and most of it's about a government prison with krypsin blood, gangster disciples, seen a lot of cartel drug dealers who look up to L-chopel, like my daughters look up to Taylor Swift. Murderers weren't there for my first three years. I lived at six foot by eight foot prison cell. Far cry from the 50,000 square foot governors man. Well, that's incredible. But what's incredible to me was the fact that you survived it mentally, not just intact, but stronger. And I just find that, I mean, if you'd killed 10 people, it's not even about, I mean, I think you got screwed. Yes, you know. Thank you. I would still be in awe of your toughness, emotional, spiritual toughness to come out positive, focused, not bitter. I mean, that's remarkable to me. Thank you. Thanks for saying that. No, I mean it. What's so obvious? How long were you away? 2008, 1996 days, one month short of eight years, not that I was counting. I'm sorry to laugh for your prison. No, but it's just remarkable. Three years in that six foot by eight foot prison cell, you know, in the higher prison, where they were squeezing me, you know, with the gang, barriers, mergers, bank robbers, pedophiles, transgender people who were half woman, half man funded by you, the taxpayer mermaids. And you can't call them a woman or they'll throw you in the shoe, solitary confinement. They take away a good time. So I know what it's like to live in a society that's imposing, which you can even say, you know, having been there for that time. But no, you know, it was that such a smart point. I mean, they're basically trying to turn the country into an open air prison where they can just hold your faith, your language, your thought. Yeah. Well said, faith, open love. So it got me home. Faith, hope, and love, you know, and you know, you get those moments when you're, you find yourself in deep despair and you feel like there's no chance the system is so arrayed. You can't get justice. You can't even get mercy because you fought back. You know, it even said it took a penny. It was all politics. Request for campaign contributions, no quid pro quo. We knew where the lines were, tried me twice. And then you put your faith in the appellate court. And then they, you know, they cannot uphold this so-called sale of the Senate seat because if they allow that standard, government shuts down because that's all horse trading and that's what they called it. And they were right. So they've actually reversed that. But I'm known for this. The other ones were three fundraising requests made by their parties, not even by me. And they knew not to make any promises or threats. And they criminalized that by using a standard that the Supreme Court said wasn't the law. And it was whitewashed by the, the appellate court to protect them. And you get those moments. But then you say to yourself, you know, it ain't about you anymore. It's about your daughters. They were little girls would have left home and your wife, you got to be strong for them. And it's long as you have purpose in life, you can survive anything. And Victor Frankel wrote that book, Man's Search for Meaning, Holocaust Survivor. And then a million times worse than anything we went through. But it's point was the last of the human freedoms is our freedom to choose our own attitude and any given set of circumstances. It was very helpful. And I got to tell you, and this is not baloney in my hand right now. Yeah. Yeah. The Bible. I mean, I was so low in the beginning and I reached for that Bible in a way. never did before. I wasn't going to bother with the Genesis or Leviticus or Deuteronomy. I'd be caught up in who's be getting who because I would always slow me down when I tried to read a real world. I went right to the, right to the Psalms and got inspiration and then they moved on and went to Isaiah and Jeremiah, then I went to the Gospels, Paul of course and well, all of them. It's began prison terms. Exactly. Rome. Yeah. I did a lot of time. He sure did. He was in strength and drew me closer to God. I'm not running for anything. I'm not giving any BS to your listeners. It was just real. And in some respects, I'm not saying it was good, but I'd have moments over the years where I would actually feel some sort of real unique connection to God. And it was somewhat like what Solzhenitsyn had written when he was in Siberia. And he talked about it. It's something like thank you prison for what you did for me because, but for what you you did, I would not feel as close to God as I do now. But that's just such a remarkable perspective, such a non-American perspective. Thank you for prison. Yeah. That's what he said. Yeah. That's very wrong. I'm not quite going that far. But I think what you're saying is that suffering turned you into a different man, a better man. Yeah. I think, yes. And I think a greater appreciation for the things that really matter most in life, you know, like the people in your life that you love and the appreciation for the simple things that maybe you were a little bit less aware of because you were so busy in the race of life to get in. Right? No, iPhone must have been nice. There was no iPhone in the world at that time when I loved home and I got home eight years later. What is this thing? Right? Wow. The world changes. And that's another thing. It's humbling. Is it OK if I keep talking? I hope you will. Yeah. It's like, you ain't so good. You ain't so great, man. You ain't like the world waits for you. You're just going to spend around, man. Huh? That's the truth. And all graves go and visited. Well, yeah, and everybody's refrigerated. Wow. Your party changed very much. On to how, what did you notice when you go back? Well, I noticed this whole new thing called wokeness and cancel culture, which I wasn't aware of before I left. I noticed the intolerance of the far left of the Democrat party. I noticed that my daughter, as my little girls grew up and became vegans, not that they're far left. That was weird. I'm sorry. I think that's it. I think, you know, I'm not against, you know, whatever. You would ever want to, whatever you don't eat, which you don't want to eat on the other hand. That's like the fear of every father that your girls are going to become vegans because it feels like it represents something else. But it has nothing to do with diet. It's that they, you know, they feel like it's wrong to, you know, eat meat to, you know, kill an animal. And it's a very sweet kind thing on their point of it. Oh, it is. Oh, I agree. And then, you know, I came home to a, you know, working class neighborhood in Chicago. I mean, we live in a nice little neighborhood. But where the local Democrat party began to turn socialist and, you know, the local city council people call them Alderman in Chicago. I think in 2019, my sister-in-law was the Alderman in our ward. She had inherited that seat from her father. It had been there for a long, long time. And she got beat by a socialist lost by 12 votes by a socialist. That was like shocking to me. And that's some of the other longstanding members of the city council were defeated by socialists. And so suddenly that was this new realization that the Democrat party, the grassroots level was radicalized. Were they good at governing the socialist? No, they're terrible at governing it. Now we're going to get a major property tax increase in Chicago to mayor, get Brandon Johnson just announced that. And as I read that this morning, I was thinking driving here. Geez, I wonder if we're going to, we have any risk of getting carjacked up here in the death of Maine, right? Because there's a cackle you got to think about those things. It's just funny. I mean, it's, you know, people have all these ideologies and I'm this or I'm in that, I believe here's my worldview. But on some level, it's kind of about do you make the town, the state, the country better to live in or not? And you're saying that the people who took over Chicago did not improve life? No, they've made it more unsafe. They're unwilling to have any kind of open to my discussion about the fact that the schools have been failing for generations and most of the kids that are suffering are the black kids. Yeah. For sure. And they talked a big game about being this out of the black people, but they won't even give a black mother a choice or a chance that maybe trying to other school because the public schools are so locked in to what the teachers unions want. And I'm not here to say that I wasn't exactly, you know, part of that Democrat party and the unions and the teachers you were part of it. That's why it's interesting. Yeah. Oh, yeah, you're a product. I mean, you're the governor of the state, right? And you came out of that world. I did. So that's why it's worth asking about this because you've seen the whole scope of it. That's right. From the daily years to present. That's right. And you know, the Democrat party that I was in, the party of the second mayor daily, the party, the first mayor daily, practical, you know, practical governance. Just make people's lives better. It's the best of no plowing in the United States. That's it. That's it. That's snowed Chicago got plowed before the suburbs. It was, I saw it. It was amazing. Yes, that's right. Not too stuck on ideology, but there were certain values that were fundamental to traditional Democrats. But were they love of country? Well, faith, family, love of country. And this Democrat party is none of those three. And there isn't a salt on faith in America by these Democrats, by the more radical Democrats. And it's something that has grown over the last couple of decades, something I saw when I was a Democratic member of Congress. I hope I don't turn your listeners off, but I supported Pelosi to be the Democrat leader when I was there. I saw even the beginnings of that when they were trying to take God out of the, you know, the, in God, we trust her. Well, she was a Catholic girl from Baltimore, some of the mayor. She was very, I mean, she was the son of Baltimore's mayor daily, like kind of old school machine Democrat. Right. That's right. But that she changed because she's a practical politician. And so she's gravitated towards that energy in the Democrat party today, which is that far-loved, far-loved socialist Democrat party that wants to re-change America. And you say this, and I'll repeat what you say. And that is to force us and make us to try to believe things we know. They're just not true. Yes. Right. And that's this dictatorial Democrat party. But you saw a hostility to Christianity when you were there. The idea growing. Yeah. In the late 90s, I did, you know, once in a while there'd be residential resolutions to take God out of the, um, the chamber, the house chamber. And then there was the judge in Alabama, Roy Moore. Yeah. I'm proud to say that back in the late 90s is a Democrat congressman from the city Chicago. I supported that judge. Why can't he put the 10 commandments up there in his courthouse? What's wrong with the 10 commandments? That's the foundation of our laws is the foundation of our values. So that's literally true. It is the foundation of the church. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So why are people so hysterical about Judge Roy Moore? I mean, they destroyed Judge Roy Moore. Yeah. I know this person. I saw that from afar. Yeah. Really, I watched on that. Um, because there's a, you know, there's an element in America and it's found a home at a Democrat party that's all about science and absolutely nothing about religion. I think the part of the coalition is the Democrat party. And I've been supportive of LGBTQ issues, but I think they feel threatened by Judeo-Christian values. And so they've become in many respects antagonistic to those traditional values. And these are some of the practical considerations that are part of why a lot of these Democrats have left the traditional Democrat, you know, working person's view of God and it become more apt to embrace science. And you know, I, one of the, I'm not saying there's any advantages to being present for a long time. Yeah. But when you got all that time and you got to kill it, you either try to use it constructively or it'll kill you. Yes. And it's a good place to catch up on your reading. Yeah. And you know, I've been in a lot of history, a lot of the sermons from Martin Luther King. And one of his sermons was really powerful. And he talked about what science can do, the good things. But it's God, it's God that provides the conscience to God's science, to guide science. Yes. And you know, science creates the medicines that cure people, which is great, also created the nuclear weapons that can destroy the world. What is it that's going to guide that? Are we going to trust in people? I know how people can be. I know how wicked they can be the best and brightest can be corrupt because I know what they did to me and to my family was shocking to me that US attorneys could be so dishonest and corrupt and that the judge would be in on it. Just go along with it. And so my faith's not in people. So you were shocked? I mean, obviously you were distressed. It happened to you, but you were shocked that it happens. Yes. I thought they were the good. I was a cook-honey prosecutor when I started out in a low level daily, the second mayor of daily at the time was he let the cook-honey States of Shurney. And he was my boss. So he's way up high. and now I'm a traffic court, right? Just starting out there were 800 of us assistants, big office. And they opened the misdemeanor branch courts and then I went into private practice. So I never met him when I worked for him. It was only until I became an elected official. And then in 10 short years I became the governor. He was the mayor. He still thought I worked for him, by the way. But that's a fraught relationship always between Chicago, mayor and Illinois governor anyway, isn't it? Yeah, I think so. But I think that he's practical. And these Democrats have programs and stuff that they want to pay for and bloated budgets are not a priority. And even the old school Democrats, that's not a priority. It's jobs and opportunities for people who've helped and that kind of thing. But the point I wanted to make about daily was when I worked in that state's attorney's office, I learned a lot about how prosecutors operated. And they were all right, mostly good. But I imagine that the federal US attorneys who wanted to better schools, I could never have a chance to be one of them. Grades, I was a gentleman, see scholar in law school, that these people had to be really smart, really bright. And they had to be super honest compared to the local Democratic prosecutors, many of whom you had some political backing to get their jobs. And I discovered they are in my case anyway. And I don't want to speak generally about everybody. But they're so corrupt, you can't get a fair trial. If they were looking at Andrew Weissman, you know, so the very top was a truly evil man, evil. And you know, Weissman, I'm sure, was smart, clever anyway and certainly well credentialed and has almost unchecked power. I mean, it's crazy that that exists. So he destroyed Arthur Anderson with fake law. That's related to me, fake law. They just make it up. They just move lines to get the convictions. Supreme Court took the case. And Weissman's standard that used to destroy Arthur Anderson and cost all those people's jobs, nine to nothing Supreme Court ruled he was wrong. That wasn't the law. Oh yeah. Yeah. So he destroyed the, and what does he get for that? He gets rewarded by being some big commentator on CNN and people listen to this guy like he's like he's honest. It's disgusting. It is disgusting. So what not to get such a short one of it. What is the daily family? I think we're still still alive, right? Yes. Yes. What do they think of the modern Democratic Party, Kamala Harris, Joe Biden, like what do they think of that? Bill daily. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Rand from Harris, Chicago, while I was in prison, and shockingly got his ass kicked in the new Chicago. And that's when Lori Lightfoot was elected. Yeah. The new kind of mayor in Chicago, right? She was a big failure and she got defeated soundly. But the fact that the daily could was news in Chicago was another reminder that boy times have changed. Different population in the Chicago. Very different demographic now. The city needs to be, you know, diverse racially, you know, very strong. Still, you know, black population still in the poor, bad, rough neighborhoods, big Latino population. But it was a city of white working class, white ethnics. Yeah. Central Eastern European people. Yeah. That's right. Large Polish population. Sloughs. Yeah. That element is gone now. You know, they, two, three generations, they worked hard to build better lives for themselves. They take advantage like our friend Phillip over here. Yeah. Working hard to make the American dream. They've moved upward out of the city and into, you know, more affluent suburbs. But they were the basis of the city. They sure were. And they've been replaced by these young, you know, young, new generation, not very politically aware, you know, probably driven by the social issues more than anything else. You know, the woman's right to choose those kinds of issues. Right. So they've been replaced by affluent white inherited money kids. That's right. And illegal aliens. Right. Speaking. That's exactly right. Right. So that's, that's always the model. It's rich white women and illegal aliens working in tandem to destroy civilization. It is in cities across the country. That is the model. The unhappiest people and the most, you know, the, the people with the least power who just can be used as cannon fodder for the program of the unhappiest people. So, um, but do you know what the dailies think of this? Like watching their city become a joke? Well, yeah, I know that I know rich daily, better than Bill daily. I know I know both. And then there's John daily, the younger one in the father. I mean, this is not their democratic party. No. And mayor daily, who's in his early 80s now he hosts a Christmas party every year. And again, invited I get to see him and he's had a couple of strokes and then he hosts the same Patrick's Day parties you can. Of course he goes. Um, I think he's quietly going to vote for Trump. Oh, I'm sure. Yeah. And he may be not because he sort of, you know, he was more like Bill daily didn't win elected office. He was more appointed guy, you know, he worked for Bill Clinton. That's just, that's right. And, um, well, I don't want it to mean him, but he doesn't have the same kind of testicular virility. You got to have to be in the arena and be good at it. You know what I'm saying? Run Chicago is not an easy thing. That's just, as the current mayor is proving. Yeah, that's right. No. Until not that long ago, the 1990s, the US government classified encryption as a form of munitions and strictly controlled its use. In other words, encryption was considered a dangerous weapon. Both technology and law have changed a lot since then, but it's still true that encryption is a powerful weapon against a defensive weapon against an entire army of bad actors who want to invade your privacy on the internet and then profit from it or control you. Thankfully today you have the right to use encryption to protect yourself. You don't have to be a sophisticated computer programmer. You don't have to code in order to do it instead you can use a simple app called Express VPN. Express VPN automatically encrypts and reroute here in a connection through secure servers. And that makes everything you do online private. No one can monitor, record, manipulate or profit from what you do online without getting your consent. You have your freedom back. Without encryption, your internet service provider can legally sell everything you do your browsing history to whomever they want and data brokers contract your activity across every site you visit and then sell that information to marketers. But Express VPN makes it very, very easy to shut out all of those third parties, which is why we use it here. You tap one button and when the app turns green, you are private. Your connection cannot be seen. And Express VPN works in every device you have, your phone, laptop, tablet, you name it, it works. So if you get it, say you can extra three extra months of Express VPN for free just by using the special link. You can express VPN dot com slash Tucker. That's Express VPN dot com slash Tucker and get three extra months for free and begin to protect yourself. So what role did Obama play? I mean, I think most people thought Obama was like a sign that America was getting healthier your healing from past trauma and all that. He was a sign of hope. And then it just got super evil. But when did you realize that Obama was not what he seemed to be and what role did he play in the disaster in your life? He started the whole thing. You know, my story, the book that I'm writing is a story that started with him on election night in 2008. It was magical. You know, first black person half black. Yeah, yeah, I'm from Kansas, Dad from Kenya. I like the president. I've known him since 1995. We both came up together in politics. Had good relationships. I was introduced to him by a guy by the name of Tony Resco. I think that name is familiar to you. It was not merely what the guys who's been portrayed. I mean, business, bad, very practical, extremely generous to Obama and good Obama, helpful to both of us raising money and things like that. And when I was elected governor, he would come to me with request from Obama and, you know, a lot of it were appointments to tie positions in state government. I was two years ahead of Obama in terms of going to the next level because I was the first Democrat, governor elected in Illinois in 2002. And with this long and hard to pronounce last name, which was kind of cutting edge at the time because for the most part, Illinois was electing guys with angle of names. Right. You know, we had Thompson, we had Edgar and we had Ryan before me. All those guys went to prison. Well, Ryan did. Yeah, Thompson put that governor, a colonel in prison. That's another story. Yeah. And then I won't like being a first lieutenant and Vietnam. The odds are bad. Right. Exactly. Right. Yeah. But I think in some respects, I should apologize to the American people because I might have something to do with Obama's success because I think he saw that if I won and I could win downstate in the rural areas and, you know, deep southern Illinois, which is the American South, I got like me from Chicago, he could do it. And with a name, you can't say his name, he could do it. Two years later, he did and he got the opportunity of that speech in Boston, which was his William Jennings Bryant moment, right? Oh, yeah. Electrified to cry with that speech. Oh, it was there. Yeah. So was I? I turned a Bobby Rush, the Congressman former Black Panther. I said, Bobby, just think about that. As soon as you get down with that speech, you're the only guy who's a rebeaten guy in an election because Obama challenged him in 1980. Oh, right. But no, I thought Obama was all right, you know, kind of cold and impersonal, but okay, and I was happy to be helpful. But he's one of the more selfish people in politics on a one on one level. And he's not pure like the driven snow in the sense of his ethics from morality. And, you know, Tony Reskow is the guy who bought this lot next to Obama's home. And one of the things I write about in my book is that when I was governor first and then Barack won in 2004, I was asked to make a phone call on behalf of Michelle Obama, because as soon as you won the Senate race, she wanted a job either in Northwestern University or the University of Chicago hospitals for two to three hundred thousand dollars a year, though the wife of the new senator. And I was asked what you call and will she specific about how much she wanted? Yeah. I can't specific about salary. Yeah. And I think to the Northwestern, we should double check this, but my recollection is good. I think Northwestern was willing to pay $200,000 to hire her. This is the wife of the new US senator and federal money for, you know, Medicaid and and things like that. And then they got a better off for the University of Chicago, which is in high park where they're from 300,000 and she ended up working there. And I called to help because you need to help people in politics and the guys who I have wanted to job, I'll make a phone call. You didn't get it because of me, but it didn't help to have the governor call and say second Obama gets elected. Michelle says I want a job at one of two hospitals for between two and three. That's correct. And she ended up working at the University of Chicago hospital almost certain $300,000 a year. And so, so, Roscoe was really helpful, really helpful to Obama. And so when the investigations against me, he did it up. It had to do with fundraising and Tony was part of that. And I got to say this Tony suffered. He spent eight years in prison. I don't know whether those things that they said he did were even legal based on what they did to me. I'm not so sure they were illegal. They had nothing to do with my administration. They were business matters. But Obama just ran from him. They did nothing to help him. And you know, for instance, I didn't ever know him. And yet the moment he became Senator, she gets a $300,000 a year job with a little help, tiny, little help for me with a phone call. And then they buy this mansion in the Kenwood neighborhood, which is high Park Chicago. Beautiful old mansions were the family of Leo Pollton, low, they lived. So a lot of sickos in that neighborhood going back 100 years. Well, those guys, those two boys were. Yeah. I mean, it's a bastion of Lille and a liberal America there. Dickie Lobe. But so what happened was the Obama's bought this mansion. Now he's the new Senator. The first thing they do is buy a mansion. I guess he felt like I was getting a mansion because I was the governor. I wasn't mine, but I got the use of a 50,000 square foot governor's mansion. I guess they wanted their own. So they could only afford 750,000. They purchased the lot with the house on it, the mansion on it, but they couldn't afford the adjoining lot. So they asked, Russ, go to buy a forum. And he did. And my understanding of the federal investigations with me were also connected to Obama that these guys were apparently looking into that and some other things along the way the dynamic changed. Obama started moving up in the presidential race. And here again, I did something I'd like to take back, but I was the first governor in America to endorse them for president. I'm a greater personal relationship for Illinois. And he was running against Hillary. So it was hard. But what ultimately happened was when he started rising, Axelrod, David, who used to work for me and then went on to Obama. I knew what they were doing. They were for political reasons. They were influencing the media to pretty much lay Tony me up more than Obama. I was more Tonyed up and Tony was a supporter and a friend and he was and I liked Tony. In spite of everything that's happened to him, but Obama knew him and loved him longer and Tony had done more for Obama over the years than he did for me. And ultimately, politically and in the media, the media just conveniently ignored Gresco's relationship to Obama. They had given very little coverage and it was all about me and Tony. So Axelrod worked for you. He did when I was at Congressman, but I ran for Congress. He was like, he's very smart. You know, I like him a lot. His son was an intern for him. His son, Michael, he's a great kid. He's grown up now. Though I like David a lot, but he's a very practical guy and he's very ambitious politically. And it's a rough and tumble business. And when his interest collide with yours, you know, he's one out. He will exercise what's in his interest. Yeah. And I think a lot of the political consultants are that way. He denies saying this, but he did when when Kerry had been beaten by Bush in 2004. And the Democrats all felt like Kerry was going to win. In fact, Kerry was getting some massage and boss in that night election night and what the guy's name is to write great speeches for Ted Kennedy, Bob Shrum, Shrum, Shrum watch instead of watching and told up something like, I'd hear the stuff from the Democrat world, you know, let me be the first one to congratulate you, Mr. President. Right. Remember that? And then the next morning was finally concluded that Bush won Ohio. Right. I knew them all very well and Shrum, you know, had good qualities. You're smart, but what a toady, what a professional. Later of politicians is just really disgusting. So that was a Tuesday, right? And of course Wednesday, I get a phone call about six in the evening. Some at home, the election's over. David Axelrod, he denies this, but it happened. And he said, you know, the Democrats, Hillary's the front runner in 2008, but two liberal to dislike Kerry should have won. He couldn't. We're looking for a new face somebody from the heartland of America. That's what he called it. You need to have an open mind about thinking about running for president and challenging Hillary in 2008. Not that time he had Obama. Obama was as candidate for the Senate. He had been as consultant. Obama won and he was had that great speech. And he was, but I think David wasn't quite sure that maybe America was ready to elect a black person. So he's in the business of being a consultant. He's make want to make sure he has a horse in the race because the Clintons already have their people. He had Edwards in 2004 and he didn't care. Oh, well, yeah. So he's looking for candidates for president. So Bill Zach, remember that name? Me in Illinois and Obama, the three of us. He was probably positioning himself to see which one of us might have the better chance. And he picked the right horse eventually because Obama was the right one. And of course Obama's success in my calamity parallel. And so he asked me, this is a long answer to your question about 55 minutes ago. What did Obama have to do with my problems? Was election night were there and a labor boss by the name of Tom Ballonoff, service employees union big support of both of us came up to me. The grand park in Chicago, beautiful weather, magical historic night. And he said, Brock called me last night. He wanted me to talk to you about Valerie Jared. He'd like her very close friend of Michelle Obama, by the way. He'd like you to point her to the United States Senate because the governor has to point the senator. And he wanted me to ask you what you would want. Can I call you and come and see you and make an appointment? I said, of course, call me tomorrow. It will set something up this week. That's how it started. And then at the next day, I got done running and went out and ran like eight miles that day, seven miles. Of course, call me tomorrow. It was said something up this week. That's how it started. And then at the next day, I got done running. I went out and ran like eight miles that day, seven miles. I'm just loosening up. I'm laying on my little family room floor stretching. I'm back and I'm talking to one of my aides. And I said, oh, ballin' off call to permanently Obama. Send him to me. Obama sent him to me. He wants to make a deal on the Senate seat. What should we do? What should we think about getting? Probably legal stuff. Not, you know, give me cash or anything, which would be illegal, political, horse trading, which eventually is what the Supreme Court, I mean, the appellate court said it was. And then I say, and you know, unless I do something, you know, significant, this will be in my obituary. I said so much, oh, it's suggested that we just kiss his ass and give him wherever he wants. But that seems like that would be political malpractice. And we have a golden opportunity. We have a real opportunity here to, you know, to something meaningful. And then I said, I know this is F and Golden. I'm not giving enough for enough, right? I'm known for that. And you didn't realize this was being taped. I didn't realize it, but let me say something to your listeners. When you're in Chicago politics and the ethics in that place and the way they do business and the way the feds not wrongly necessarily try to set people up to see whether or not they'll take a temptation. They send people in to give you an offer, you cash and stuff like that. You'd be an idiot if you don't think they may be listening. I, it wasn't, I had been under federal investigation for five years I knew it because of the rest of stuff and some other stuff. People who were supporters of mine and Obama. I mean, I thought it's all very possible. And everything I'm talking about doing is legal. And I was super careful because I was under such intense federal investigation at that time to make sure that anything I talked about doing, I chucked my governor's lawyer and lawyers. And my lawyer was on the, on average, all these FBI tapes they taped my calls to this day 98% of those tapes are covered up under a court seal. The judge would not allow us to talk about how my lawyer was on those calls three times a day because at that point, you know, like you know, they're coming. You want to be absolutely careful that whatever you do on this Senate seat is legal. Right. And so you, you're throwing out all kinds of ideas because you do have this ethical and an opportunity. We talked about Oprah for a couple of days, all these crazy ideas. And everybody wanted it. Everybody wanted me to point them as you can imagine. And you know, and through third parties or suggesting deals that were political, they weren't illegal. Some had suggested money and campaign funds which would have been illegal. And, but I would talk to my lawyer, you know, three times a day and he was advising me. In fact, one call, I say something like, you know, we're discussing a creative way to create a nonprofit, political action committee to help support the advancement of access to healthcare, which was a big issue for me when I was governor. And Obama was talking about doing Obamacare and all this at the federal level. And some of the people that had put our healthcare plans together in Illinois went on to work for Obama. And so the question was whether or not there was something that we could do to be helpful, to push it further in Illinois and do something. And could we put together a 501c3 or 501c4? Obama gets some of these big rich Democrats who give money to him to put in our thing. And can we, you know, perhaps make the deal on the Senate seat for something like this? And so I say to the lawyer. And to one of my aides, I say, I mean, how do you do a deal like that? I mean, it's got to be legal, obviously. I'm on the tape saying that. A couple of years ago, by about my second trial, because they failed to convict me on their corrupt charges the first trial. And they're going to play that tape against me. And I'd be actually charged one of my big crimes. It was that phone call. How do you do a deal like that? I mean, it's got to be legal obviously. I'm asking, I don't even know if you could do it. So I'm just thinking out loud. And they criminalized it. But surely I'm going to get acquitted on this. But the jury instructional was custom tailored to fit these conversations to tell the jury that those things were criminal. And they can convict anybody if they do that. If they decide, for example, that this conversation you and I are having and they, you know, they charge us. And then they got approved for a jury and they got a judge that's only doing anything they want. Then they do. All they got to do is just write up a jury instruction, 12 laymen, average everyday ordinary people, aren't lawyers, aren't in politics. Just tell them this is against the law. And they'll make the right decision. They'll convict you of this conversation because they're told by the judge and the prosecutors. It's against the law. So big picture, why do you think they did this to you? The Democratic establishment was to you. Well, they were Bush prosecutors that started it. Here's what I think happened. So it's Gerald. That's right. And like I said, there would be a rotten and corrupt. I've noticed. Yeah. Here's what they came at six o'clock in the morning and arrested a sitting governor. I mean, I was Roger Stone years before Roger Stone, right? My little girls are sleeping at, you know, ready to get up shortly for school. But my little one at the time was five. And she was in bed with us. And I got up at six. I was going to actually go run that. Just went to where I was going to go run and I'm already closed laid out phone rang. And I thought it was a friend of mine. The guy says, I gotta wear it warm for your rest and the agent so and so. And I had state police security all the time as the governor. And I thought it was a friend of mine. I say this a lot because he's like that one. I really did. I said, come on. Just stay center of Jimmy to Leo. And I said, come on, Jimmy stop effing around six o'clock in the morning. But it wasn't him. It was really the FBI with a warrant. Um, I think they got me. Handcuffed me, drove me to their facility. By four hours later, my 10 o'clock, they were good cop. And they had me in and you're not a bad guy. We'll listen to all your tafesers, the product, the Chicago politics. They wanted me to cooperate. I believed my interpretation was they wanted me to talk about Obama. I don't think they were ever going to go after Obama at that point. First black president. But I think they wanted to see whether or not I would. Here's a prison term, snitch on the president elect and then go back and hit the him and say that. They probably told him that anyway because he lied. In any event, I said there's, you know, I was never involved in any wrong to him. I don't know whether he's he's involved in anything of that sort. I can tell you I'm not. And I got nothing to talk about. Whatever I discussed was politics. And then they got it. They changed their attitude. They shipped me to another facility, the court building and put me in a small little cell. And they had me next to this really angry guy all caught up on PCP screaming and MF and it no clue that he was right next to the governor. You know, I'm doing pushups in there because I'm thinking this is really a bad day. And this is going to be really bad. And maybe at some point, I want to be able to say that while I was in the heat of the moment, I still was strong enough to do some pushups in myself. So I did pushups in there. So I can say that I did it, right? Yeah. Plus if you're going to join again, you need to be buff. Yeah, there's some truth to that. Yeah. Anyway, so I think that and then they went to Obama the next day and they did, they interviewed him. They call him 302 is FBI 302s. Every criminal defendant is entitled under the constitution to have evidence that could exonerate him or her. And Obama's 302s are relevant directly relevant to my case. To this day, they won't give it to us what Obama said. And he publicly contradicted what the labor boss, Balanoff, it said that he'd come to me the night before because it all started that way. And Balanoff, it testified under twice in two trials that he said that Obama had called him and sent him over to me. And you know, it was about talking about a political deal. And Obama publicly said, no, what he said on those FBI 302s, my contradict that, I don't know. Right of the FBI, you know, it's a crime. So I think what happened was because it's unusual and you know this, the new president doesn't keep the US attorney from the previous president, especially if it's the other party. Of course. But suddenly now they made a deal with Obama will leave you alone. You keep us here until we get him. And it wasn't until they got me at the second trial years later that they all went in private practice and became partners at big firms making millions of dollars. And then later one of them became a judge, but Fitzgerald's a partner to big law firm, the lead prosecutor, partner in a big law firm. And the moment that they got their convictions against me in the second trial, that's where they went. And I think the reason Obama did nothing to be helpful while I'm in there. And after being in prison for, well, five and a half, six and a half years, I was unusually, unlike God, her 51,000 federal inmates, I was probably the only guy who was able to get, this is the for an accurate prison. My paperwork in front of two presidents, Axelrod was getting my request for a commutation from Obama. On Obama's desk, he gave him letters from, you know, my two daughters, my young daughters to the president. Obama's daughters are the same age as mine. And I done already six and a half years asking for clemency. And we recognize the politics of him. And as I mentioned, walking out of the White House in January 20th, 2017, so we're not even going to have it be where someone might have a, you know, the screenshot of him leaving the White House and me leaving the big house at the same time because we're connected to the case. But why don't you just cut my sentence in half from 14 years and never took a penny, was request for campaign contributions and a political deal you wanted to make, right? It's cut my age sentence from 14 years to seven, which would be higher than anybody governors ever gotten from Illinois who's been in prison, probably maybe the longest actual time served of any governor. And I'll limp out of prison in October of 2017. And it should look promising in the days leading up to that because a few days before that he had provided it released from prison, a member of the FALN, the Puerto Rican terrorist group that was blowing up federal bills. So you should have been a Puerto Rican terrorist. This guy got released by Obama a few days before I'm thinking, oh, that's a good sign for me, right? And then a guy got 35 years in prison for treason against the United States. His name was Bradley Manning. He went into prison as Bradley Manning, came out of prison, Chelsea Manning, through the largesse of the taxpayers. Obama cut him, cut her loose after six years or seven years. I'm thinking I'm easy compared to these two. And I had members of Congress, Democrats who had served with X-Rod asking him to do it. And he didn't do it. And I think it's because he made a deal with them. They were basically said, we'll leave you alone. You don't interrupt. You get involved in any of this and you don't help him. That's what I think. But here's what's interesting. And it shows a lot about the kind of person, Trump is, and all through this process, these long hard years and the years of dashed hopes and expectations, because there was no way we could lose our appeal. These things aren't legal. Then they reversed the Senate seat after I'm in prison for three and a half years. And they came my sentence. Now I have no sentence. So I went from 14 years to no years for a year, which was easy, easier time to do because when you're looking, you walk into prison in March of 2012, March 15, and your exit days may 2024. Right? That's a long hard road. So you've tried to break up and psychologically try to break up that time. So you say, okay, let's get from here to the first appeal. We're going to have hopes that we can win that. The deep time you just know, you've seen enough of the system to know you're dead. Right? But you hold clung at that hope. They can't uphold the Senate seat. They reverse it. Now I have no sentence. I discuss with my attorney, um, when do we go back to recense and they got to give you a sentence? You go back to the same judge. Let's just wait a year. I'll just stay here. I'll keep, you know, working out reading and just trying to grow. And then we'll go back to this judge when I will have served almost five years more than just about anybody. I mean, nobody in American history, other than me has served a single day in prison for a fundraising violation. And this wasn't even a violation, but let's assume the worst that it was. No one had did a single day. And my lawyer presented this to the judge. There's not a single case. And letters, my little girls had grown up. They gave beautiful presentations and cord. I'm, I'm, I'm video from Colorado in prison for the resettancing August 9th, 2016. Okay. So I go from no sentence. The centerpiece of the case was a big lie to begin with. It was never a crime. No sale of the Senate seat. No sentence back before the judge. I've been a well behaved inmate. We submit well over 100 letters from my colleagues, guys that I helped. Good guys. I'm criminals, but I learned a lot of these guys aren't bad guys. Some are really bad. Some are pretty good guys are just, you know, have gone the wrong way and got bad habits. We submit the letters. There's real expectation that I'll go home. He puts me back at 14 years and I hear my older daughter sobbing in the courtroom after they gave these beautiful presentations. I'm watching my little girls who've grown and I'm so proud of them and look how, you know, how sweet and nice and smart they are. And boy, Patty did a great job raising them. You know, I'm all these things I'm thinking at this resettancing. But here's where God comes in and this whole miracle of how I eventually got home and the Donald Trump would be the instruments. See, this is part of what I read about my book. I got to know him a little bit on celebrity apprentice. I show I never watched. But after they took everything away from me and I had no income and I was an honest governor and didn't get brinched in the business. Are you just getting these opportunities to do these, you know, in one place that you can actually make a living when you got this leprosy is an entertainment. Yeah, exactly. No one wants to come near you when you got it. Understand, but you're better than did it. So you can still, you can still get paid. Yeah. So yeah, I turned on a bunch of really bad stuff like being a greeter at an HBO show called the Bunny Ranch. It's a whole house on Henderson, Havana. He offered me six figures that I was perfect for the role because I have such a scoundrel in the media. Right. I turned it down. The guy's name was Dennis Hoff. I know. Yeah. Nice guy. Yeah, but I couldn't. I got two little girls. I'm not doing that. Anyway, but Trump's show can't call it because he saw me on television fighting back. And so I did celebrity, this is October 2009 that we tape it. There's like March 2010. My first trial is June 2010. And he was so good to me. He was so sympathetic. He was so kind. People don't realize on a personal level that Trump's a kind-hearted person, very different from those politicians and the direct opposite of a cold, selfish, completely practical Obama. Right? So when Obama passes me by back to the resensing on the 9th of August, the 9th of August, the judge puts me back at 14 years. My daughter's sobbing in the courtroom. I can't see her, but I hear it. Hope is gone now, right? But here's how God works. He sends me more hope because that afternoon, Trump's given to speech in North Carolina, it's running against Hillary. And he starts talking about crooked Hillary, right? And before the audience starts chanting a locker up, locker up, he says, and then there's this guy, Raphim Al-Noye. Boba, they just gave him 14 years. Again, 14 years. He's a choir boy next to Hillary, something like that. Trump's got me on his radar, right? And I'm thinking, because I believe I know politics, I think he's going to beat her. Even from a foreign person, I thought he was going to beat her because he was different. And he was standing up to stuff. He wasn't back at down like typical politicians do. And I thought, wow. So if Obama doesn't do it, who knows? And he was so good to me on that show. Well he didn't do it, Obama, the 20th of January. One month later Trump's been president for one month. I get called into the case manager's office and they have a form I have to sign. It's a waiver. I have to, if I agree to allow the White House pardon office to get my prison records. Of course, what do I sign? Right? So I signed it. Two things. Trump's looking out to want to see whether or not he knows that well behaved in made, there's a way perhaps where he can send me home. And Obama was never going to do it because they never asked for my records. What that did for me was it gave me hope for the next couple of years. And then after the Supreme Court didn't take our case, God bless you, my friend. Me and my home, he's in prison, watching my wife on your show on a Monday in the spring of 2018. Supreme Court turned me down that weekend, that Monday evening you had Patty, my wife, Patty. Yeah, I'll never forget it. Yeah. And you were fantastic. And I'm really grateful to you. Oh my gosh. Well, there's nothing more beautiful than a royal spouse. Yeah, she's amazing. Yeah, I agree with that strongly. So when you see going through everything that you did, when you see the FBI raid Mar-a-Lago in the summer of 2022, what do you think? Deja vu all over again. Yeah. These lions gumbags. Yeah. Weaponized are politicians, they're political agents. KGB, Soviet style, police, they politics in America and the Democrats have embraced it. The Bush administration started it, but this Fitzgerald is his own guy. And Comey and Fitzgerald are real close. Of course, there are. And there's no doubt in my mind that what they did to me at the AAA level to a Democrat governor, they said, oh, we can get away with this. Let's do it to Trump, a Republican president at the major league level. And that's exactly what this whole Russian collusion bullshit was all about. And I'm watching this from prison. And I know all of it. I recognize it. I know the tactics. I know what that stuff they say to the media, how they leak stuff and how they lie. They're political operatives. Our country is on the cross for us, on the threshold. I mean, so important to, the Trump for a thousand reasons. This might be the most important one of them because if we lose this, the ability in America, to elect our leaders without the intervention of prosecutors, criminalizing things that aren't crimes for politics, the voters don't have any choices. Free and fair elections don't matter. It's all rigged like they do in the, the also of the union. What did Barry say show me the man, I'll show you the crime exactly. Yeah. When we started this show, we were looking for a very specific sponsor. We wanted to find a company that could send us good meat. Better than anything you could buy in a grocery store, they didn't have a lot of weird hormones and interchemicals, just good meat from the United States. And we found one and we are proud to partner with them. They're called Mary Weather Farms and they produce all natural beef and we are proud to be in business with them. We eat it. Our viewers have been buying it and loving it. We've got all kinds of positive reviews. Again, this is a sponsor we're proud to have. So, Mary Weather Farms out with a new product in addition to the stakes that we have almost every night here and the burgers all shipped directly to your house. They have a new line of snacks including single serve beef sticks, one of which is right here on the table. Unlike store ball, but alternatives which you can buy it, convenience stores, these are made the United States in Wyoming at their facility and they're free of nitrates, MSG, mystery, meat and other weird stuff you don't want in your mouth. Like all the products that Mary Weather Farms makes, they are made fresh. They've got simple ingredients all of which you can pronounce and recognize and they're delicious and good for you. If you use our special promo code TCN24 and check out there about a buck 50 apiece. It's a perfect on-the-go protein boost if you need one or if you've got kids or sports, want something to keep in your car or truck. Super easy and good for you. Check out Mary Weather Farms today. You will taste the difference. It's again better than anything you can buy at the grocery store and it comes right to your house. We have a media protected first line item in the Bill of Rights as you know, in order to push back against the abuse of power by the government. And they don't seem to be playing that role. They're assigned role. They're the role that Judy would compel them to play. They seem to be covering for the people in power. Oh man, duty would compel them to play. Yeah, the fourth estate, a free press and a free society. You don't have that to check power. Yeah, we're dead, right? So that's kind of what I naively thought when I'm sitting in the back seat of the FBI vehicle, handcuffed behind my hands. I'm the governor of Illinois. It's a fifth largest state in America. Right? I'm now they got me. And I said, what was this about? And the guy said the sale of the Senate seat. I said, what? First of all, you got to be a horse's ass to think that you can get away with something like that. I'm going to sell Obama any president's, but Obama at that time was a demigod elevated by the media. Okay. Also, professional bullshit about how great he is. But I'm going to be that stupid. Well, I'm going to actually try to sell his Senate seat. And I'm already under intense federal investigation for rescue and some of these other guys. And, you know, back to some politics and stuff and they're trying to find crime. They can't find them for five years. So now this, I'm thinking the media, and that's so great. But the media certainly going to laugh them out of court before they get into court. Who'd be so stupid to do something like that? And the reality was they were all over it because it was just too super sensational to pass up its old newspapers. It was good for ratings. So they're more interesting storyline than the truth, aggregating their responsibility to all of us as citizens to keep an eye on the power. And the government has no power. And these federal prosecutors have all the power unchecked power, not foreseen by our founding fathers when they divided our government. They didn't know that they'd be a branch out of the executive part of the government, an agency out of the executive branch that would grow like a cancer. There originally going after the alkyl poems of the world and that taking that power to all kinds of levels to turn it into a political line. It becomes a secret police. There you go. Yeah. This is why the work that you do tuck our nominee. You're so nice to me, but I'm grateful to you for what you do and others like you are fighting for freedom and Elon Musk and these guys. Which is so corrupt. I mean, and I think it's important to say out loud what it is, which again is corrupt and evil. Corrupt and evil. Yeah. So does, I mean, just Trump have a, in a fair election, do you think Trump will win? Oh, yeah. If fair election, he wins every one of those battleground states with some cushion. It's another thing I want to say to your listeners, they should listen to me on this sort of stuff. You know, in a fair election, one thing I've been good at in life is winning elections. I've run 14 of them. Seven or eight were really hard. Prime Mary's really hard to out against other Democrats. You know, running against Republicans for governor, Illinois, being the first Democrat to win after 26 years, those are really competitive races. So I'm giving me high marks. I'm an expert witness when it comes to politics, understanding the mood of the voters, sensing them, not just what the polling says. Actually, it's more instinctive. What you saw at Madison Square Garden, we gave that great speech. I saw the crowds there. They're not Nazis. You know what they are? They're white people. They're black people. Exactly. They're Hispanics and their Asian. They're old and they're young. They're good, decent, hardworking, forgotten Americans. Yes. And there's more of them, aren't and they've learned to know what's being done to them and how our country is setting the priorities that go against their interests now. So blatantly, for those who don't legally come to the United States, they're not stupid. And I believe if this election is run fairly, it's going to be a 19 or a 2024 version of 1980 when the country made us this choice between Reagan and Carter by the first or second week of October and started shifting and going to our dragon in that a winning, you know, maybe 49 states or something. That won't happen now because the demographic in America is different. The ball games, those battleground states. But if I'm right about this, Trump will sweep all of them and might be competitive in states like Virginia, maybe or Minnesota even. Keep an eye on that. We'll see. But I'm very hopeful and as Reagan used to say cautiously optimistic. Well, it does seem, I mean, I bet my house on the proposition that Trump is more popular than Kamala Harris and more people in those seven states will vote for Trump and Kamala Harris. But that doesn't mean that he's going to be president. What do you think will actually happen? Well, that's a good question. I couldn't imagine what happened in 2020. You can't really talk about it, but I have a tremendous skepticism about all of that. I was asked after that election about, you know, we literally can't talk about it. And if we talk about that, this will be taken off YouTube. Yeah. But what do you think that is? What do you, I mean, if somebody says, you know, we can talk about anything you want, except this one thing. Yeah. What does that tell you? That's nice. Well, you look at those FBI tapes. I want to play 98% of them, right? That they wouldn't let me play them in court even. It's like it could include my innocence. So, if you're hiding something, there's a reason. They don't want to say relying. Yeah, of course. They're the ones who did it. But I think that I think that so much, I think there's such a movement for Trump right that. I think there's such a movement against what's happening. And I think the testicular virility, that great courage Trump showed at that moment when he got shot. Yes. But other elevated him to a very different place. He's no longer your typical politician. Right. I think he represents something that's really powerful. And you can just see all the things they're unfolding. And here's another reason why I feel very good about the selection. The public polls, whatever they are, I never relied on those. We had our polling and we had guided how we ran the race with the strategy was to run and win. And you know that the other side has their polling too. And in all likelihood, it's probably as good as yours. So they know what you know. They're seeing what you're seeing. And so if you really want to know how the campaigns are going, just watch the candidates, where they go, what they say, what they do and what they're running on. And Trump's running on a message on things that he wants to do for the American people. You might disagree with those things. But this is what he's saying he's going to do. If about you, the people, what she's saying, he's a Nazi. Now they're in the last late stages and making these outrageous accusations and calling people names. Whenever that would happen to me, they would call them a Nazi. But I was, you know, you get nasty stuff thrown at you when you're a head. You love it because you know you're winning. Yeah. Right. So he's winning. And if it's fair and honest, he'll win comfortably in those seven states. So if they come to us the day after the election and by day, I mean, morning Joe and the rest of the sick offense in the media and tell us that Kamala Harris turns out to be just incredibly popular and incredibly popular. And her compelling vision got her across the finish line with a massive margin. And she got, you know, 84 million votes. And she's the winner. And if you disagree, you know, you're a criminal. Well, people accept that. I will not accept that. But will others accept that? Like what happens then? In Nazi Germany, they held a plebiscite, Hitler wanted to confirm somewhat what he was doing. And it was like 99% yeah, that's how you say us in Germany, right? I think that's the only way they could even remote. But I mean, shouldn't look, I don't want to be an election denier or denier of anything that's true. I always want to acknowledge what's true. That's right. But I also don't think that any of us are under the obligation to accept them at face value at their word. I think they've kind of tried the limits of good faith. And aren't we allowed to say, look, you say Kamala Harris won? Great. Shows the books. No doubt about it. We know them to be liars. They've been lying through the years. And they've just recently been lying about, but what? The cognitive capabilities of the president and the exact throw them out of office and hijacking from office and put her there. And you know, lying about her records. She didn't work in McDonald's even they lied about everything. Right. No, we can't believe that. That's going to be really hard to believe. Why don't we have electronic voting machines? I thought the idea, well, I was never against them. I never thought about it. But I assume that they were more efficient, that you got the results faster and that they were more accurate. And they're not more accurate than hand counting paper ballots. And they're certainly not faster. You know, the resulting countries that don't have electronic voting machines are reliable. And they're in long before our results are. So what is the reason that we have electronic voting machines? So among the different people I write about in my book is Walter Hill, Black guy from East St. Louis, Illinois. Yes. When I first got to prison, he embraced me. He was, you know, you my governor. Right. And he told me about a time that we had met. He had lost some way, but he had been a big guy. And when he told me about having met him once down in the Metro East area, Villanoy down south, Western Illinois, any saying, Louis, I kind of remembered him. And he was like some liquor license commissioner. Now, I don't think he'd mind me saying this. It was colorful figure and a good guy. But he was wrong. What he did. I like him already. I kind of remembered him and he was like some liquor license commissioner. Now I don't think he'd mind me saying this. It was colorful figure and a good guy, but he was wrong. What he did. I like him already. Yeah. What he said to me, uh, and he told you, he was sympathetic to me because he's a politics. Can believe how I'm in prison for what? But he said to me, you know, I voted for you two times. Right. And he's saying, Lewis. And I said, Oh, wow. Thanks. How many times you vote for Obama nine? He said, you're a racist man, but both Democrats. You vote for the black guy nine times me only two. That's why that's why I don't remember Obama running for president nine times. How did Mr. Hill pull that off? No, then that first election because I met him in 2012 before the real elections. So this would have been the 2008 election. And I frankly believe he was telling me the truth. But that's the answer to your question about those electric, those machines. You know, that they what gives me hope to about this election is those, among the ways Democratic precinct workers and Obama and I know this, we would, we were, you know, high up, but you kind of know these activists are doing whatever they're doing in, in the polling places that are controlled by Democrats largely in the inner city and the poor neighborhoods. Um, it's through the, what's the absentee balance and they gather them up and harvests them. And what happened in 2020 was that on steroids with the COVID situation and the mail in ballots. And it's among the reasons why I have a, you know, I believe I honest skepticism about the result of that. Don't know the Trump even had a fair chance to get the court on any of that stuff. And again, I know for my experience how the courts can, you know, be dishonest. There's got to be so many reforms that have to happen. God willing Trump wins. Clean up that justice system. And I think there has to be nobody should be unchecked. I think that's the lesson for a hard experience. Human nature, even good people can get tempted to do the bad things and wrong things. Another reason why thank you scientists for your great intelligence and the great contributions you make. But unless we guide you through conscience, which comes from God, exactly, you're going to destroy the world. So, uh, answer your question. And I think the, the body system is the way it is today because of political priorities that are above and beyond what's fundamentally right for our country and what really makes me angry at my party is nothing sacred to these people anymore, that they would weaponize the law and the justice system to destroy Trump because they know that if they, if they destroy Trump, nothing's going to stop them from destroying our freedoms. And little by little, this I know too, having lost mine. I see the steady erosion of freedom in America. And it's so much like countries that like my father came from after World War II Serbia, he didn't want to live in a communist country. And, you know, they saw, they know how those rights and freedoms are taken away. And here's this what Lincoln called the last best hope on earth. If we lose freedom here, forget about it all over the world. I think we're going to start seeing the beginning of a new dark age where tyrants and totalitarian governments are the rule and democracy is dead. That's what I think. This time of year, we are focused on our families because we're apt to be with our families, celebrating together. And it's the time of year where you might ask yourself, what happens when you're gone? What's left behind? Well, protect your family's future and peace of mind with a product called policy genius. Policy genius has one goal to make it easy to find and buy life insurance. So your loved ones have something when you're not here. Something they used to cover deaths and expenses if something unexpected happens because unexpected things do happen. With policy genius, you don't need to struggle to do this. You can find life insurance policies that started $292 per year for a million dollars of coverage. Some options are 100% online and that lets you avoid unnecessary medical exams, which is always good. Policy genius combines digital tools with the expertise of real licensed agents. You compare quotes from America's top insurers side by side for free and there are no hidden fees. Their license support team helps you get what you need fast. You can get on with your life. Join thousands of happy policy genius customers left five star reviews on Google and trust pilot. So secure your families tomorrow. So you have peace of mind today. It's easy. Go to policygenius.com slash tucker to get your free life insurance quotes and see how much you could say. Again, it's policygenius.com slash tucker. It does seem. Look, if Kamala Harris wins fair and square. Yeah. Right. Blessings to her and I hope she fixes the country. Right. She helped destroy. But I really do fervently hope that I would and a mean it. Yes. I will support any effort to do that. But if she declares victory without proving that she actually won fairly, I think it is the duty of the rest of us to resist that. You know, I love to steal elections. That's that's the end of democracy. Resistance to tyrants is obedience to God. That's right. I know the old testament. I feel that. No doubt about it. Look, we're in this historic state of Maine where you have this wonderful studio. I mean, think about the Patriots in America who began our country and visits the tyranny from England. Oh, traders. Unique place. I wasn't set the world on fire and school. I want to not so good schools and Chicago public schools. My parents were little working people. Fireroom apartment. My father spoke broken English. And my mom worked for the public trans assistants passing on transfers. We didn't know anybody in politics or anything. We were just working people. I became the governor of Illinois. Anything's possible in this country. If we lose this, it's why everybody wants to come here, but just follow the law. Right. And they're destroying the law. The idea of sanctuary cities. I'm sitting in prison watching the Democrats to the sanctuary cities. That was unthinkable. How's that not insurrection correct against the federal government? Yes. I mean, what happened in Fort Sumter in 1861 was less radical in sanctuary cities. We're saying that we're ignoring federal immigration. Right. How are we not breaking away from the rest of the United States? Right. How's that? That's a session. I don't, I don't get it. It's crazy. Right. But again, the media just made it seem like an exercising compassion. Yeah. Here again, thank you for what you do. And thank you for a lot of the other services that are out there who are providing alternative views from what the mainstream media has become. You're, I mean, when you guys talk about mainstream media, you're right. They've been so corrupted and so co-opted. They're corporate media. Have you talked to Obama since you got out? No. He never called you home. No. Oh God. What's he mad at you about? What'd you do wrong? No, I don't think he's, I don't think he's mad. He's just like, uh, that guy can only hurt me. And of course, he's living the good life. You know, you think about Obama. He's close to being a billionaire. Those Obama's have monetized. Like the Clintons did their time in the Oval Office and the White House. I think about Trump. How are Obama gets a rich? Right. Well, I mean, he's, you know, he's got that whole establishment stuff that, you know, overpay them for things. I think got a deal for like a book deal that was like $60 million or something in advance. And I don't know what the other things he's doing. But I think there's like documentaries he supposedly makes from Netflix. They paid him $100 million or something. But I think about that. And I think, and I know, you know, them in the moment they won for them for the Senate and, you know, they want to try to first thing and she wanted to job. Yeah. There's other things about him that I've been told by Tony that I don't think I should say just because boy, they're terrible of true and I tend to believe they are about his personal behavior about about the desire to have upper mobility. And, you know, and to where he was in the late 90s and he's a money worshiper. Yeah. And I think I compare that and I think about Trump, who's made all that money and built it up in business and then decided to leave that good life, to go and put his self through this in this rotten nasty business. And I get he gets treated like that. We're the trying to literally destroy him and his family and all that wealth that he created. And juxtaposition between that where he wants to serve an Obama, how they catapult it to that level after the presidency by just playing the inside game and being part of the establishment. It's a dramatic. Do you see if you keep hearing these whispers, a lot of them are just like nonsense on the internet. But then you do hear from Democrats. I don't know if it's true, but that Obama would like to see his wife run after Kamala Harris loses. Do you think there's any truth to any of that? Yes. I think that's not unlikely. I don't know if she wants to do it though, but I doesn't see much. She does. But why no? I'm not going to do it the same way. Sure. I can see the possibility of that. How much control does Obama have over the modern Democratic Party? It's a good question. He's the most influential person in the Democratic Party today. But I would say that his influence, Wayne, is the years go by. He's not as influential now as he was four years ago or eight years ago. Times change, new people come in. I do think that the socialist, the Democrats, the AOC types are further left in Obama. And that's a tiger that he can't hold by the tail that are kind of pushing him in others that way. I don't know if he's comfortable doing that. The thing about him is he's got a fundamental left-wing ideology, but he's a lot more practical than that. He's all about just winning for himself. And I think about when he ran for president in 2008, he supported a border wall. Oh, yeah. Right? He was practical politics at that time. He's willing to ditch that right away. And so I would say his time goes by his influence, continue to Wayne, but probably four years from now he'll probably be still be God willing Trump's the president, the most influential Democrat. Boy, he was pretty cold with Joe Biden who was always kind of running around pathetically bragging about how close he was to Obama and their buddies. And Obama's nifed him twice, one in 2016, supporting Hillary for the nomination. And again, this summer with, you know, weeding the crew against him. What's that? It's Machiavelli. Yeah. He went to Harvard. He was probably reading the law and reading the prints. Yeah. Right? No, he's a cold-hearted, very Machiavellian. Look, it's a tough business. And I don't want to be a wider complainer and like, oh, what would mean? Look, what happened? It is a tough business. And you know, you're in a rough business like that. Harry Truman said, if you want to fund an Washington get a dog, right? A lot of truth to that. But within the spectrum of these practical people and business and bullshitters and duplicitous phonies who almost embraced their hypocrisy as if it's like some sort of skill or talent that they have. In other words, Michael Jordan, you know, his game got better as he got greater, right? He became a much better shooter. I'm Chicago six championships. We love Jordan, right? But Jordan wasn't as good a shooter when he first came out of college as he became his game got better. And so you embrace that. He could move go to the left a little bit better than he did when he first started. You embrace the improvement of his skills in sports. These politicians, what they do is like the Chuck Schumer's of the world, they laugh at the duplicity and the hypocrisy. It isn't that they're being phony or fake. They feel good because they're getting away with it. And the people are buying it, right? And at some level, including me, there's a level of that that's part of that business. But there is a difference between a lot of the people in politics that aren't like that. And it's fightable to everybody. The establishment's been saying about Trump. He is probably the least political of the people I've known in politics. And I've known a lot. I mean, I knew Biden when he was a senator and I was in Congress. I knew Bill Clinton. He was actually a very nice guy. That's my book, Clinton. I shouldn't really like them. Right? The feminine one, that was a hard thing to defend. I mean, what are you doing with an insert man? Come on, right? Anyway, Obama, I knew since 1995 was that Monica Lewinsky thing, some sort of op from a foreign country to control Clinton? You ever heard anybody say that? No, I haven't actually. You do wonder. Do you think? Yeah. I don't know. Gosh, I don't know. No, I think well, I think it was I think it was real. Oh, totally. Yeah. You do, you know, you just sort of wonder. Do you ever talk to Clinton? Is he still around? Do you hear he's not well, but I don't know. You know, I haven't seen him since before prison. Is he still a force in the party? Unless so. Yeah. Yeah. He's less. Obama's eclipse them. You said that it was, if it was a choice between Obama and Hillary, it wasn't a tough one for you. You obviously know Hillary why, why weren't you eager to support her? The reason Bill Clinton won and the reason she lost is the reason you talked about Trump at the Madison Square Garden. Trump likes people. Yeah. Yeah. Clinton likes people. Oh, sure. You know, she has contempt for people. You know, that basket of deplorables. Yeah. I think she feels that way about all the people. You know, everyday people, she just, you just so focused and guided a political animal. Whatever she stands for driven by focus groups and polls, she has no like feel for anything. I really believe that about her. I mean, she's, you know, a personal of the immediate, I mean, you know, no surprise she didn't win. Right. Really? Yeah. No. Not a warm person. Oh, not at all. Very cold, very cold, hard, and very ambitious, very dishonest, very dishonest. She had, well, her best friend worked for me in my administration. I heard this one, but I can't remember her name, but she was a nice woman. She's competent. But it's not like she ever told me anything bad about Hillary. It's just that I'd been around Hillary enough, not a lot, but enough. And Bill Clinton too to see a very big difference between the two people. He just naturally liked Clinton. I'll take a quick story. You want to hear this very much? Yeah. So I'm a congressman. It's 1999, the United States and NATO, not without you and approval. I're doing to my father's Serbia. What you rush is doing you cray now. Oh, I noticed. Right. We decided to bomb a sovereign country, forcing them to give up a part of their country. Thank you. Can I ask you? Because I want to thank you for bringing that up. Oh, it's one of the worst things that the country has done in a long time. And it's been completely forgotten. It was not talked about then. Right. And so I hope people weren't familiar with what you're talking about. We'll listen carefully. It was 1999. It was the Balkans and Serbia and the United States and NATO decided to bomb Serbia over Kosovo, which is part of Serbia. And basically it was whether or not the the Serbs would accept an agreement that was made in France, Ram Boulay, that basically said this part of your country, he has to be submitted to a referendum where the Muslims outnumber the Christian community by like 10 to one. And if you don't submit this to a vote, which obviously was going to go for separation, a succession, we're going to bomb you extortion at the highest level. But what was the motive there? Why would we want to get involved in the internal affairs of Serbia? I don't under like why would we kill all those people to achieve that result? Do you have any idea? I do. I have different ideas. I think a lot of it has to do with the politics in the Middle East and Muslim, you have a Muslim country or two in Europe itself because before that was the war in Bosnia, where it was divided up three ways and the Muslims have a section of the of Bosnia into the east as the Republic of Serbskuh where the Serbs other equations are to the west. The Balkans have historically been very difficult places with the different people getting along and it is a lot of things. The word Balkanized. Yeah, that's exactly right. But I, you know, I learned this about politics at the high level, which was surprising to me that a lot of our foreign policy, and this is frightening, is driven by campaign contributions. Of course. Yeah, I could see all of it. Yeah. But foreign policy, think about that. That's what I'm saying. Yeah. I mean, the French. Yeah. Well, I see it every day. Yeah. Well, she was running for the US Senate in New York, Hillary was. And there's a prominent Albanian community in the state in New York. How much Clinton's desire and attention to support, you know, the coast of our issue that the Albanian supported had something to do with his local domestic politics. Tiponil said, politics is local. The Clinton's are experts at that. I'm, you know, I don't know for sure that that was the motivation. I think it was my, you might have been part of it because she was running for the Senate. However, it was they did it. And I was the only Serbian American in Congress, and I was a Democrat. And my party was doing this, but mostly Republicans went along with it as well because it was the established Republican Party of the Chinese, right? Of course, it's war. It's good to kill people. It's a good thing. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. And so they bomb this country, my father came from it. And it was on a personal level. It was really hard. You know, I think about my late father, you know, you would tell me stories about World War II. My father spent four years in a Nazi prison of war camp. And then three years in a refugee camp after the war, waiting for the US to pass a law call to displace persons act, which allowed my father millions of others like him with these millions, these hard long and hard to pronounce last name to chance to come to America, freedom. My dad loved America. And he just, there was no place like it. You can, if you were in a work hard, you could make it. And if you don't, your kids can do good. And like, actually, we happened with my brother and me. But freedom was the thing. And I saw that David Ashwood was working for me then. And I would go to his office and I'd vent these MFers, the MF and Clinton. Where did they come up? Surview was an ally for the United States and World War II. Surview was an ally. The United States and World War I. And now they're violating international law and bombing a sovereign country to support those on the other side of the war. As opposed to trying to work something out through the United Nations, you know what I was just mending. And I kind of just poured this cut. I got to support my party. So anyway, and I vent. And so we're figuring out ways where I could be constructive. Now, I'm an American and God forbid, you know, we're at war with the country. My father came from my loyalty to the United States. And there was a big vote. Bless you for saying that. The war, it was a big vote on supporting the military effort against Serbia against my father's country. It was tied to 12 to 12. My colleague and at the time friend, Jesse Jackson, Jr. voted against the war. The black caucus was against the war. The first black kids go and fight these wars. I took the position. I hate this war. I spoke against it before they started it. I was one of 15 congressmen Democrats could send it to another one who votes said, don't do this. You bought this country. You can unleash the theories. My lozovich is a crazy guy. He's going to kick out innocent. He'll close the virus out of that country. It's common. They wanted it. It was a provocative act by NATO. No one my lozovich would do that. And most people would suffer like they did. But then they put it on the Serbs, right? And demonize them worldwide. But the black caucus in many ways, the black community really understands a piece of power more than any other community because they've been on the wrong end of that. Yes, totally. They're not buying it. So the bombing starts on the Thursday as we all leave from Congress. They timed it. We had a two-week recess for spring break. They start and I'm Saturday, you know, I'm watching this on CNN. And anyway, long long story short, I'm venting the ax rod. And I, this is making me sick. I got to do something. By then they had taken three US soldiers had been taken prisoner by the Serbs during that war. They had stumbled into Serbia and they were taken prisoners. Nobody knew where they were. The Red Cross wasn't allowed in. Milosevic had been demonized. The president of Serbia. And in many ways, justifiably, but worldwide. And they were making them look and they were calling ethnic cleansing genocide, which is also not a lie. It's not good. But ethnic cleansing, you know, it's the nature of how things have happened in Europe all over the place, told me in Germans where ethnic people from the east to the west after World War II. A lot of them murdered. Yeah. Right. So anyway, I'm frustrated. The ax rod comes up with, they take the soldiers. I'm beat up because I'm the only serve these guys for the serving government on reaching out to me. I don't know if they're real or not. And I see one of them on television with Milosevic. A guy by the name of a cottage, bougled you've caught each. Very interesting man. Long the short of it is, ax rod, I'm meeting with him. I want to play a role. I got to do something. And he says, why don't you try to get those soldiers out? But you can't do it by yourself, because I speak the language. That's my first language, my father, you know, my mother was American born. It's how do you get there? They won't let me. I'm a junior congressman. I mean, they'll crush me. They won't let me go. State department was against it. And then I saw that wherever in Jesse Jackson, Ramsey Clark, you know, of course, right? Wherever in Jesse Jackson wanted to do what Ramsey Clark had done, he wanted to go visit the bombing sites. But that he had made a condition that he won't do it unless he can see the three soldiers. He was the self. I don't know Jesse Jackson at the time. He's since then he's become kind of a friend. So I see the son, you know, we're young congressman. And I see Jesse Jr. and we vote on a Tuesday. But he's done with our votes, like 11 o'clock Washington, time we're sitting in the chamber of the symtees, just me and him. And I said, you know, hey, Jesse, I saw that your dad must have got a Serbian, see those soldiers. I think he's, yeah. And I said, I don't know if this is bullshit or not. But these guys from the government approached me because my father came from that country. And I speak the language. If I could arrange for your father to go to Serbia to see those soldiers, you think he might do it. And he said, he sure would let you call the Reverend now. And I said, what he's called the Reverend now. And I said, you call your dad Reverend. Not surprised. No. And you say, you're calling. I said, I don't know your dad. You call him. See, if you said, then let me know. And then I'll call him. So moments later, we're at our office. As he calls me, I'm in the cannon building, right? Fifth floor. And he says, I just talked to the Reverend. He's in Mississippi to vote a registration drive column between for your call. So I call him first time I ever taught the Jesse Jackson. It's like, I don't know, spring may of 1999. And April may. And I said, if you ever talked about the phone, he speaks very softly. He's very powerful speaker, but privately, very softly. And I said, Reverend Jackson, this is Congress of the Guohey, which I serve with your son. I understand. He says, I said, can I call you on a hard line? You know, you're in a cell phone. It's kind of a delicate thing I'm talking about. I don't know if this is property goes, I can't run now. I'm on a voter registration drive in Mississippi. Talk to me and code. For some, I thought things, I got to go with it, right? Okay. I said, well, I'm calling you about over there. And he says, understand, I said, I talked to a guy in the government who says, it's possible for you to go over there. Understand. I said, I said, if you're willing to do it, he's going to talk to the big cheese today at four o'clock. Understand. I said, if the answer is yes, how soon can you go? Can you go? Can you leave tomorrow? And he says, I can't. I'm here doing voter registration because it was a Tuesday. But if you make this happen, I can go on Friday and we can move on. He says to me, right? And there's people like this. Yeah. And then I said, and he says, and you pull this off. I'm taking you with me. I didn't say it, but I'm thinking myself, of course, I'm calling with. Okay. I'm putting this all together. Anyway, we got to go, we actually did it. He was the government. Why did Jackson and Jackson put together this interfaith coalition of religious leaders left wing religious leaders from a very diverse Catholic priests, Jewish rabbis, Methodist ministers, this lady named Dr. Joan Brown Campbell from the National Council of Churches. They were all part of this delegation. Jesse Jackson and me. And so we go. I speak the language. And they're very understandably mistrustful of America because we're bombing them. The bombs were falling while we were there. They wouldn't stop the bombing. The Clinton administration kept trying to squeeze this Jackson. He's able to procure things. He got like a plane. He got like a commercial plane. We're all there. You'll appreciate this story. We're all airways. And we're supposed to leave on Saturday. And then Friday evening, I got a phone call from his aide and he said, we got a postpone or a trip because that's why it goes, well, CEO of rural airways called a reverend and said, they got to let us have the plane until they get war insurance on it. Okay. So the next day my wife sees me, says, I thought you were getting ready to go to Serbia, Patty. And we by baby Amy was just our first one was three years old. And I said, uh, no, it's been delayed. That's something about war insurance. And then he clicked, Patty said, war insurance. I said, yeah, we're flying into a war zone. They don't want us to give us a plane. And so then she quietly calls her insurance agent. They were going to insurance agent state farm. It says, if I fauched him voluntarily goes into war zone against killed, this twice, they'll get his life insurance. And he's they checked. He got back to her and said, yeah, he's covered. And she said, okay, I love you. Good luck. We should. Right. It's maybe. Well, I don't know the real explanation that would explain why we pushed NATO to bomb Serbia. But I do know that we killed a ton of Christians. We took the, we in coast of other Serbs. They were asked that they were, I think, the cleansing coast of the way. Oh, I'm aware. Yeah. So the US, but it does seem like a lot of our interventions wind up killing Christians from the bomb in Nagasaki, which was on a military significant place, but it was the center of Christianity in Japan to the war in Iraq that basically ended the Christian population of Iraq to Syria, Gaza to Serbia. It seems like one thread that connects all of those is the killing of Christians by the US government. Is it worth all of that? I haven't, but I didn't know that about Nagasaki, but that's really, oh, it's interesting. So I'm landed on the church on the majority of Christians in Japan lived in Nagasaki. And the majority of them were killed. If you're asking me to speculate on why that might be the case, I don't think it's so much desired to hurt Christians as it is. If we got to hear it, anybody will hurt the Christians and not the other groups because it's politically incorrect if we hurt the groups. Yeah. And they won't complain because they're Christians. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's right. But we did kill a ton of Christians in, in the Balkans. Oh, there's no doubt about it. And it was really maddening because, you know, these otherwise liberal Democrats who were, it turned out, I think right on Vietnam that was wrong, the wrong war. And how did he get out of this was the issue. And I think Nixon frankly did the best he could, under the circumstances of war started by Johnson. But not something they were all war hawks. All these liberal Democrats were war hawks against Serbia in 1999. It was sick thing. And I had to work with these people, you know. And well, that was just a foretaste of the world to come, wasn't it? It really was. And, you know, so I wrote an app for the Washington Post at the time, suggesting that they, they should partition the coasts of them and stop the bombing, stop the killing, the bombing of a sovereign country partition that country, protect the Orthodox monasteries, the Christian Orthodox monasteries. They're so vital to the Serbian experience, because Kosovo in the Serbian history is his historic, it's, it is to serves what like Israel is to Jews. And they had lost this battle in the 14, 1300s against the Turks, the Ottoman troops 500 years of enslavement after that, you know, the Ottoman control. And the battle of Kosovo is central to the Serbian history and culture. I'm American born and I didn't really need to understand it, but I got a much better appreciation of it during that war. And so I suggested this, as the bombing was going on, and the American people really never understood why we were doing it, Clinton was losing support. And particularly with the black caucus being a guest that leaders like Jackson speaking out against it, that's why he was so vital going there and making the deal to get the soldiers back, which we successfully got those soldiers back, Jackson and I. What happened, was that they had to, they had to justify this war. So they went extremely hard and trying to demonize the Serbs without any kind of honest analysis of the complexities of those issues over there. And it's really galling. And what's the clerk the general was the one running? Oh, I'm very right. And I'm told he's doing business there in Kosovo now. That's true. That's sickening. He's a sickening person, totally hollow clever, but not wise, ruthless human being. Yeah. So last question, just to circle back to where we began and that's the condition of your party. I don't think it's an overstatement to say born of the democratic party rose to the top of it. When you see Kamala Harris on the road campaigning with Dick Cheney's repulsive daughter, what do you think that ain't my democratic party? And you see Kamala Harris on the road campaigning with Dick Cheney's repulsive daughter. What do you think? That ain't my Democratic party. Why did Dick Cheney is now a Democrat? I mean, it's a Republican thing. That's another sick thing. And it, but the good news is it just shows you how politics has been real, real-eyed in America today and those traditional Democrat working-class voters, everyday ordinary people I talked about them before the silent majority, including a much larger number of black people than even the polls are reflecting. Yes. And Latinos, I predict Trump across the country will have actually win a majority of the Latino vote in this election. And the beauty about the Latino vote, there remind me so much of the immigrant back in my background. God-fearing, hard-working, family-oriented. Most families are like that who come here legally and those illegally, you know, go back and come back legally. And that's what we shall follow our rules, especially when you first come here, right? Don't break into our country and the Democrats have opened the doors and come Kamala Harris all by design. But when I think about how that parties have changed, those corporate country club, war-mongering Liz Cheney, Dick Cheney, Mitt Romney Republicans, I have a lot more common with the left-wing Kamala Harris wing of the Democrat party than traditional working-class daily-type Democrats, John F. Kennedy Democrats, Robert Kennedy Democrats, have with them and they're not part of this new coalition, Trump's building in this new Republican party. It's very exciting. I see all these history books that you have here and my reading a history and I had eight years read a lot of it, right? Yes. We're going through a historical realignment as part of a very different than what this new Republican party is the party, the little guy. Truly believe that. My voters, I saw that in Madison Square Garden, those were my voters that I saw there. They looked just like my voters. Good people working, people honest people, not the elites. Have the tree. You're having gold. They were wearing the laughing. Okay, I can't. I can't improve on that. Go to a roblig wave, it's great to see you. Good to see you, Tucker. Thank you. That's so great. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know. Shocking. They did an election year with everything at stake. Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time, not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, whether you could actually get information. That's true. It's not intentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. And you'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will.