James Wildman, you understand. And you're still getting late. It's crazy. Look at him. You are? Three, good for you. One. We're live. Got to change subjects. OK. We're going to get a bandit all that crazy talk. I thought it was good talk. It was. It was definitely good talk. First of all, it's good to see you. You too. I haven't seen you in a long time. You look great. You do too. I haven't seen you since King Queens. Been a long time. And I found out about the whole Scientology thing. I knew you were into it back then. But it was one of those things where I'd heard about it. And then I met you. I'm like, oh, it's pretty fucking normal for now. I'm not telling it right. Well, I mentioned once and once too. And I sent the same thing like pretty normal. Nice guy. Kelly Preston is pretty normal. She's normal. Yes. You know, I guess you get deeper, get to know them really well. And it might get a little weird. Yes. Yeah. Because the thing is, Scientologists are good people. They really are. It's they really, as I did, believed that we were doing amazing things for the world. So they go into it thinking I'm helping myself and I'm helping others. Right. But then as you, like you said, as you get more and more. And by the way, you don't really get close to Scientologists when you're a Scientologist. Like when you're a non-signologist. When you're a non-signologist. Correct. Like everything that I did and they do is for the purpose of setting a good example, being a good person, being a good friend. So to get you in. To the doctor. Does it does a purpose in that? Like I would never tell when I was in a non-signologist my real problems. It would be kind of bad for the church to ever appear human to a non-signologist. It would be setting a bad example. It would actually be considered like a transgression. If I told you, Joe, you know, oh yeah, I'm fighting with my mother. I'm fighting with my husband or I would never tell you those types of things because it would be a bad PR for the church. Wow. So that's something that you're taught. Correct. Now you kind of grew up in it. Yes. How old were you when you... No, I think. So you don't even remember pre-Scientology. I had a little bit. And you know what I remember pre-Scientology was, you know, I had a very Catholic Sicilian father who, you know, believed in punishment, believed in not... Like did I talk to you? I don't know why you're talking to me. Like that kind of guy. Right. Like my dad says at the head of the table and then we don't talk back at all. Or you know, so that is kind of what I knew. And then we were baptized as Catholics because my mother wasn't really religious. My mother's Jewish. She's, you know, but she didn't have any kind of religion growing up. My father, of course, was Catholic. So we got baptized as Catholics and the only time we really went to church with our grandma, we went to visit her in, you know, in the city. And my dad on holidays. So that's really kind of all I remember pre-Scientology. And my mother, meeting my stepdad, he was in Scientology and he got her in as well us. Like right away. Right away. Yes. So that was like part of the deal. Correct. Yeah. And by the way, Joe, like we went from like, don't talk until you're spoken to to, hey, we see you as spiritual beings. We want you to talk to us. We want you to communicate. Like you're just, you're not, you're not children. You're, you know, spirits in a little body. And so immediately that kind of indoctrination begins that you're not a child. And so, you know, as children, you have kids, you know, they always want to be grown up. So that, that really starts to work this kind of idea that you're an elitist, that your, your ego becomes kind of stroked as a kid, like you're very powerful. And you returned and you came back and you found yourself back. You picked your mother because you knew she would get into Scientology. And you're very strongly and you're very strong to call to my sister. You picked your mother. You picked your mother for this reason to find your way back to Scientology. And now as a child, remember, you, you want to be more important than you are. Kids are always trying to exercise their power, you know. So that speaks to something inside of you that like, oh, I'm bigger than a kid. I'm more than a kid. I'm a spiritual being in a little body. And so it sets up that kind of indoctrination very early on. Did you like it because it made you, when you were young, I made you feel like, okay, now I can express myself better. That I don't feel suppressed. Yeah, exactly. Because you know, again, I'm going from a dad who's tells me to, you know, shut the F up and talk when I talk to you and you sit in that chair and you don't have any thoughts worth listening to to you're very much an important being, you're a big being. That's a word that's used a lot. Those words big beings, you're a big being. And so yes, you start to feel very important. You start to feel that you're powerful. These are not bad things to make kids feel, but this is the way cults work. You don't realize that, Joe, until you're out. You don't realize any of this was really going on because I've heard people call it a cult throughout my 30 plus years and I was offended by it. I was deeply offended by it. And I couldn't even allow myself to believe that I was in a cult. And so all these epiphanies are only happening, you know, after the fact. Well, I was watching this scholarly documentary once on Christianity and they were referring to it as the cult of Christianity. And it's that word is the correct word. If you want to just look at it in terms of the actual literal definition of it. But when any, it's automatically got this negative connotation. You say the word cult. And people think you're brainwashed, you're lost. Right. But there's a natural inclination that people have to be tribal. There's a natural inclination people have to be on a team and we like it when we're all together. You know, I know you're a Scientologist. I'm a Scientologist. We're together in this thing. Everybody else doesn't get it. Right. And that's, that's a good feeling, right? Yeah. And you're taught that. Yeah. It's not even just that you think it, Joe. You are taught that you are the elite of the world. And by the way, you're going in every single day. It's not like I'm going, I'm going Easter and I'm going Christmas. You know, it's an every day. So what did you do every day? Like when you say you went in every day? Like, no, I go do King of Queens. Then after rehearsal, I'd have to drive to Hollywood and put in my two and a half hours a day. Two and a half hours every day. Yeah. Every minimum, Joe, no minimum. Okay. And then if I couldn't like, let's say on a tape day, I couldn't. You know, it's there from nine in the morning till 10 at night, as you know. I'd have to make up the time on the weekends or I'd have to make up time on my hiatus. So I'd be there all day and night. So what if you went a Hawaii on vacation or something? Very rare that Scientologists were going vacation. I'd have to make up the time. When I got back, I'd have to put in on weekends. Like, let's say if my schedule was, you know, 12 to 2 30 to go in, then I'd have to go in one to six or one to 10 or nine to 10. So there's an every dayness of this indoctrination. It's not only that, there's its policies, right? You're studying the policies all day and all night. You're looking up words. You don't understand. You're being tested. Like, after you read an Elvond Harbor, you know, Elvond Harbor's policy, then you're tested. You go in from another room. And they go, what is the definition of this? What is the definition of that? So it's almost worse. We had a cult expert on, and he said it's worse. I'm going to tell his words because you actually brainwashed yourself because you have to study the policies of the church and then you get tested on it. And you have to look up words. You don't understand. You have to put them in sentences. You have to write essays. You have to do clay demonstrations. So you're really brainwashing yourself and you're speaking all the same language. You're all working towards one goal. And that is very intoxicant. Like it is to feel like you're saying to be tribal, to be part of something. Imagine being something, part of something that you think and are told and are reading every day is the most important thing that's going to save mankind. You are doing the work that no other group is doing. And so you believe that. You want to believe that. You want to believe. I'm more than just an actress. I'm more than just this. I'm saving the planet. And now all the stuff that you're doing, you're going in for two and a half hours every day. Are you trying to move your way up the ranking system? Because I know there's some. There's a chart. Right. And everybody's more. What is the story off that? Well, there's like the little courses. They're called self-improvement courses. And these are the things that people like me would say. Like when people would ask me about the money, I'd say, well, there's courses for $35. You know, it's all. It's very affordable. Like these are the lines that were taught to say. It's not an outright lie. It's it's omitting a lot of data, right? Because really the next the follow up to that is, but when you're really a Scientologist, going to cost you half a million easy or whatever it's going to be. But it's preset prices. So you start on the self-improvement courses and then you get onto this actual chart called the bridge. And the bridge is very precise. Nobody's doing different things. You're all working at the bottom all the way up to the top, which was OTA. That's like the most enlightened. How many people are OTA? Not a lot anymore. Because the people who were in Scientology in the 50s, 60s, and 70s who got to OTA were like, this is symbol shit. It wasn't what I thought it was going to be. And so a lot of them left. At a time, I'm sure Scientology was big. Because it was almost it almost spoke to the time that it was. When people wanted free thinking, but also wanted to be morally on the right path. Not on drugs like they were maybe not part of that, but they kind of didn't want to be held by a certain religion, but they did still want spirituality in their life. And I think it spoke to the people of the time. So I don't think you're going to find new Scientologists in the world. So do you think the internet took a big chunk out of that? Yes. Because of the information was very hard to get. For example, for example, let's say you were Scientologist. And one day I just didn't see you. And I said, hey, what happened to Joe? Where's Joe? Why is he not in Scientology anymore? Oh, they tell me whatever they want to tell me about you to discredit you. He's an enemy to the church and hear the reasons why. And they could say anything. And they do say anything that immediately makes me not want to talk to you ever again. And then become an enemy. Really an enemy. Once you're an enemy, I can't actually talk to you. I can't actually talk to you. The policy says that once you are declared labeled a suppressive person, my association with you would then make me a suppressive person and then me an enemy. So I can't actually talk to you. They could tell me whatever they want to tell me about you. And so I couldn't actually find out are these things true about Joe. But now with the internet with social media, it's harder and harder to tell people whatever you want to tell them about the person because the information is there. You have to want to seek it out. I didn't seek it out. I didn't want to seek it out. And when I did seek it out and I go to the church, they'd say, that's a lie. That's not true. Here's the real data. And they have actual doctor, they actually doctor things that make you believe. I mean, you're not going to go and take it to an analyst. You're not going to go take it to somebody and go, is this a real document? You tend to believe the church you're in and raised in most of your life. Now, it had to have been positive in some way for you. Of course. It gave you some confidence. It gave you a true belief in yourself that you're on the right path. Because I had seen some interviews with you, were you talking about it when you were in it and you genuinely seemed to believe that it was very beneficial to you. Of course, there's basic morals and basic tools to help you in your life. But remember, wasn't educated. Most Scientologists are not educated. And so we went- You made it as far as like college education and education. Yeah. I love school in the eighth grade. Really? Yeah. Scientology does not value a traditional education. They value your education. So you never went to high school? Never. Whoa. How old were you? I don't know how old you went high school. I don't even know. The eighth grade is like 13. Yeah. So when you were 13, you just stopped going to school. I was doing Scientology and I was working. Like literally working, selling car insurance. You were working at 13? For Scientology companies. And so was my sister. Holy shit. Yeah. But people ask like, well, how come the- nobody did anything? How come child-p or I got my GED? So I did things like that. Right. But the original question, what was it? Because it was about me learning. It was about, wait, what was your original question? Because I was answering something. Well, it had to be of some benefit to you. Right. Exactly. Because I thought I was getting, you know, I'm looking at these big words. I'm using it in the dictionary. I'm like, you're doing more school than you could have ever imagined even as an- Right. And you started to feel like, oh, I'm really accomplishing something. So yes, there are benefits to it. But I didn't realize because I was a kid that the things you're talking about that were beneficial were in the real world. I thought they were, they were invented by Elrin Hubbard as most people do believe that. So you're saying, were these things beneficial? I would have learned these things as Sunday school. I would have learned these things like being a good human being, being around other people. But regardless, if I was brainwashed into believing that I was doing great things and learning great things, and that does work, you know what I mean? Yeah. It does work. If I say, hey, Joe, if you do these steps, you take these steps and you really truly believe in me, you can then attribute it to Leah. You can say Leah is an amazing life coach. You totally do these things. And without her, I can't, you know what I'm saying? Yeah. But not knowing that it was available to me in the real world, because I didn't. I thought Elrin Hubbard had come up with these things. Mm. Now, when did it start to unravel for you? Well, it's like a law. It wasn't just one thing. I think people always think what was the one? It wasn't just one thing. Was it slow process? It was six years of me. Basically, I was begging them for these things not to be true that I was hearing about. Like what? It was, for example, when I went to Tom Cruise's wedding, and I saw the leader's wife wasn't there. And, you know, David Muscabich, who's the head of the Church of Scientology, his wife wasn't there. And when I asked the question, and I said, where is Shelley? Why is his assistant here? Scattered. People just scattered. And then I was told I didn't have the F and rank to be asking about the leader's wife. It wasn't that she was just an average person that I didn't have the rank to ask about. You didn't have the rank. The rank. Wow. And so that would begin. OK, that was the beginning. But then when I went to my friends, now, when you're my friend, I consider you family. Like I really do. I take my friends very seriously. And my friends of 35, you're looking at my sex meet nails right now. You're what nails? My sexy nails. Sexy nails? You do have very nice nails. You didn't use the word sexy, though. You said nice. Oh, wow. You know, I'm different than other people. It comes to nails. Apparently, because of the real. No, when you say real, what does that mean? Are they glued on? No, they're not glued. No, but I'm appreciating them more. Oh, OK. I'm finding out a lot about you. I'd like to do a whole couple of hours with you talking about other things. Do I have to hold on to cans? How's that? You don't have to hold on to cans, but you do have to wear a clone. Because I'm down with you. You're not a clone wearing. OK, you're too cute for that. OK, so let me give you what was I saying? David Miscavige, you did have the right to question him. Yeah, but then seeing my friends re-aching to it, where I said, well, you need to get involved in this. I think there's something really off. What did you get going on? Well, I didn't know what was going on. I saw Tom have an executive role in our church, which I had a problem with. Because remember, you learned very early on what Elron Hubbard says is the law. There's no, it's not up for interpretation. There's no assimilation of data. It's just what it says. It's not what Joe thinks Elron Hubbard said, what Leah thinks. It's what it says. Right. And that's very strict. It's always what does Elor each say? Read it again. What does it say? And it's very tough. So I was very by the book person. I'm a by the book person. If I have a recipe, I follow it exactly. I don't do pinches. I don't do that shit. I do exactly how it says in the recipe. And then I see how it goes after that. Scientology is about word, for word, what does it say? My understanding and the policy is there is no celebrity that should be treated any differently than any parishioner. And I was seeing behavior. And I was seeing things that wouldn't be OK, that are not OK for the average parishioner. But we're being made to be OK for Tom. And it didn't matter to me that he was Tom. To me, I saw him as a team member in the Church of Scientology. And we were working on the same thing. I actually thought I was a better example of Scientology than he was. And I wrote reports on him. Like internal reports on him, which I didn't realize were kind of getting me to be a target for the Church. Because I didn't realize his position in the Church. You wrote internal reports? Yes. We were all required to write reports on each other. Oh, Jesus Christ. Yeah, there's a policy. There's a policy about writing reports. So if I, let's say you and I are saying politics, OK, you and I go out one night, right? Like not like that, Joe. So don't get it. Right. You seem uncomfortable. No, no, no. You did it because you said nice as opposed to that. Do you want to say that? You said nice. I don't know if I said nice. You said nice. You said nice. I don't believe that. OK. I think I probably don't know. I think I'm a sexy nail. He said they're nice. They're nice. Yeah. They're beautiful. Is that better? Mm. It's a day. If you wore a cologne, I feel like you have better adjectives. OK. OK. OK. So, like, are you a fine guy? When your wife comes out, is this how do I look Joe? Do you say fine? No. I see you look great. You say great? Beautiful. Lovely. What do you want to say? It's very clinical. You have kids. That's what it comes from. I think different adjectives, different words of different meaning depending on what person they come from and how the person will be intent behind it. Ooh, do you think? Well, beautiful. You look beautiful. I don't know. I guess, yeah. I mean, if Angela says I look beautiful. Let's go back to the internal part. OK. I'm going to go to the internal part. So, yeah. So let's say you and I went out. We were just one hour one night. We were going out with dinner. Right. A group of us. And something you did like. And I saw you doing something that's not like for the book. I have to write a report on you. Are you allowed to drink? Not really. No. OK. What if I got lit up? I probably write a report and say it's over. Come on, fuck it. L-R-H would love it. OK. I just do it. I just do it on R-H. OK. So that I write a report on you. And I say Joe was acting inappropriate. He was making fun of Elvron Hubbard because you're not allowed to joke and degrade on Harvard. There's a policy called Jokers and Degraders. Jokers and Degraders. Yes. You and I would be very much. I've been, yes. Have you been in trouble for that? Many times. OK. So I would have to write a report. It's go right to you up. I'd have to write you up because let's say you went into like the next day for a session. And you said and they said, you know, they do the check. They do a check on you every day. Do you have an upset? Do you have a present time problem or are you withholding anything? Now, if you were real sign intelligence, you would know that you probably shouldn't be drinking, carrying on because there's a 24-hour rule. You can't drink 24 hours before you're going to be doing a service. Remember, you're required to go in every day. So you never can drink. Right. And if you consider it a transgression, so that's on your mind that you're withholding this information. Now, if you went on a vacation and you knew that you were going to make it up when you got back, yeah, that's OK. Then you can get it. You're not going on. Because you're not going on. OK. That's the only time, then. Correct. Or if you're just not getting a service. But that's OK. If you're doing a service. Correct. So you go in and you'd say, OK, so I went out last night. I ordered a bunch of shots. And I made a comment about to Elvond Hubbard or whatever. And they go, OK, great. When was it? Who would you do it with? Who was there? They'd write down all the names. It's also being recorded. And they're writing everything down. Who knew about it? We'll be the next question. Who knew about it? You'd say, well, Leah was there. They go, Leah was there. OK, interesting. Then that person's going to write Leah knew about it and didn't do anything about it. Then I get pulled in. Why didn't you write a report on Joe? Because Joe just admitted that he was drinking, carrying on, and you didn't write him up. Do you see them saying so? Yeah. It creates that kind of environment. So it's a rat environment. Correct. So I was writing up Tom. And I was writing up David Miscavs. So what did you write up Tom for? jumping on couches and being in a program. I thought he was being inappropriate. Who I was jumping on couches for? Well, he did Oprah. Oh, you wrote him up for that. I wrote up John for the Battlefield Earth. I thought it was. For the movie itself? First of all, that movie was awesome. If you haven't seen Battlefield Earth, it's one of my favorite unintentional colonies. You don't even joke. No, it's terrible. Yeah. But awesome, because it's so terrible. Ridiculous. It's so terrible. It becomes good. It crosses over that. You write it down. After a while, you write. Yeah. It's like, what's that movie with the dancing one with Elizabeth Berkeley? Showgirls. Showgirls. Showgirls. That's the best one. Yeah. That's probably the terrible movie. Yeah. That becomes awesome because it's so bad. You're like, what in the fuck were they doing? Right. And it's fantastic. Exactly. You're like, this is, yes, I get it. Battlefield Earth is right up there. Right. So I did things like that. Not that I was a great example. Nor am I a great example. So you wrote a whole thing about him jumping up on Oprah's couch. Yeah. But I also listen. I gave myself a while. I was writing myself up. I was writing my mother up. I was writing my husband up. He jumped up on Oprah's couch because he was in love. Supposedly. He jumped up. Well, that's probably the, they pulled me in and they said, could it be that you're just not as high on a scale in life? You're so basically they're saying you're a bitch so you can't understand that kind of love. Because I was like, right. I guess because I've been married 20 years. I don't understand jumping on a couch. But I thought it was a, it wasn't a good example. Because because I cared so much about my church and the work that we were doing and I didn't want the church to be seen as a joke or one of its senior members, which he's considered as senior Scientologists. So you just thought it was inappropriate. It was out of line. Yeah. I just felt like you had an obligation. Right. I mean, listen, I'm not perfect. I mean, of course, there's many things that would be considered a bad example in my everyday. I'm not a great example. But at the time, I thought I was pretty pristine. But looking at it now, you feel like it's totally innocuous. He's just on a couch jumping around having a good time. Yes. But if you knew how serious Scientology was about clearing the planet, it did not go with our intentions and our goals. So anyway, I was writing him up and I was writing everybody up and I was writing everybody up at the wedding because I thought our senior executives were and I was like, wiring them back from Italy from my hotel room, calling one my closest friends who was a Scientologist. And I'm like, and then I need you to write this. I need you to write this verbatim. I need you to write this verbatim. And I need you to get this to the Watchtop Committee. And I think our whole church frantic because I was frantic. And I was heartbroken because it's like seeing if you believe that the sea organization and the people at the higher, you know, that are senior executive strata of your church are living a pristine and perfect life that you're trying to aspire to, that you're spending your day and night and money and time. Like this is what we're trying to be. And I'm seeing not great examples of what this is now. Like it's seeing behind the curtain. I was like, I don't want to see this. And I really thought I was going to save the church. I thought my writing reports was like, I'm going to take over the church. And I'm going to get it right by Elvond Hubbard. I really still believed in the policies of Elvond Hubbard. I just believe they were bending the rules for a celebrity. And I was like, he's a celebrity who gives a shit what he's doing. Like he's a Scientologist first and a celebrity second to me. So that's why it's difficult. I don't want to talk shit about another actor because we've all met asshole actors and we're not really supposed to be talking about them. Do you know what I mean? It's just, you don't hear that a lot. You don't hear a lot of actors doing that to other actors. But for me, it was just a Scientologist. Right. So you take out these reports on him. I write these reports. I'm sent to Florida. Immediately the Mecca, the hub of Scientology. Clear logic. That's right. For interrogations. No. And I mean like interrogations. So you have to fly out there. I fly out there. I'm in the room. I'm in a room with cameras, with my person who is armed with information unbeknownst to me, of a stack of reports that were written on me by everybody who worked for Tom. A stack. Now, because Tom found out about your report, so he decided that everyone who works for him has to take out a report on you. I don't know what he knew, but that is that the church is very much involved with his life. He's staffed by people who work for the church. No non- Scientologist works for him. But it was if you say something bad about this person, you were talking about God. And you and I was asked, do you have sexual intentions towards him? What are your evil intentions towards him? What are your evil intentions towards the even misguided? What are your evil intentions towards Elrin Albert? And it was three months of this. It was and I had to retract everything I said. I said I made it all up. I didn't see any of it to get out of there. And so then when I came back to LA, they said they want to see you again. And I said, I'm here in celebrity center. So I went to celebrity center and they said, look, everything that was done to you was wrong. I was like, right. I know that. We just want to let it go. You need to let it go because if the fact that you're not letting go means that you're guilty of the crimes that you're saying. I'm confused. They're saying that everything was wrong that was done to you and for it. Why are they saying that? Because they wanted me to come back because I was kind of like, I'm not, when I came back from Florida, I was kind of not really a dedicated Scientologist anymore. But I wasn't doing anything to rock the boat with my family. And how long were you in Florida for three months? Three months of dealing with this? Three months every day for three months? I had to write a apology like that. 90 days. So you're there for 90 days. I was telling my house to come. It was during my hiatus on Halloween. Holy shit. Yeah. Yeah. That's what I'm doing most of the time. And we have a family. You're married. I was there. My daughter was there. My husband was there. And how much the other day are you spending all day? All day. All day every day. Did you see defending your life? No. Oh, God. You have to see it. What is it? It's a movie where Merle Street, I forgot the other guy. Anyway, they die and they go into the, you know, the holding cell. Like, you know, where they're going to decide their fate. Are they going back to earth, which is considered hell, or are they going on to heaven? And Merle Street lived a pristine life. And they review your life. Right. And they have judges and everything. Right. So they review good moments and bad moments of your life. And they decide, are you going to go on? Are you going to go back to hell? And Merle Street was, of course, pristine. But then the guy that I keep forgetting, I'm just front and thing. But you know, they were looking at times where he didn't stick up for himself or where he posted it out of something. Right. And so they were judging him pretty harshly. Right. They were like, you need to come back in the morning and like it was like an old day of like, we're reviewing 120 days of your life. Right. Merle Street, they looked at like five days. And they were like, don't worry. You just come back when you can. I was, that was me. Like my mother was there to do some fluff thing. And she was like, come have lunch with me. And my person was like, be back in 10 minutes. They go get a sandwich and eat in the elevator. And you need to be back here in 10 minutes. It was like, for me, it was like defending your life. Because my mother was just like, she didn't know. person was like, be back in 10 minutes. Go go to sandwich and eat in the elevator, and you need to be back here in 10 minutes. It was like, for me, it was like defending your life because my mother was just like, she didn't know what was going on. She didn't, you don't usually tell your family what you're doing. I wouldn't tell my husband what was happening to me because I didn't want to create. Can you imagine this? Did you meet your husband in Scientology? No, my husband was out. He was never in. But I made him a science challenge. Oh, you made him a science challenge. Which is good because you still kind of cool. You know what I'm saying? So he wasn't like, he was still kind of freaky a little bit. You know, still believed in slapping an ass once in a while. So like I kind of got like a bit more. Best of both worlds. You can't slap asses if you're in Scientology. What about choking? Absolutely not. It would be honestly, you would be considered like you really, there's something really wrong with you. You know. Yeah. Are you a slapper? No. No. I didn't think so. You say things like nice. Yeah, nice. Anyway, so you're there for nine days. Yeah. You're there for nine days. And I'm not telling my family what I'm going through. I'm not because I don't want to create a bad situation with the church. How crazy is that? All day you're just like reviewing these papers. I'm admitting my crimes. I'm saying maybe I do have evil and maybe I do. Maybe I didn't see what I saw. And you don't know these people, right? Cool. These people that you're meeting with in Florida? No, they assign you a person. But you hadn't met them previously? No. So just some person with paperwork and they're going over your... Well, they have you on the meter. They have you on the lie detector test. I mean, on the, you know, with the candles that you're talking about. Yeah, yeah. You're in a room that's locked. And that thing doesn't do anything, right? That you meter? Well, it does something. I don't exactly. I mean, there is an actual explanation for it in the real world. And that's smart enough to retell it to you. But if I was to have a meter here and you had a thought, I could show you it does register that you thought something. Right. But you can't really differentiate what those thoughts are. No, but as someone who trains their Scientology, all you're trained to do, which what I was doing, I was training to administer Scientology to people, was learning to do that. And I would learn to say, Joe, what was that thought? What was that thought? I don't know what you're thinking. But I just know that you had a thought. Right. And so I asked you a question. And then I look at the meter to see that it registered on the meter. And regardless of what you want to talk about, we're only going to talk about what I see on the meter. Right. And then there's also, it's open to suggestion, right? You could say, is this a moment where you had doubt? Is this a moment where you were angry? Yes. And then the person that says, think, wow, was it? Yeah. And they start convincing you. Correct. Well, the first thing to do is they, right. Okay. You need some of your discussing coconut water or no. You like that? You're atrocious. You loved it. I didn't love it. I also didn't love your coffee drink, but I'm sure there's sponsors. I loved everything you had, Joe. What, what that? This intro stuff? You didn't like that. It's all everybody, everybody drink is from this. Baby drink is from this. There's a flame in it. There's no sugar. That's great. Wow. It's pure. It tastes to bean. You like pure. Something's pure. So after this 90 days of being there, 90 days of being stuck in this, I mean, it must be like, I'm not a belief that I was really, really messed up. I would imagine too that they have probably a pretty grand establishment and clear water, right? It's probably intimidating. Like that's how a lot of like, no. Cults and religions like to rock it. No. You didn't go to a pretty big place. It's a huge place, but if you're raised in it and you know, you're very familiar with it, but it is when you realize your position in the church takes, uh, uh, a back seat to the leader and Tom Cruise, you realize really that that was scary to me because it goes against everything in the top. Everything I've been taught is that everyone is some sort of spiritual being and everyone's equal. Correct. And then your whole goal as Scientology is to act for the greater good of mankind and sort of bring as many people into this as you can. Right. Because you're going to help them. Right. And so I'm going to get somebody in because I want to screw their lines up. It was always, I want to get this person in because I want them to be happy. I want them to contribute to what we're doing. Now is the thought process that Tom Cruise being this huge celebrity worldwide figure that it's very important to keep him happy. Yes. And he's probably the main goal of Scientology is to keep Tom in. What a ego boost I must be for him. Oh, you see, uh, that is something that that people say all the time to me like why is that pot? Where? I mean that ashtray. Uh, yeah, definitely. No. Yeah. Joe, do you know that I've never smoked pot? Oh, you should definitely try it right now. I'm scared. Oh, you should be. Why? What would happen? Cause you're going to start freaking out thinking about all sorts of stuff. Yeah. Yeah. And so you just keep it dirty like that, the ashtray. What do you mean? Why don't you make it nice? Like, why don't you present it in nice way? Oh man, this is my man cave. Man, I'll give a fuck about it. Really? Yeah. Well, actually, I should not surprise hearing what I heard before. Don't try to talk over me, Joe, cause you know what I'm going to say. Uh, you've never had pot? No. I would suggest like a little tiny amount for you. Okay. Like, look, just that's it. Cause what do you think something about gummy bears to me about you? Oh, Jesus, don't fuck with those gummy bears. Why is it so sweet and really powerful for me? Okay. Cause you're horrendous. So what happened? Anything? Yeah. You want a journey on your life. It'll give you extreme paranoia. That's not fun. It's not, but when you come out of it, it's very beneficial. Why? Cause you realize it's all bullshit and then you're nervous about some things that it just highlights your vulnerability. Oh, I don't need that. It takes your blinders away. I don't need that. That doesn't sound like fun. Well, it's not necessarily that fun. Yeah. So you would do it again. Or you have. I do it all the time. Yeah. I mean, there's two. I do them all the time. Really. So you like that feeling of being. Yeah. I think it's good for you. I think it's good to be vulnerable. I think it's good to understand. It is good to be vulnerable. You're really just this point of night, organism, floating through infinity. But I feel that way without it. Okay. Well, then you don't need it. I mean, it's not for everybody. Oh. Wow. I kind of want to get a push on me a little bit. You just gave up. I think it benefits a lot of people. So you're sensitive. It gives you a better sense of community. Makes you kinder. Oh, I definitely need that. Yeah. It'll make you a more, I think it makes you a more loving person. I really believe that. And I need it. Yeah. Okay. Back to what you're saying. Oh. Makes sex feel better. Makes food taste better. I'm married to a Puerto Rico. Like a lot of you that. You know, I'm, Puerto Rico's a little bit on. That was a little shout out to Puerto Rico. That's a little shout out to Puerto Rico. They do not have sex. I could say that. Yeah. Well, I should say that. I should say that. I should say that. I should say that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The celebrity, we all know those treatment, different treatment. Right. Collaborate. Well, especially in Scientology, right? No. It's highlighted. It is like nothing you could ever imagine. It is. So when people say Tom doesn't leave because they have information on him or John, that's not the reason. The amount of power they receive from this church is like nothing in Hollywood. It is like nothing. There is no reason for them to leave this environment. Right. So it's super beneficial for them to be attached to it. Correct. Okay. As employees, they work for them. All these people will take care of his every need. Yes. And there's policy on how to talk to somebody. Like you wouldn't say, like if you said, go get me a, go get me a coffee and I wanted this temperature. There's no, I can't get it. We're five miles from any, you know, we're 30 miles. There would be none of that kind of talk. Like not any kind. There's policy about don't, you don't talk back like ever. You don't step out of line. You don't give an opinion. You don't make a face. You don't make a gesture. You don't sigh. If you step out of line in any way, you are dealt with by the church. So Tom, essentially has servants. Correct. How many people? A lot. A lot. A lot. And by the way, I don't but grudge somebody would have stepped. Like if you can have it, I go do it all day, all night, do it all day, all night. But when you believe as a Scientologist, you are working for somebody who single handily is saving the planet. And you deserve that kind of punishment. That's something different, baby. Understand what I'm like? That's, it's an abuse that is not justified, but it is justified because you believe that you are single, handily saving the planet. Hmm. Capiche? Yeah, no, I get it. I get it. So he's the main figurehead, right? He's the main guy like right up with Miss Cavitt, right? Mm-hmm. And then John Travolta is somewhere in that. I think John was given what a designation called Cucant, where... Cucant? Cucant. Not Kant. Cucant. Yeah. Cucant. Okay. He's given this designation of Cucant, which there's a policy that basically says you can kill another human being. If you work Cucant, you're going to look the other way. And he was given that, he was given that by Elrond Haverard. Don't be allowed because you're going to make me pay. Go on, don't make me pay. Don't make me pay. Sometimes you work on a car, because you have any takes I ruined because of that. Like Kevin goes, don't ruin this take. I go, no, don't make me do it. And then I wouldn't ruin it. I wouldn't ruin it, you know, because he would do some stupid show with his hands or something that he never rehearsed. That would make me cry from laughter. Yes. And he was really highly inappropriate in moments that maybe... He almost paid. Yeah. Okay. So he's allowed to kill people. Yeah. Did one? I don't know. I should look at the policy again. I don't want to speak out of it. But you're supposed to look the other way. So if somebody said something wrong to John Travolta, and he pulled out a samurai sword and cut their head off, you just got to clean up the body. He just got to clean up the body. Because it's called ethics protection. Oh, okay. So everyone could be responsible for dealing with it. Yeah, so you just leave the room and he would know that you guys would take care of it. Correct. And there's also another policy. And by the way, the reason why I say these policies is because I don't like when people say, Lee, I believe you. I don't want you to believe me. I want you to look it up. I want you to look for yourself and make your own decision. So I keep quoting these policies because I want people to look it up. So that they can say that's true. She's not talking shit. You know what I mean? Right. There's another policy called ethics protection. There's another policy called the responsibility of leaders, which he actually says exactly what you just said. That basically, you know, what you got to do to protect a leader, you got to do it. If you see a body, then you clean it up. And the leader should never know. I read going clear by Lawrence Wright and I watched the HBO special. on it. And it's stunning. Yeah. Like when you're crazy accurate. Crazy accurate. I was blown away. Yeah. The book, especially the book goes into great depth about how bananas Elron Hubbard was. Right. And it's so odd to me that all this information is out there. There isn't out there though. Remember, you're reading Elron Hubbard's words from Dianetics. Right. The book one. It's the first book that we're all required to read. Everybody's required to read everything that he's written. I read Dianetics too. He did. He did. Yeah. I ordered it. It was one of those late night infomercial things. When I first moved to LA, I've always been into self-help, self-help, Sally Anthony Robbins. I bought all his tapes. I used to listen to it on a Walkman back in the day and read his books. Yeah. So I thought it was just more of that. And I got put on a list and I got sent for years. For years. For years. I was a writer of this. I swear, I'm actually willing to make a money bet that you get mail after we talk. Interesting. Yeah. Well, I went to one of those things where you sit down and you get an emeter and you hold the thing and the guy asked you questions. Oh, yeah. I wasn't Sandy Hagan. I was filming something. Oh, so you saw the, so they did a demonstration. Yeah. Did you see it read on the meter? Yeah. Or the pinch test? Yeah. Did you get the pinch test? Well, no. I don't remember a pinch test, but I do remember holding on to these things and he would ask me some questions. But the guy was very uninterested. Right. Or disinterested. He just seemed like he was kind of like being forced to do it. That's what he was saying. Yeah. He was just going through the motions. Well, that's right. He seemed super bored. Oh. Yeah. So I wonder, how do you not been super bored? Would you be full on right now? No, no, no. I was doing it as a goof. No. It was only like 10 years ago. Oh, okay. I was in San Diego filming something. And they had this set up out there. Yeah, I was like, oh, let me go in there. Right. And I was just hoping I could weasel it and have a seat and there would be no I am and put on the cans. Did they know? No. I think so. I didn't give a fuck. It was interesting. You see that very welcoming and loving because they remember. They do believe in what they're doing. I did. Right. But anyway, what I was saying to you is the dynamics and dynamics. You know, Elmer and Harvard is writing that he's a scientist. Right. He's, you know, a decorated war hero that he was a college educated. And so you're not you're seeing the information's out there. What information other than what we're reading is out there? Well, I mean now, like more than so. But no scienceologist allowed to read Learn's Rights Book. There's not allowed to. So they didn't. The next time job of insulating people. They didn't know if you and I were like friends friends. Right? And you had concern for me in Scientology. And you came to me and you said, Leah, I really I'm scared for you. You know, I'm right. I read Going Clear and I want to know that you're okay. And you and Angela, I don't know if this is good thing for you. Do order, you know, I would say Joe, you know me. I'm a good person. Like I've been there for you. You're white. Like come on. You know, I don't I don't do draw. I don't you know, I don't steal. I'm doing right. Just respect the fact that this is something I believe is helping. me. Why would you ask me to look at something that's anti my charge or anti what I'm doing? That's how you would approach it. But and you would accept it, Joe. You'd be like, she's right. It isn't messed up of me to be telling her these things. When she is a good person and her and Angela are great. Like you wouldn't you wouldn't push it. You wouldn't push it. You wouldn't push it. You would respect me enough because you would know me enough to go. And I want to do that to her. It's wrong. It's disrespectful. So you feel like that happens pretty much across the board. Well, anybody who's outside. Yes. And when I was that's what you're trained to do. Yeah. So you're working constantly with people that are not in the church, right? Right. You're not sets. How many people are going to come up to you and say, hey, I think you're in a cult. Well, in your position very few, right? Because you were one of the stars of the show. Right. And everybody's trying to behind you. Who would do that to Tom Cruise? Very few, right? Very few. None. None. So when he's on a set, is it all like he's doing mission and and post-abortion like that? Is it all Scientology employees that are constantly surrounding him? Yes. So he's got like this wall of insulation. Correct. And it's all Scientology people. Correct. But the director, the writer, they don't have to be Scientology. Not at all. No. No. But they're not invading Tom's space. They're not going to be disrespectful to their lead actor. They're not going to go up to Tom and go, hey, Tom, we don't know about our affiliation with you. Right. And what you're doing in the Scientology thing, you know, they're not going to rock the boat. The higher them as an actor. Right. And because of the way Tom Cruise is, I don't know, obviously, but what I get out of him is he's a super focused, like very tense. Turned on intense guy. Yes. And it probably benefits him having all these servants take care of all his every needs. So he could focus directly on his thing and just go for it. So for him, it's probably 100% beneficial to be involved. Correct. Because it is a world that's tailor-made to him. That's so strange. And that is his Scientology. What a rare position. Yes, it is. For any human to ever find themselves in, without like being like the conquer of a country or something like that, you know? Correct. I mean, again, I want to make the distinction between, you know, listen, when you gain some success in this business thing, God, you're able to surround yourself with an assistant and people to help you to make your life easier so you could focus on your work. But this is something totally different. Because behind closed doors, you are acting and being a different way. And you know it. I know it. He knows it. And anybody in Scientology knows it. And that's why he different. It is about the mission of Scientology. So anything is justified. So behind closed doors, though, how is he different? It is nothing out of line. Nothing that would upset him. You have to act and be a certain way around him. You cannot. You just can't step out of line out of the bounds of the policies of the church. And you or you will be dealt with, and you will be dealt with swiftly within your church. And that seems to be quite abusive to me. I was punished for basically following my own policy of my church, defending my church. And I can't be friends with somebody who you can't be. You can't be around that. You can be around that. And you're beginning punished by your church because of it. But that again, that wasn't really even the reason why I left. I mean, I was dealing with that. I was dealing with being interrogated. My expense was talking hundreds of thousands of dollars. And you've given millions of dollars. Millions. Yes. Millions. That's insane. And now they're turning around. You know they have these hate websites. They create on everybody within minutes. Yeah, I saw yours. It's adorable. Any great. Yeah. They can't really say anything. You didn't do anything. They can say a lot. Yeah, but I said I said it. I said it in my book. Okay. Yeah, I'm all those things. Okay. Even if you catch me, you know, in a situation or my husband, it wouldn't change anything about what I'm saying. It wouldn't change a damn thing. It doesn't matter. But their intention is to try to, you know, my husband sometimes sings in a salsa club. You don't think they're going to catch him. What a girl somewhere dancing. And you know what I'm saying? Yes. You can do all those things. You can hire PIs to follow us. You can get us in situations. But does that change anything? They're trying to discredit you. And it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter because what you're saying is true. Exactly. And it's not just me. I'm not saying it. The other thing that bothers me is that it's become my crusade. It's not my crusade. It's my responsibility. And I feel other people need to step up and take some responsibility. I don't want to be the only one saying. And I don't want to be other people, other actors, other officials. The media, they need to not make it about me. Get some bowls and say what you really think. Like I was on 2020, right? With Dan Harris. And it's the parent company to A&A. And I did the show for somebody else. And Dan Harris, I said, what do you think of that? And he said, I have to be impartial. And I said, would you be impartial about abuse? Are you impartial about this? And I named a few things. And he went, well, no. And I said, right. Okay, you're being an asshole. And the truth of the matter is, I do think that of this industry. I think this is like a ballless industry. And there's people who have some balls, like you, like Adam Corolla. There's a few people who are in the public eye. I'm sorry about that. Who are in the public eye that have had the balls to have an opinion? Don't make it about me. These things are screwed off. These people's lies are being hurt and damaged. And you're defrauding people at a million dollars by your abusive policies. You can make things confidential. Then you say these policies don't exist. Why don't you say they exist? You can Google them and see that they exist. Well, in their defense, what you are is a magnet point. Because you are a famous person. And so it makes it much easier to concentrate on the whole situation through you. Right. You know, because of the fact that you're a famous person, because of the fact that you lived most of your life in the church, it makes it very convenient to go through you. I don't necessarily think it's a bad thing to do. I don't know, but you're just what I'm saying. If I say this connection is a policy, right? And they say, and then the next headline is, Leah, run many alleges that this connection, don't know I'm not alleging anything. Look it up. Right. I see what you're saying. Look it up. Right. Don't say that I'm saying it. They're protecting themselves legally, probably. That's why it's available for anyone to see. Well, because they probably don't want to get sued. But why do they get sued? It's in their policies. That's a good question. Maybe they would say that they were misinterpreting it. It's a different connection and suppressive. And it says exactly when the church labels a suppressive person, you are only your only option is to disconnect. So you have children disconnecting from their own mothers and fathers. That was one of the most disturbing aspects of your show. To see the damage that caused and see how devastated these parents were and family members were. That's horrible. That's really horrible. And you know what people say? You knew the policy existed, right? When you were in Scientology. So why you guys so surprised? We were taught a suppressive person is like the evil with horns. Right. They like Hitler. You know, you know, thinking it's my mother, my daughter. But when you get pulled in for something like this, which is what they did in the end, they try to get me to disconnect from my stepfather, then they try to get my stepfather to disconnect from my mother. And so they did this whole thing with me. Your stepfather who brought you in the first place. No, no, no, this is another guy. Another guy. I'm a busy. Just getting crazy. Yeah. She's a naughty naughty. But she's been married to George. My husband for 30 years. So yeah, no, the other guy ended up leaving us there. He got us into Scientology and then he took off. Oh, Jesus. Yeah. So talk me through your return. So you go to Florida. You spend three fucking months getting grilled every day, putting the pressure on you. And that's been a proven tactic of interrogations. It's always questioned by people that really like look at the ethical implications of interrogation. The problem is when you put so much intention on someone about a certain thing, it makes them so uncomfortable that it changes their perception of things to the point where they're willing to admit a lot of things that may or may not be true, just to get the interrogation over. Well, that's what I did. Yeah. Yeah. I just said, OK, I'm sorry. So you come back. I come back. I kind of like take a little bit of a hiatus from Scientology, but I'm not creating ways. When you say take a hiatus, you're not doing the daily thing. I'm just not going in all the time. How often are you going in then? Maybe like once every month. Once a month instead of every day. That's a big deal. It was a big deal. Then they got me back. Then they have a big meeting with me and they go, we want you to come back. We know you're upset. Like that whole thing was just screwed up. Let's just come back. And I wanted specifics. What was messed up? I want you to tell me in writing. And then you should also refund all my money that you spent that I spent having to do this. Then they showed me a policy that there are no refunds. And if I ask for a refund, then I'm going to get declared a suppressive person, labeled in any way. So the money that you spent going to Florida and spending three months down there, that's what you wanted to refund. Correct. Not money. I said that no, no. Because listen. And in their defense, I don't think it's right to get your money back on something that you feel you've received. Right? A service you've received. Right. The problem that I have is, Scientology is a pay before you go proposition. There are, if not tens of thousands of people who have money sitting on account that they can't get. Because they have a refund policy. I can't. I can't just call the church right now and say I want a refund. Because they're not allowed to talk to me. So it's a catch 22. So your only person that you could talk to in the church is the person who deals with refunds, but they can't talk to you because you're declared an enemy to the church. So they're holding millions and millions of dollars of people's money that they can't get back. Because no lawyer is going to take on the church of Scientology for free. But you're talking to the average guy who has $50,000 and $100,000 on account. He or she is never going to see again. So you come back, you get to them. They have this meeting with you. You say that you want to get your money back. They won't give your money back. And then how does it go from there? They said, you know, you're going to be interrogated because you're now acting as an enemy to the church. Because you're asking for your money back. Correct. That's a bad sign. Then I said, okay, now it just kind of opened up a little bit of a wound. Then I started saying, we're Shelley. Okay, now I want an answer where Shelley is. Because I had been writing her. Shelly Miss Cabbage. Correct. The leader's wife. And I said, it's going to get bad for you guys because now I started going on the internet. And I started seeing stories of senior executives getting beaten in the church like Debbie Cook and Mike Rinder and Tom Devoc. And I was seeing all these names that I was beaten. That they were actually beaten, physically beaten. For what reason? For looking the wrong way at David Miss Cabbage. For signing. For signing? For rolling their eyes. For being tired. For... For Johnny. Like, Johnny in front of her or something? Yes. So someone beat you. Right. Or he has somebody beat you. And Mike Rinder and Marty Rathbun were part of that. Right. For part of that senior executive strata that was up in Riverside County where they have a place called Gold. Gold Base. And that's where these incidents were allegedly taking place. So I started googling it and I started going into the church and saying, I'm googling this information and I want to know why these people are saying the same thing. Their stories are over and over again. And then I'm seeing stories of families being declared suppressive people. They're OT-8s. You know, they're high up in the church. And their families are being forced. And then you're being... Then you're presented with, this is a lie, look, Mike Rinder admitted that he beat people and Marty Rathbun. But that's the difference. They're admitting it. They're admitting that they did this under David Mustavage's direction. Right. You're saying that they're lying. But they're not lying about they're doing it. But they're lying about having received it. Does that make sense to you? You know, over and over again these stories kept coming up. Right. And they kept... When I would ask a question, they would put me in a room and go, what are your crimes? Who are you talking to? Why are you talking to enemies of your church? And it was just... It was my questions were never answered. And I said, does this church ever do anything wrong? Does this church ever do anything wrong? Is everybody an evil asshole once they leave? Is that what you're telling me? So what would happen if you said that my mother was? Then I just got to believe you that my mother is an evil person. And all these horrible things you're saying about my mother, I was supposed to believe you. And the answer was, don't believe me. Believe what is Elroy? What does Elroy say? And then they have the policy out. What does Elroy say? Read this. Read this aloud. What don't you understand? What does this word mean? What does that word mean? Go look this up. You have an misunderstood word here. If you don't understand that anybody who attacks your church is a criminal. This is the kind of thing you go through. Right. So this is what you're going through when you came back to LA when you slowly started separating. Yes. Did it ever give you one of those big gold medals like Tom Cruise got? I never got one. I didn't. But I did get a huge award for donating another million to the church. And it's so crazy to me that everybody who leaves is somebody who is an axe to grind a past state, a big head. Because they've been called a big hit. Because they go to the one place they can go to, which is don't disrespect my religious beliefs. Right. And then they can call you a big hit. I'm for religious freedom. I'm for the first to met. Like that's what they're hiding behind. And I'm calling bullshit to every celebrity who says that shit. Because they know what they're doing. I did it too. I did it too Joe. So I know what they're doing. Right. And they know that I know. Which is even sicker. You're a terrible person to have against you on this. Why? Because you're so fiery. And you enjoy this combat. There's part of you that enjoys it. Really? Yeah, that's what I thought about this when the whole thing's first started going down. I was like, oh, she's like a terrible person to like to leave the church. Because she's going to talk shit to the end of time. No, you're going to go. I don't mean a bad way. Listen, Joe, if you told me tomorrow, and I really just getting to know you today, I mean, I've known you, but we don't know each other. Right? But I'm really kind of like you like you're... Well, if you told me tomorrow, and I really just getting to know you today, I mean, I've known you, but we don't know each other. But I'm really kind of like you. Like you're cool. Thank you. I like you too. And you smile with your eyes, which is a thing that I loved about Kevin. Like that was one thing I used to say about Kevin. Like there's like a smile behind their eyes. Like there's a smile. I always find that to be kind. Now you could be a total dick, and I don't know about it, because I don't listen to podcasts. OK, but are you a dick? No. OK, good. Because if I hear it, like when I leave you, it's a total dick. He's a fuck. You know, OK. You probably probably hear that from one person or two. OK. But just because you said it. OK, but here's the thing. If you call me tomorrow and said, I'm having a problem with my neighbor because he said I'm approaching on his property. And my kid's swing set is in croat. Like I would be so. Like I would be I would find every resource I could help you. That is who I am. Not that I'm a mother Teresa. I will get upset about if I see anything on the street. I mean, I get involved in shit. I've always been involved in other people's business. OK, always. If I could see into your house, I will spy on you. I will do. I will. If I go into your house, I'm looking in your drawer. I'm in your shit. I'm in people's business all the time. And if I'm going to restaurant, I tell Angela to speak to me because I want to hear what's going on next to me. And I figure everything out. But if I see people being bullied, if I see people being unjustly hurt, yes, I do. I have always said and people who know me know that's true. Yeah. Well, so this David Miss Cabbage wife situation, did that get resolved? No. I filed a missing persons report with the LAPD. And then I found some pictures of the guy who was in charge of my case, speaking to Scientology event on human trafficking, Lieutenant Dawson, at the LAPD. The police officer. Yeah. He was in charge of the case. He was repaying to speak at the celebrity center at a human trafficking event at celebrity center, Scientology. That seems like a massive conflict of interest. You think? OK. So then that's funny. So then after that, I called the Dawson, Lieutenant Dawson. And I said, so what's the deal? Because I had given a letter with the police report that said it was too Shelley, if they found her. Shelley, go with this man now. I'm going to take care of you. I'll take care of your legal fees. What's going on there is wrong. You have no idea. Because let me tell you, they have no telephone. They have no mail in or out. They are not allowed to leave the base. If they leave that base of it Riverside County, they are accompanied by security or handler. So you think she's a prisoner? But if she's alive and well, the second best case scenario would be, yes, that she's being held prisoner, if not by her own mind. If she's alive and well. So you did what didn't she release some sort of a statement or someone who is interested? Someone did. I don't know who is from. To respond to your accusations, right? They said that they had made contact with her. And she didn't want to be found. I said, did you see her or was she speaking with somebody speaking on her behalf? You ready for the answer? That's classified. This is what the police said. And I said, are you sick? I said, sir, I used to say there's something wrong with you. Am I doing something wrong? I filed the report. You know that, right? You know that I filed the report? I thought maybe he was confused. And he thought he was talking to my cousin. I said, no, I filed the report. Of course, you're going to give me the information. I need to know if you saw her or the officers that you sent there, saw her. Did anybody give her my note? Did you, was she OK? Was she, did you take her off the base? Did you say you wanted to speak to her alone? He said, I can't give you any of that information. Could you imagine? Then I had to spend more money, Joe, because this is not free. I had to spend more money on a lawyer to do a follow-up on the public information. I asked specific questions. Who did you see? Did you see her? Was she alone? Where did you see her? What did she look like? Didn't give me the information. They go, yeah, you can get that information and pay two more dollars, OK? We paid the two more dollars. And then the thousand dollars are costing me to get a lawyer to draft up the letter. So it's still ongoing. I still don't have any answers. So she just sort of vanished. She stopped going to events. She stopped being. And by the way, she is called official title is called C.O.B. Communicator, Chairman of the Board Communicator. She is by his side 24 hours a day. So imagine going from seeing somebody as a permanent, like that's not like, oh, sometimes your assistant works sometimes. This is a person who worked around the clock for him and was his wife. What do you think happened? I don't know, which is why I followed the door. Have you heard anything? No. So no one who used to be a part of the church is contacted you. There would be no, OK, anybody who would, anybody who I would need to talk to me is up behind gates in Riverside County at this gold base. Anybody that I would need to come out and talk to me and give me information, the FBI information would be behind those gates. Where are they getting money from now? Who? The Scientologist. Because it seems like. Well, you have people like Nancy Cartwright, who give $10 million, $20 million. You have some whales in Scientology. You have Greta Van Sustrin and her husband. Greta Van Sustrin. Oh, big time. Really? Oh, yeah. It's on her Wikipedia page, which is Scientologist. Yes, and her husband too. But it seems like they have a giant staff. They have a lot of people working there. They just people work for free, baby. Those people sign billion year contracts, and they get $15 a week. Not Matt Kinney, I'm not fine. Billion year contracts. I'm not being funny. I know you. And they get paid $15 a week. And they work from the moment they get up to midnight. They work astronomical hours. These are called seargemembers. I'm not talking about average Scientologists. And explain to me to see her, because was that established when Elran Hubbard was evading taxes? So he got a bunch. Yes, he was on a ship. Yes. And he created the ship called the Freewinds and whatever ship. That's not called the Freewinds. And it is called the Freewinds now. But that's where they deliver the highest level of Scientology there, OTA. So when you get to OTA, you got to get out of the Freewinds. But before that, I don't know the name of his boats. But I think it was called the Apollo. That was a part of going clear that was hilarious when, who was it, one of the writers, or one of the, the, well, Haggis? Yes. When he was received like the highest level ship. That wasn't even the highest level. Was it? Was OTA 3? Really? Yeah. And when I read it, I literally, you know, you have to go into a secure room. Explain to talk us through that. Well, as a person, well, you have to get invited. You have to get an invitation. So you'd been Scientology for years. You'd spent a ton of money already. You know, I've got a money, a lot of money. Most scientists, by the way, most scientists don't even get to this. Most, most don't. Right. Yeah. Because you have to be wealthy to get to this. Not only do you have to be wealthy, but a lot of times, what they do, the, the new scam is you got to go, you get to a level and then they go, we, we mess that up. You have to go back down at your expense. Right. You have to redo that part. You were talking about that on your show. Yeah. Yeah. So, and there will be some new thing. Yeah. Now David, Miss Gavadry writes things and says he found it and evolts somewhere. And, and we all believe it, baby. Honestly, we all believe it because we want to believe it. So it talk me through. So you go through this. You're level. Did you get to OT five? You got close. Yeah. Here it goes. Um, I, uh, I got to, uh, so when I, so you, to get to this advanced level, this is, it's called, advanced levels. Right. Uh, you are put through the ringer. They go through every folder. You know, from the moment you walk into it, you're just saying to all the, they have folders on you. So everything you've ever said is written down and, and videotaped. Okay. So they, they, um, they get your folders and they, they call, they call it. They go through it. Okay. And they go through every transgression. Are you still humping your pillow? Are you still, uh, you know, a nasty asshole to your mother? Like they, they go through everything. Are you still connected to this person who said something bad about Scientology 20 years ago? So they make sure that you're eligible to get the advanced data. And where do they bring you? To give you some. Where is it at? It's, it's on Elvond Hubbard way in Los Angeles and fountain. So how nervous are you freaking out? Oh my God. Can I just happen? Finally, all this shit I've put up with all my life is finally going to be answered. All my questions of life are going to be answered. And then you realize this is the moment you're going to get the sacred documents. So my mother, yeah. So because I'm a celebrity, they let my mother come in. She was also higher level than me, right? So imagine I'm in this like double like, so you go through one door in this security and then you got to get to land. You like, you got to get like clearance. You got to go take a picture. You've got to sign documents and say if I ever reveal this, uh, it's going to be a hundred thousand dollars. You know, you don't ever get to read any legal document that Scientology gives you. So you just sign things. You know, you just they say sign here, sign here. It's like today what you did here. So I don't know. I could be married to you. It was for all I know what I signed today. Um, I like how you shook your head. No, you don't need to shy. Okay. So you know comedy. You don't deny Joe. So I don't know why you keep denying it. That's how you step up the comedy and other notch. Got it. You deny. You just go. Oh, I didn't get the memo. Okay. So that's what we're doing now. Yeah. Okay. So we yeah. Okay. So you want to room? The secure room. You got to land your, they take your photo. You saw the documents. Well, they give you a folder. You have to get a briefcase that only you know the, uh, code to. I'll briefcase. So you go up to the window to the AO window and you hand them your briefcase. They scan your briefcase and they put the materials in the briefcase and they close it. They turn it back to you and you lock it. Then you attach the briefcase to your body. I'm not like a handcuff. Not like with a little clip. Like it has to be has to be physically connected to you. Right. So when you go pay, you have your briefcase coming with you. Right. Okay. So you get briefcase. They go go to the go down the hall and use your thing and you're going to be led into one door and then you're going to go into another door and then you're going to go into the course room. That's what it's called. So you go into the three doors or two doors or whatever it was. They sit down. You open up your briefcase and you read the material for the first time. The answers. So my mother's sitting there in front of me. Okay. She's so excited. This is what you want for your kids. You're like they're getting up the bridge and they're getting the answers to life. So when they come back next lifetime, they're not going to forget everything. They're not going to be as fucked up as they were. You know what I mean? Right. It's really a proud moment. And so my mom's sitting across me like I'm so excited and I'm reading this that my body is made up of other beings. My body, my whole body, my thoughts and everything are mixed in with these other beings that are make up, compose my body. Okay. Are you following me? Yes. What's your understanding of it? Your bodies made up of other beings. Right. Every, everything, everything. My thumb, my clothes, your other beings, your hair, your other nails because they're acrylic. Okay. Your skins, other beings, your eyes, or other beings. Everything. That's just here. Just, my thumb is a person, is a being trapped into this body. Okay. So I read this and the supervisor comes over and he goes, do you understand? I want you to draw it out. I want you to draw it out. So the supervisor has access to this information. Yeah. He's standing there to make sure. I go like this, Joe. I go on a drawable person. Okay. I go, there's a bunch of beings on me like that. And I give it to him like that and he goes, start again. I want you to read it again and then I want you to draw another one. So I go, okay. So I did all this, you know, and I literally did this, Joe. I made circles on every part of my body. So for people that just literally is drawn a stick figure and she's drawn little circles all over the stick figure. Right. Right. Right. Now these beings were like from 75 trillion years ago, they were put in volcanoes and blown up and packaged and overlored. Anyway, are you freaking out at this point? I go, I look at my mother who's standing now. The supervisor's standing over me. So I go, what in the fuck? Huh? Yeah. So he's like, is that a man? So your mom was in. She's fine. There's OTA. Right. Your mom's OTA. Your mom's top of the food chain? Yeah. Not only is my mother top of the food chain when it comes to the counseling side. My mother was top of the food chain when it came to administering Scientology, which is very rare. She was what's considered a high trained auditor. But she hadn't read this stuff yet. Of course she read it. She was just there to see my excitement. Oh, I see. Okay. She was there as a spectator to see her daughter receive the answers. Right. But you were super skeptical. Okay. Right. How you? Right. Right. Right. Right. The supervisor comes up and he goes, what don't you understand? I go, I understand it. I just, I don't, I don't love that. Like, I'm not happy. What this is what it was. And he goes, well, you don't need to believe it. You just need to do it. So that's the answer that's given to you. You don't need to believe it. You just need to do it. So then you have to go and audit this. You have to go and do it on yourself. Talk to these beings on the meter by yourself. So on the meter meeting, you hold the cans. Mm hmm. And when I say cans, folks, what they looks like, it looks like soup cans. Well, you'd be drained all the soup from a soup can and it had a string attached to it and it's connected to some. Yeah, you could just Google what? Scientology E meter. E meter. Okay. So you have to hold the E meter and discuss this. No, you think it. You think it. You just think it. So now you've got to go get your material. So after you've been checked out on this and they get that you get what it is, then you go back to the window and they give you your actual what you're supposed to do with this information. So it'll say like it'll be a piece of paper. I don't say ask this question and then look at the meter and what the answer is. Whatever answer comes to your mind, write it down. Huh? Decent saying yes. So all you're doing is awakening these things to talk to them really. Oh, yeah. Right. And so let them go. You're basically saying like go be free. Go. So this is OT3? Correct. And by the way, when I was a Scientologist and I heard that this was a story, I didn't know. So I would go to the internet and go OT3 story. But I didn't know if it was true. So I couldn't verify it. Right. These are the things. Yeah. So most people who go, that's bullshit because they haven't, they don't know what they're looking at on the internet. Right. Does no one to verify it with? So if I went to my mother, let's say before I got to this level, you're told to lie to people. Oh, so. You can't tell people what the answers are because they're going to get pneumonia. They get pneumonia. They surely will die. Okay. So a lot of times when I lied to the press and then they confronted me on it and said, why do you lie? I had to to save your life. I mean, I can't. I'm going to give you cancer. So if you were about to go to OT3 and then you went online and you investigated what is OT3 and then you read a bunch of stuff about these little beings and you bought it and then asked your mom, your mom would have to lie to you. She would lie to me as she did. So after you got through this, what made you do for and father? Because there's always the carrot of like just wait. Okay. And by the way, here's what they do. They set up that you're the auditor now. So you're you're auditing these things in your body. You're now the boss. So they go, they tell you get your hat on like you're it's your job. You don't need to believe anything. You just need to audit them. So you need to do your job as an auditor. That's what they're called auditors people who are the ones who take you into session and sign challenging. So you feel like you're in a leadership role. So you're doing these things of favor. You know, and you're like, well, maybe it's true. I don't know. I mean, I do sometimes hear voices. You know, like, you know, you have a moment with yourself. And you're like, I might be really kind of crazy. So you're like, maybe this is an answer. It's sick because it speaks to a side of you that wants answers about life. You know, and then you're like, no, this is some crazy shit man. There wasn't even people. What? No, you know, listen, you believe what you want to believe at the time. Right. And I feel to you at the moment, like maybe if you just keep going, all the pieces of fall in the place, then it'll make sense. Yeah. So like, I'm confused now. But if I contemplate this and I really think it over eventually, I'm going to receive enough information. Right. And this is all going to be like, Oh, right. I was a fool. Right. Right. So for example, one time I had talked to a friend about it, I said, you know, I heard some of us. I'm seeing you shit. She's a bit. See, you know, you pulled me into celebrity center so fast into a secured room. And she handed me my ass. She said, don't you ever say that word outside is a cured room. I'm writing a knowledge report on you. She said, I'm writing a report. Right. You never say that word out loud in a room that's not secured. Okay. And never see it again. So she wrote a report on me. A knowledge report. She wrote a knowledge report on me. I got sent to what's called ethics, which is like the Justice Department of Civil Services of Scientology. And they said they brought me into another secured room because they have to get somebody who knows this information. And they said never ever say that would say this never confirm it, never deny it, never give that information out ever that just never discuss it. Just say I never heard of it. You sound crazy. And that's what we all say. You sound crazy. Or, you know, properly done, you get it, you know, like you'll get it. If it's properly done, those people didn't do it properly. That's why they didn't understand that. Do you seem to think? There's a line that you cross, right? Yeah. We're like, this is my life, this is Scientology, this is what I believe. And then you cross the line. Oh my God, this is bullshit. Right. That's a, that line, that bridge that you cross in your mind is a very distinct transition. So what, what, what was that like? Like what is that transition like? Like what is, what is your life like? Well, now, once you did, how long ago did you, to leave? July will be four years. That's it. Yeah. That's not long. No. That's really recent. Joe, and I'm still, you know, finding myself. I'm still like, who am I? What do I believe? Right. You know, am I some bullshit? Am I a person that like you're saying loves a fight? Because I don't want that. I don't want to be that person who loves to fight just to fight. I want to be on the path of being righteous. I want to be who I really am. And, and, and who I really am is sometimes an asshole, Joe. Sometimes I am. I have a horrible temper. I'm like, I've sometimes I feel like I'm like an old school mafia person stuck in a female, but like I have really extreme thoughts about life. And I'm finding who I am. I'm finding out what I really believe because a lot of them I don't know. I go, do I believe in that? Don't I believe in that? I was taught that everybody's home's part is evil. Do I believe that everybody who cheats is evil and horrible and just lost? Do I believe that other religions are lost? Do I believe that everybody needs like I will. I'm searching. You have to reevaluate your entire belief system now. And it was a big part of my day. Remember, it became a mission. It gave me purpose. And that's what I hear a lot from Scientologists is exontologists, not just hearing their pain of losing their families and everything they've ever known, but not having purpose right when you wake up in the morning. Like, you know, we have purpose, Joe, we have kids. They got for them. But this it was so much bigger. It was for your children's children. That's a giant factor for people. I have some friends that were deeply involved in the Mormon religion and they're not anymore. And it was really weird because we went to dinner once and they were saying, do you believe in a higher power? And I said, it's entirely possible. I said, I don't but I don't believe in anything that I don't have any evidence of. It's entirely possible. Like, I think the universe is an incredible mystery. And I think the life itself in consciousness is an amazing mystery. And I don't think we have all the answers. I don't I just think I don't think an aunt can understand a cell phone. And I don't think I can understand the universe. I just think my brain is not evolved enough. I don't think our our our understanding has reached the point where we could really accurately describe what this is all about. And then but their answer was like, how do you get up in the morning? I go, I love life. I like I like drinking nice wine. I like having dinner, like being with my friends. I like Joe not everybody has that. Well, they probably should find some things they enjoy about this life. Exactly. But that's the thing is finding those things for Scientologists. It's like a lot of my friends like who didn't really know what I was going through in the church. You know, you're very kind of childish at times, you know, because I never went to to dinner in my thirties and forties and had wine. Like I wouldn't go to dinner have wine. I get reports written on me. You know, we we had to go to the church the next day. I wasn't going out to dinner after the king of Queens and enjoying my friends. And if I did Joe, I was thinking their loss, they need Scientology. You know, I was never really there. I was never really part of I'm like living for the first time, but I do have faith. That's a one thing that I have found and not in a weird way. Not in a I'm in another cult way. Not in just I have faith for the first time. I don't believe in any one thing. I believe in a higher power and I believe that faith having faith is a big thing. These people that I was friends with, I'm still friends with, this conversation got, it got a little weird that night, but it got way weirder years later because they wanted to believe it. What do you mean? Okay. And when they get weird. Well, because then they got they became untethered. And the conversation I had with the wife was very strange because she was like, I grew up in indoctrinated in this fundamentalist religion. And she goes, and now that I'm not in it, she goes, I don't know what to believe. And I realized that my mindset is kind of fucked up because I I'm indoctrinated like my brain developed as a young age, believing nonsense and never questioning it. She goes, I feel very vulnerable, very susceptible. She goes, I feel like if the right cult came along, they could scoop me up and she was laughing about it, but she wasn't laughing about that. Well, here's the thing on the opposite now. That's why like when I don't want you to tell me nothing. I don't want to be told a damn thing. I've been told my whole life what to do and how to think. So I've gone the opposite. Just don't tell me what I need to do. And it the pendulum swing is far. You mean like going to the DMV when they go, you need to stand up. And I don't need to stand anywhere. Like I don't need, guess what? I don't need my license renewed. And then on that person, I will destroy my whole day and get a ticket because I don't want to be told what to do. It doesn't talk to me like, you know, your child and don't talk to me. Like, you know, I'm very much that way. You know, you should have short enough. I don't give a shit what you think about my nails. I want them that they're slightly longer than average because it's purposeful. And when I don't want them anymore, I won't have them. But that's just a small scale. But I don't want people telling me what I should think anymore. And let me find my way. I'm going to make mistakes. But I want to find my own way. So you're sort of reestablishing your own personal sovereignty. And I don't know what it is, Joe. And like I said, I want to piss some more people off, I'm sure. And I'm going to make a lot of mistakes. I'm going to not be the perfect person. People think I am or want me to be. But I got to make mistakes. You got to, that's how you learn. I wasn't able to learn. Right. It was like, do it this way. It's just the way we do it. We don't do this. We don't do that. I mean, I was always a little bit of a rebel in. But I thought everybody was being held to this higher standard. They weren't. I was finding out other celebrities were smoking pot. And then going into the sauna. Yeah, exactly like doing their purification run down 100 times. Because that's when that's in the beginning steps of science. How do you have to do what's called a purification run down? It's supposed to detox your body of all. Nothing is. You're not there yet. No. Joe, you don't get to say that. I don't get to say it. Oh, baby. And so you get there. Oh, when do you get there? What use, you have to spend $380,000 and about 40 years of your life. 40. Yeah. That's a lot of work. It's a lot of work. No. You learn, basically, purification run down is just you're supposed to sweat out all of the toxins lodged in your fatty tissue. Now, the problem with that is, you're taking large amounts of medicine. And they claim you're you're running out like a sun tan from from when you're a kid and from other lifetimes. And it's nice. It's like flash nice. And you feel it in your skin. That gets you hot. Yes. And you have to sit in the sun for five hours. Wow. It's a five hour thing. But I was finding out. I was like, wait a minute. Why was that person even smoking pot? We're not just smoking pot, right? Like I haven't been smoking pot this whole time. where people do. And I'm learning that other people were smoking pot, doing all the drugs, and then going in the sun. I was like, wait, I didn't know there was an option for me. Like I was living by this, you know what I mean? So that's what I'm going through now. I'm not saying I'm smoking pot, but I don't say. It sounds like you want to. I love that. Only because I want to be calmer, but it might not make you call as to, OK, then I don't want it. Well, it could. No, it has a different effect on everybody. I love a tool for that shit. No, you're definitely not. John, too old for me. No, you're not. No, you're alive. If you're alive, you can experience the benefits of a consciousness enhancing substance, whether it's mushrooms or pot or any. Joe, that's crazy. It's not crazy. It's not crazy. I don't know. I look at you. I look at you. Yeah, you're freaking out. You've been into call it your whole life. Sorry, folks. How's the cake? Nobody in psychology, other than the people are going to tag me and you, or are listening to this. Well, even the people that are going to tag you and me, I don't like to go back for them. I feel bad for them. I feel bad for anybody who wants to tag anybody for their beliefs or for talking about stuff. And guess what? If you're a religion or your belief system, it's so easily destroyed that someone can have a disparaging opinion about it and that threatens you to the point where you want to attack that person. You're doing something wrong. You're leading your life wrong. You're on the wrong path. There's a lot of people that have different opinions about a lot of different things. And it's one of the more interesting things about life. Like you don't like coconut water. I fucking love coconut water. We're allowed to. You don't like cologne. I think it smells like shit. We're allowed to have different opinions. This is one of the beautiful things about life. People like different kinds of music, different styles of art. They like different kinds of houses and different landscapes. It's one of the things that makes people interesting. So the problem with any kind of ideology, the problem with what this represents or any other kind of cult or any other kind of really rigid structure is that human beings are very susceptible to those kind of routines. A very susceptible to influence. We're very susceptible to other people carving out these predetermined patterns of behavior that you just quickly slot into. Because it keeps you from having to form your own opinions. And that's everything that's wrong. And you truly believe that you believe it. Yeah, I'm not sure. And you do it's leaving. You do. I mean, it's very easy for people to just slot themselves into these patterns and adopt those opinions as their own instead of trying to formulate their own. Because it's very complicated to try to formulate your own opinions. And they have to be flexible because new information comes up. And then you have to kind of change them and adjust them. And then recognize that perhaps like you're recognizing right now that like, wow, I've kind of like, I've lived a lie for a long period of time. I mean, it doesn't discredit you as a human. It doesn't. I mean, and it's very brave of you to discuss that openly. Because it gives people that are listening to this the same sort of understanding of these thoughts that are in their own mind, whether it's because of whatever religion, fill in the blank. And that's the other thing about this. How the fuck do they have toxic tax exempt status? Well, because they first of all, the IRS, they answered the IRS questions to get that status. And one of them is you have any other affiliation with any other God of which they said, no, they believe that they are spiritual beings. And they deal with the spirit. And so they answer the questions that needed to be answered for the IRS. But is it amazing that any religion gets tax exempt status? All of them are ridiculous. Well, I don't want to make comment about other like bonafide religions because I don't like- Do they think some of them are bonafide? Well, yes, I do. And I'm going to tell you why. I mean, honestly, Joe, you have to really make the distinction between an organization that takes your mind hot. You know, I don't tell you why. I mean, honestly, Joe, you have to really make the distinction between an organization that takes your mind hostage from the minute you walk in and that you are required to be there 20, you know, two and a half hours a day that your eternity is at stake, that you're the planet, every man, woman, and child on this planet, their lives are at stake with what we do in Scientology. Don't you think the people who are super hard for fundamentalist Christians? Okay, you said fundamentalist, okay. So I'm not talking about that. What I'm talking about are what I witnessed as a child with my grandmother. My grandmother lived down the street from her church. We would walk in on the way to get, you know, sausage and meatballs and things she needed to make her source. And she'd go in and light a candle for her friend Connie, or she'd go in and light a candle because I lost my ring, or she'd pray to this saint or that saint. And when I was scared at night, she would say pray to this person, pray to, you know, do your cross and God's going to protect you when you sleep. And here's your angel and, you know, here's your little cro- in it, she would give me little, you know, the saints on the necklaces and stuff and she'd say, and I believed for that night that that saint was protecting me or that God was protecting me. And those, it gave you comfort. It gave me comfort. And so that's what I tell my daughter. I don't want you to believe in anything, although I did baptize her as a cat, like I said, I want you to really find your way with some kind of spirituality. But I'm going to baptize your Catholic because I feel you need some kind of foundation, but I don't want you to be forced to believe in anything. But I want you to believe in something, or you're going to fall for anything. And I didn't have structure as a child, you know, I had Scientology. And I- But that's a structure, right? Well, I mean, a real religious base. A real religious base. Correct. Have you ever heard the difference between a cult and religion? It was a beautiful quote. What is it? A cult's bullshit. It was created by one person, that person knows it's bullshit in a religion that guy's dead. Right. Did you come up with that? No. Seems very joy. No. It's just something I read. Yeah, I like it. It's true. So I- But so that was my experience of religion. No, I know people feel very differently about religion being forced on their throat, but I would have kind of loved, you know, going with my family every Sunday to church. I think it created- When I saw my father doing that with his other daughters, I was a little bit jealous that we didn't have that. Right. That we didn't get Easter dresses and it wasn't a big thing, because we didn't have that growing up. It gives you comfort, right? Yes. Yeah. So that's- Also, I'm trying to look, it doesn't cost a quarter million to get up to this level that I explained to to you and by the end of it, if you have made millions that you're going to give those millions away, it is a requirement that's not a requirement in other religions. That you are not allowed to talk to certain people that now I understand that there are other cults that do that. And I do call those things a cult because I don't think any organization, any church should tell people who they can and cannot talk to, what they can and cannot read, what they shouldn't do. The person should make their own decisions based on the information that's given to them or information that they find on their own. Right. It's very different. This is a pay before you go proposition. There are repercussions to leaving. Nobody knows that I went in and out of a Catholic church the other day and let a candle. It was calling me saying, where are you? Why are you not here? Who are you talking to? You need to come in? We're going to start working on your family, destroying your family. Who does that? I understand what you're saying. But there's different styles of behavior patterns that exist in all sorts of religions. Like Buddhism is radically different than Islam. And there's different requirements that they ask of the people. And a lot of it is based on the environment that these religions were established in, based on how long these things have gone on for, whether or not the people that are a part of that religion have gone through the enlightenment. What different factors played apart and what standards they uphold today and what make people. But my issue is always with subscribing to predetermined patterns of behavior and ideologies where they indoctrinate you on specific ways to think. And that's what that's it. Yeah, that's what a lot of religions are. I mean, it's a real issue with human beings. Well, my grandmother, of course, was raised. Yes, exactly. We need to think a certain way about people or lifestyle. But she had the choice to be friends with somebody who maybe wasn't those things. Right. Sure. We don't have choice. No, it's pretty obvious that especially in particular, the way you're describing Scientology, it's far more suppressive than most and far more rigid in its behavior patterns. Right. And they force you into these behavior patterns. And it's incredibly difficult to break behavior patterns, especially when you believe firmly in your heart that this is the right way to be. Yeah. Yeah. It's just fine because you're clearing a planet. It's just amazing that they don't have to pay taxes. That's stunning. It's a look at their doctrine. If you look at all those things. But that's the thing, where there have been judges that should have looked into the doctrine, they said, it's not we cannot actually look into the doctrine. But they need to understand that there are you need to look into the doctrine where it's abusive and hurting people. Yeah. If your doctrine calls for you to hurt people, hurt children, the government does need to step in. You're right. Yeah. I agree. Well, it just absolutely this, the accusations about the sea organ about people making 15 bucks week and about these people that are essentially working as well. That's not a leak and dintered service. But that's not, they sign up for it. So as long as you sign up for it and sign that billion dollar contract, you're not subject any minimum wage laws or anything along those lines. No, by the way, Joe, I'm not really that's more enough to speak on these things because people don't think that my that my agenda is to take away their tax exam status. I would love for that to happen. But that's not the reason for the show. You just want to express yourself and be honest about your experiences and help other people. These are other people's experiences. But yours too. Well, because I know it's true because I experienced it, I'm co-signing. And I'm saying, you know, if you're going to bully somebody, bully me, bully A and A, but I'm going to let these people tell their stories because they're telling the truth. Right. Yeah. And if we weren't telling the truth, you would have sued us. So cut the shit already. Well, that's what's interesting is the disclaimer at the end of your episode. The end of our episode, it's in 100 times. Yeah. Yeah. It's bullshit, but they got to do it. I understand. It's smart to do it. It's a lot to me. It's annoying. Every time you see it, I roll my eyes. I mean, every time I see it, I go, I understand it. But you know, it's it's annoying because what we're saying is true. Again, this is a litigious group. Okay, they're not going to shy away from any lawsuit. If they could have sued us or they would have, but they know what we're saying is true. These are the policies of the church. Here's a thing. What they should do is go, yeah, we subscribe to these policies. You don't fucking like it. Don't be part of our church. But don't say we're all lying. It's right there on the internet. You ask holes. I had the books in my freaking garage. Right. What are you wanting about? Not not you want to get all I feel like you are. No, no, I'm just thinking. Now you're your current state right now, like doing this show and having all these people, I feel like you're helping a lot of them for sure because you're getting their message out there. And again, it's a very heartbreaking message. You see these people and they're not in contact with their children and they're not in contact with loved ones. Yeah. It's an imagine my daughter doing those videos, going, my mother just wants to make a buck. I'm disgusted by my mother. I'm disgusted that she didn't that she's my mother. I would be scrabbing. No, it's crazy. And I'm I'm one of the lucky ones. You know, like these things didn't happen to me. Joe, I wasn't I wasn't molested. I wasn't hurt. I wasn't physically hurt. I wasn't my kids didn't disconnect from me. My mother didn't disconnect from me. I have my mother during the holidays. I have my sisters. I have my husband. Now your life must have revolved around the church in a very big way socially. Yeah. What is that like now? Like all those people that've written you off, right? Yeah, um, it's sad. I'm sad for them because our relationship was was obviously dependent on my relationship to the church of St. John. You can understand that right from them being brainwashed and no, because they knew me. Right. So for my church to say, Lee is an enemy of our church. My friend should have said bullshit. Why aren't you kind of an enemy of them now though? Uh, I don't know why I would be. They know we're telling the truth. Right. But that truth is very damaging to their organization because their organization is the truth. Right. You're right. No. I'm not saying you're saying anything wrong. Stand behind it. Say you don't like it. Don't be part of it. Yeah, but they can't do that. Why? Because they're doing some fucked up things. They say they're the epitome of morality. They're the elite of mankind. They're saving the planet. So when you go on their website and see that they say that they're the largest growing religion, they only ones what the solution to life to man's ills. I'm not making this up. Okay. So when you make those kinds of claims, you didn't then stand behind it. Say that's right. That's right. I don't believe in other things. We don't we think you're all lost. We are extremists. We are bigots. And we, this is what these are our beliefs. And don't join us. We obviously have enough money. Do you communicate with any of the people? Then it allows to talk to me. So I've seen celebrities who talk shit to me on Twitter and social media, not directly at me. And they run from me. They run from me. A party's and they're lucky. They're lucky that they run because honestly, I don't mind. I don't mind you talking shit. Just when you see me, back it up. That's all. Just back it up when you see me. I don't want to name you. You want to know why I don't want to name a name Joe? Yes. Because I don't want to give him that much credit. I don't want to give him that you could just name any celebrity that you know. Like that that's a Scientologist. What do we have? We have cursed the alley. We have Tom Cruise. Christy always still in. What? She called me a big it. Yeah. She's big. I get a big it. Because you don't like Scientology? Right. But I wasn't a big it when I didn't like anybody else. What Scientologist, right? Because that's what something I was very much a big it. And she knows it. Who else is that? Greta Van Sustrin. She's Dean. Greta Van Sustrin. Danny Masterson. Laura Prepawn. He was on the 70s show. Oh, yeah. She's in, Laura Prepawn. Julia Lewis her brother, like Phil Lewis. She says, she said a wedding. Her Julia Lewis is brother who I grew up with, like Phil, okay, in the Scientology community. He was filming a wedding. He was a center like, you know, doing the video. He literally ran from me and my husband on a wedding. And he was videoing the wedding. So whatever that shot was. And my husband even said to him a lot like he said, he goes, Hey, like Phil. And he ran and that other band member was going to go singing. Right. He, the other band was like, is he okay? And he's like, oh, he's just saying, toologists. Who else is wrong? Well, I'm ignorant as to how many celebrities are Scientologists. I don't know. Back. Well, I'm trying to say. That's a weird one. Why? Well, because he's a musician. You know, and he's like, uber creative. You would think that person's like super open mind that he comes out with a song like, I'm a loser, baby. So why don't you kill me? Did he do that? So song. Are you sure? I'm a loser. That's him. So why don't you kill me? Yeah. That's him. I love that song. It's back. It's like a big hit. Are you sure? 100%? Okay. Okay. You know what? I mean, this one's saying yes. So I believe him because he seems backish. Yeah. Like a fact, like he would be a nine inch nails. That's Jamie. He wears Zeezy's. Or Bailey. Look at him. So do you. Who else? Who else is in deep? Jenna Elfman, right? Jenna Elfman. She's still in deep. Whatever. What happened to her? Uh, she had that big show. I don't know. We all go up and down in our careers. You know, that's the way too is like I love how the church tries to measure like she's an actress past her time. I was like, Oh, I church says, oh, yeah. I was on my website. How's anyone past their time if you're still alive and acting, right? I mean, Betty White's not past her. But I was, I was famous enough when I was in. Right. Oh, now you're past your time. That's what they're saying about you. Oh, hilarious. And by the way, you can't measure Pete. Like we have an up and down career. That's right. It's our life. But, but I don't, I don't need to work. I want to work. I love what I do. I love acting. I love making people laugh, but I don't need to do it. You only need one solid hit in your life. You know that. Right. Um, this is my passion. This is something that I always wanted to do as far as helping people. This is why I was in Scientology. I loved helping people. it was everything to me. If somebody needed help, I was there. I just love it. Um, that's why I know like to talk shit about these people, I know in their hearts, they really believe they're helping, even attacking me as hell. Right. So I don't really want to call these people out like this Pacific, but, but at least have the balls to back it up when you see me. So you believe they just have misguided intentions, but their intentions are correct as you did at one point to see your uniquely quiet. I would call anybody a liar, a bigot. I would tell the zineu story is a lie. It's crazy. You sound crazy. What is the zineu story? This is the story. This is how they got to be attached to our bodies. The zineu story is they got package. What is it? You can go to the fall into a volcano. They got dropped into a volcano. I think I, yes, they got packet. Like there was a planet that existed like this. It looked like this. And then the, the, the, the, um, the Lord zineu thought that there was too many people on the planet. So he packaged all these people up. Is that okay? It's tough. No. I think this is O T three stuff. O T three. And then what what happens? Like an O T eight did you hear me? I'm out now. Yeah. So hold on. So you were told from the very beginning in Scientology that you have a reactive mind. Hmm. And so in Dianetics, you are running out these bad experiences that you've had. Maybe this lifetime, maybe last lifetime, maybe lifetimes ago. So you're, you're told that you have a reactive mind and we're going to take it away. We're going to find it. We're going to take it away. So you don't even know that you haven't. So you're told you have it. Right. So you run all these like things, these incidents. Like you'll get a picture in your head. Oh, I'm getting a picture that I was like a French, medieval times, whatever. They're like, that's okay. You don't have to believe it. Just say it. Just say what it is. Yes. And then I was burned at the stake. I was a witch. Obviously I was in Salem. And I was burnt because I have a problem with fire. You know, and you're making up these things as you go. And then you're like, I think I'm making these up. And then there's a policy that says the person's going to say by Alon Harbor that they're making it up, but they're not making it up. These are real pictures of real past lies. I don't know. Right. Okay. By the time you get to O T eight, you're told, okay. So what wasn't true? All of that was a law. You made that up. But what is like, what aren't you? So I'm not a, I'm not a body. I'm not a arm. I'm not a this. I'm not, I was never Louis. The, I was never that guy that I said. I was never a witch in Salem. I was never. So that's what O T eight is that you're basically told what, what wasn't true. What are you? Like, what are you really? I'm just me, is the answer. How did your mom get out? My mom got off that ship and she said, I'm never going back. Why is that? Another thing. Because she thought it was bullshit. But she thought it was okay when you were going through your O T three thing and there's plenty of you covered with bugs that are. You're not ready. You're not, not bugs. You don't think I'm just trying to do any to go back. Maybe do we need to do that? No, we don't. But I'm laughing. Um, little beings, not bugs. Right. Right. Got it. Okay. Um, so your mom got all the way past that. Yes. And something she decided at one point time, it's bullshit. It wasn't for me. What was it that she decided? She couldn't tell me that if she would have told me that, that would have stopped me from going, they would have pulled me in a meeting. So when did she think it was bullshit? I don't know, T. But she got to the top. But she can't tell me she thinks it's bullshit. I'm still coming up behind her. Right. If I, that if she then pulled me in and said, Leah, this is bullshit, like I don't want you to continue, then I would have turned her in. I would have. Oh, you know, saying it would have, they would have gone to work on me and your mother, you need to connect from your mother. She didn't want me to disconnect from her. That's so kind of of losing her family. So you learn to be quiet. It's so complicated. It is complicated. And it takes years and years of this. You don't just, it doesn't happen overnight. So your mom got to OTA. So she had to go to the ship. Yeah. And is it the wackiest of the wacky when she got to there? And she's like, this is nonsense. I'm done. She was just happy to be done. Finally. It was almost like she was free. Wow. Yeah. So what happens when she left? Did they go, hey, where you going? No, no, after you're done, they let you off the ship. Right. You complete it. You get a cert. And that's it. And then you don't have to go every day anymore? No. And now, but they're created more OTA levels now. So she would have been called back in. They created more. Yeah. So it's a date. You know, like, look, we just went to the vault. Right. You uncovered a scroll. Right. We found some writings of Elrond Hubbard before he passed. And sort of God. It's not even a lie. And you believe in it. Jodel because I feel bad for like, I feel bad for people. I did too. Looking back, I go, you know, we were all went into it like with a good heart. Like, we believed what they were saying. It was like, what do you mean you just found it? Elrond Hubbard said it was the end of the bridge. It was OTA. And we spent our whole life doing this. Like, you want there to be a definite end. Right. You know, so you could live your life a little bit. Just incredible that a science fiction writer could create something like this that's so poorly written poorly thought out. We only knew of his science fiction writing like from him telling us, but it wasn't like we were faint, like new Elrond Hubbard as a science fiction writer. But it must be in some knowledge of it. Otherwise, battlefield earth would have been all of course. They have a whole building on, they have a whole literary building on Hollywood Boulevard called Arthur Services. And it's all dedicated to Elrond Hubbard's publishing. And you walk in, you think this man is a serious right? Like this is somebody who was really well accomplished in the world. For people don't know, he wrote more books and wrote more stuff than more fiction than any human being that's ever lived ever. Is that true? Yes. He wrote more fiction than anyone who has ever walked the face of the place. He made up made up more shit than anyone who ever lived. So he wrote down more shit that never really happened than anyone who ever lived. But the Scientology stuff he was talking truth about. But you don't make that you don't think that you don't make that distinction. You're reading dynamics because it's a self-help book like you were searching for something bigger. Most people are looking for that. And so when you read that book and you're like, oh, I could cure myself with psychosomatic ills. Right. Well, he's, that was a big part of going clear. Is that it seems pretty obvious that he was going through some issues himself and he was trying a self-diagnosis. Like you heard himself of blindness, he said. So, and you believe it. You want to believe it. You want to believe like I can cure myself of things. I am the cause of my own well-being by my own thoughts. And I don't want this reactive mind. And you know, that makes sense. Right. When people say, have you ever done anything that is uncontrollable to you that you know is damaging to you and you're like, yeah, every day, I don't want to make bad decisions. Well, that's because it's your reactive mind. Right. It's beneath you. It's in your subconscious, deep in your subconscious. And we're going to help you find those areas and we're going to help you to stop making bad decisions. And who doesn't want that? Right. And you believe it. You know, you go from maybe, you know, punching somebody in the face, you know, for looking at you a certain way to being able to control your emotions. You're like, oh, okay, maybe this is working. Oh, okay. I used to do drugs. Now I don't, you know, in cursey's case, it saved your life. So if she believes it, it saved your life, it saved your life. I'm not taking that away from her. I'm not taking away your gains and your wins. But don't take away the fact that you know, I'm telling the truth. And don't come from me when you know I'm telling the truth because then we do have a fucking problem. Well, it seems like, yeah, I mean, they're a clan, you know, and you are opposing the clan. You know, they know it's true. Right. I have a listen, if you didn't know it's true, then I'm like, oh, she's unaware. She knows it's true. So to come for me is kind of crazy. It is kind of crazy. Right. What is the predominant criticism amongst these people? They're not, they can't say you're lying, right? Yes, they say I'm lying. About what? All lying, baby, not just me. We're all lying. Any person who's spoken out against the church is lying. We are bigots. We are invalidating their religious beliefs. We are telling them that something didn't help them. We're not nobody saying that. Nobody said, if you feel you've been helped, you've been helped. However, you know the truth. And now you have a responsibility. But what they think is, I don't want to have a problem. Scientology helps me. And so that's all I care about. You don't give a shit about abuses. You don't care that children were being molested. And these things were being hidden. You don't care that we're being molested. Honey, if you even just Google that what I just said, Scientology and child, I'll say you will come upon website after website of people saying I was molested while I was in the church. And the church did nothing about it. I'm not alleging it. This is what I've read. This is what I've seen. Right. And I've been in I hadn't heard that. Well, you're going to you can hear it. You're going to hear it because people are becoming more and more vocal about what's happened to them. And so if I seem overly passionate about this subject, it's because I have heard these stories over and over again behind the scenes. I have heard stories of people being abused, children being abused, mentally, physically, sexually. And I'm only me with a show, you know, A and A can't do anything other than just let me tell these stories. Right. So I'm virtually and Mike Rinder and other avenues that we really can't talk about. I'm trying to do something right by these people. And so the last thing that I want to be bothered with is bullshit from a celebrity who knows that we're telling the truth about what we have already spoken about, but to be interested enough to maybe find out what I am talking about now. Right. Well, the Grinnoff hand Sustron one is really odd because she's a news person. She's supposed to be a television news journalist, right? I mean, is that what she does? I don't know. Yes, but why? Why is that? Because I would just assume like you would want your news from someone who doesn't believe a bunch of wacky shit. Well, that I'm in her defense. I mean, who knows what any person believes. True. However, the distinction that I'm glad you did make is when you are hearing about abuses, when you are hearing about things that are happening that are hurting people, you then do need to say, I'm aligned with this organization. And so I do need to find out. Right. How long has she been in it? I think most of her life. There's a lot of people like that, right? Get in the doctor name as a child. Yes. Have you received emails or any sort of contact from people who your show benefited? And it was the catalyst for them leaving a lot. No, for leaving. No, we've received tons of emails with people who said, I'm glad you told me that I'm glad I watched your show. I'm well informed now. I will never step into a church of Scientology. What about people leaving? Because you're not getting Scientologists watching the show. Right. You know, I know they have shows, right? They do have TV. You don't have to be on the front. Well, average Scientologists do, but they're not watching shows like this. They'd have to pay for that. Literally, Joe, like you'd have to go in the next day and pay to have your own interrogation and punishment handed to you for watching your show like hours or going clear. After a while, you just go, I don't want the punishment, especially if you believe that I am the devil. If you believe that I am a liar, that I have crossed over to another side, that I'm not to be listened to, why would you support somebody who was talking should about you and your faith or your family and people you love? Would you go out of your way to listen to them? Maybe. But the average person doesn't want to seek out things that they think are damaging to them. What kind of blowback have you received from this? And what kind of blowback is a guy like Paul Haggis or Lawrence Wright or any of these people? Well, Paul had to watch his family go on his hate website that the church of Scientology created and watch his family talk about him. Because they're still in it. Because they're still in it. Disconnect from him. As every single person who's been on the show, they've been followed. They've been harassed. They've been, they've got PIs following them. They have people showing up at their jobs. They're getting mail, like people who are people who don't even have never stepped into a church or getting mail connected to me, mail at their house. I mean, like have never stepped into a church of Scientology. The girl does my eyebrows. She's like, I don't know. I said you never stepped into a church of Washington. She said never. She's getting mail for the first time in the church of Scientology. It's just crazy. But that's just a little anecdote. But to have your family make videos of you, to not talk to you, to refuse to see you, their own grandchildren, that that's just something I can't deal with. But also now what I'm dealing with now is hearing stories of these people who have been silenced for years, the pain that they've had to deal with and sustain through these years, the fact that they're normal in any way is a miracle. And so I hope to do something with them. And I hope to make some change. What are the positive aspects of Scientology? And how do you think it benefited you? And do you think it's possible to take some of those positive aspects and either reform that organization or form another organization that doesn't try to control people's thinking, but maybe positive, maybe tries to encourage the positive benefits of being a part of a group. I couldn't promote anything good about it because I know it's an all-in proposition. Right. But isn't it? But isn't there some benefits? Read books. You can use buy the books if you want to buy the books. But I mean, I don't think it's, I, you know, going to a therapist now when I bring up concepts and she's like, oh, yeah, that was in psychology. My, it's like one, you know, I'm like, what? Right. A lot of it is from a lot of us from this existed. Yeah. You know, um, so yeah, but I believe in, you know, um, finding things that work for you. I don't think it's one thing. The one thing that my therapist is teaching me is that it's not just one thing. You know, you get something from here. You get something from there. It's knowledge is Scientology is not about knowledge is. It's about us. And this therapy thing is very new to you. You never went through any therapy. No, it's one of my first thing that I said to her is I just want you to know that I think I know more than you. I was taught, I was taught as a Scientologist that you are, you have wasted your life going to college. Uh, I could do for a person in five minutes on this e-meter, what you're going to do with me in an, you know, in five years. Like I went to a therapist, I understand. I understand. I understand that you feel that way. And she said, uh, you know, that, spirituality and religion should have nothing to do with the ego. Like it does stay with me for second because I have a huge ego. She's right. She's right. Scientologists believe that they have the answers. And when you believe that you have shut yourself off to, uh, the fruits of observation to experiencing other people, opening your heart up to things. I mean, it's, it shuts you off completely. So you feel like this is a part of you that you're re-explan- experiencing other people opening your heart up to things. I mean it's it shuts you off completely. So you feel like this is a part of you that you're re-exploring or exploring maybe for the first time? The non-colonial thing is like I'm so judgey about it but I'm willing to maybe change my mind. My non-colonial thing. I'm sure you've seen that video of Tom Cruise that where it's got the mission impossible sort of soundtrack playing the background. He's talking about a car accident. Have you stumbled upon a car accident? Like you know that you are the one who has to take care of because you're a Scientologist. You don't want to can handle that. And you believe that when you're a Scientologist. You are not only you are taught that we are the only ones doing anything. That you are the only ones. That's why it was so shocking to me when no one in my church was willing to stand with me. I was like wow so we are not those people who stand up. We're the people who look the other way because you all look in the other way because the time because of Dave Muscavage because you have no bulls. Really? Are we those people? Because the truth of the matter is when there was an accident Joe I did stop. I am that person that stops and say that. So that's one of the positive benefits of Scientology that did. Well you feel that you're responsible for everything. And you felt like you wanted help as well. You felt like you could help and you wanted to help. That's a positive thing right? And all Scientologists do think they're right. So there's got to be some that like I want to think that I found about a lot of Scientology. That's a huge ego. If you think you're the only one doing anything by the way there are other people who stopped. But I believe in my I believe that it was because I was a Scientologist that I stopped. Right. But then I saw in life I was like wait a minute there's good people in the world. They have no interest. No ulterior motive, no vested interest in helping somebody. Right. They're like a little shocked like with the show. That's why like in the last episode I was in tears. I was a mess because I was shocked by the goodness of people that I thought the world was so screwed because of Scientology because I thought we were the only good people in the world. Do you see what I'm saying? It sounds so stupid in juvenile. It doesn't though. It completely makes sense. And honestly from someone who's lived their entire life indoctrinated in that ideology and you've only been out for four years. You're showing a remarkable amount of self insight and a remarkable amount of ability to examine the flaws of your past thinking. And current. Yeah. And current. Yeah. Because every day I'm like that's really messed up. But to abandon the foundation that you've kind of established your entire life on, it's got to be insanely difficult to do it in your 40s after all these years have been involved in this crazy sort of organization. It's very it's very admirable. It's very hard. It'd be way easier for you to just keep staying inside your comfort zone. Keep doing all your nonsense. Get up to O.T. 55 or whatever the fuck it is now. And just keep paying the money and keep your friends. Right. Do you miss any of your friends that were in it? No, I only miss the children of like my god daughter. And you know, because I see her, she lives in my neighborhood. And she can't talk to you? Well, her mother can't talk to me. She doesn't know me now. I delivered her, you know, delivered her on the hospital. And then we moved my friend close to me down the street so that she could be in a certain school district. And then I'd be able to be my god daughter. And I see her in the neighborhood. And she can't talk to me. So the girl, you know, my god daughter doesn't know me. She wouldn't know to come to me because she's now only, you know, five, six, you know what I'm saying? Right. How would they hang on? How do they how they stand? They have amassed $3 billion in assets. $3 billion. Yes. And so it takes it's going to take a few good men and women to stand up with us and get interested. You know, like I said, there's been a few public figures to publicly come out. You're now one of them. Conan is another one and, you know, Bill Mar, like there's some people with some bulls that are willing to say, this is bullshit. And we should be doing something about it. The world at large is supportive of me and the people who are contributing to the show. Amazingly supportive. Social media has been amazing to us. And as well, you need very brave to do a show like this. It's a first time of its kind. I mean, a series about it. It took some bulls in their part. They put it out with the disclaimers, but okay. I think they probably had to do that for a little. I think they probably had to defend them. So I think more and more people are coming out. More and more people are being supportive. But we need more people in the public eye to say, that's this is enough. We need to do what has it been like doing press for this and promoting it? Like what have been the varied reactions from people that you've had talked to? No, I'm very, it's not been varied. It's been very supportive. And beyond touch by it, like, you know, I didn't know what I was going to get. I didn't know if I was going to get people who were going to, you know, kind of walk the line and go, well, I don't know. You know, I mean, the one problem I had was we'd be in because I felt, Dan knew enough. Dan was provided with enough. We've talked to him in Dan Harris, you know, from 20 years. He's like, he's like, kind of, I was like, we can't be impartial about things. We shouldn't be impartial about like, come on, there's some things in the world you need to stand up to, right? And I want people to feel that power, whether it's this cult or other cults or a political party or agenda, like I feel people have the power to do something. I think that's becoming more and more evident. And I think people need to start standing up for what they believe in. They can do something. And we get asked that all the time, like, what can I do? I say, call your congressman, call them and say, I want you to look into this. I want you to do something about this. If you're a lawyer who could do something, you should contact us. If you're somebody who has knowledge of something that could help us prosecute, you need to come forward. Because a lot of the stories that we told, the statute of limitations on these abuses have already passed. And it's their words against, you know, 100 others. Like, let's say we walked in right now to that base that I was telling you about. Most of them wouldn't leave. They don't know what's going on out here, babe. They don't know that what's there being told is not happening. You know what I mean? They don't know. So I would love to do that. I would love to walk into those gates with the FBI and say, hey, you all who want to come with me, come with me now. And we're going to take care of you. And I've asked Mike Rinder that many times. And Mike said, they won't go with you. I'll stand there and say, what are you talking about? You know, you've been beaten. I beat you. You beat me. He beat people and saying, well, yes, he got to beat people. He had to rough some people up. And he admits in in the show. But not you, you didn't beat anybody. Did you have to smack anybody around me? In general, because I did, I have been into a few fights. How do you clubs? You've been in fights and clubs. But you don't drink. Well, I did drink, Joe. You did bad things while you're in in the group. I did. And you got lit up and out cracks of people. Yeah, but that's because I'm from Brooklyn. Um, I blame, I blame Brooklyn. That's strange. I can't play anybody myself in my bad attitude. But did they ever make you smack anybody or anything like that? No, it's not about smacking. It's about, but he had to do that. Right. He had to beat people. David Miscavige on this is what they they have said. And he said it under oath. Um, David Miscavige under his direction has, um, and they and they have admitted to that. But where they admitted it, uh, there'd be 20 people who said they're lying. Now, is this like a punishment thing? Like are they flogging these people? Or is it like a, they had a policy called overboarding when the ship was, um, where the sea work, uh, and they would overboard somebody who was at a launch. So throw them overboard. Correct. And so now you toss them in the water. Right. And so now you don't have overboarding because you don't have ship. Right. Well, when you say it toss them in the water, they pull them back out or fuck you swim. So I'm sure they threw them a line. I'm sure, you know, yes, they got back on the boat, but it was a a form of punishment. Right. It was rewarding. Yeah. Um, now they've just assimilated that to be like, we don't have a boat. So it might as well crack them in the mouth or break his finger. They don't have a boat anymore. No. Well, they have the free ones, but they don't have a sea work ship like they used to. Now they have bases. You know, they sell Liberty Center. I don't know. Celebrity Center. They have been actually a big factor. Like what would happen to the boat? Why do you have to mess with the boat? Because they feel like that would be a cool thing to own on the old side. How did you boat go in parties? No, this is this where they told the people about OT sex right in here. Okay. Do you remember when I said that there was the Apollo? Okay, Joe, do we need to? There was a boat that's what started the sea work. No, I understand. It was called the Apollo. Yeah. Where they give OTA. Mm hmm. It's called the free ones. They still have that. That's a different boat. Yes. Okay. That boat's still around. That boat's still around. Where's that boat? So you can buy that boat probably in the Bahamas. Oh, that's where they go. It's a good place to party and learn about the internet. They eat and it's not partying. Okay. Yeah. No partying at all. No party. But when they do have a party, yeah, because they have a big old celebration. Like I saw the one celebration. Like I would go to the gala every every year at Apollo. Yeah. To celebrity center. And what what happens there? We listen to speeches about how much Scientology is accepted in the community by the LAPD. And the LAPD talks. Uh huh. LAPD. So they can share a bunch of money to the LAPD. Yes. They give they give they started a thing called the police activities fund. Uh, sorry, the police and I and I contributed to it and I helped it and I they put on us to show for the kids every Christmas at celebrity center and they give them money. The proceeds to what they created, which is called the police activities league. And they present the the LAPD with money for children. Well, that sounds great. It's great. But it's it's the right listen. It's purposeful. Right. There's the policy called safe pointing, uh, the community. And that's what they're doing. And I didn't. So I know what it's about. Right. You appear as if your intentions are pure so that you then have maybe favors like this happening where somebody follows a police report and you get screwed with God. Where do you think this is going? Like, where do you what do you anticipate your battle with this? I don't have a battle. I hope that be kind of do. Um, no, because I I Joe, if you receive the calls that I receive, like, when I when I'm not working on the show, because you know, I'm executive producer of the show. So they're not safe to just call anybody. Then I'm going to call a knee. It's my me and my it's where the one who have to vet these stories and kind of people trust us because they know we're telling the truth and they know that we have their best interests at heart and telling the story correctly. Right. Um, and when you talked these people when I talk to them behind the scenes, it's it takes every piece of me not to break down. I have to be kind of, uh, their auditor, you know, I mean, they're saying, I can tell you all to keep my shit together. But when I hang up, I'm devastated by it. I'm devastated by it. Like, I've been part of this thing. You know, I mean, like I'm not getting teary. I'm talking about it now. How many people are in it? Maybe 10,000 worldwide. That's it? Well, it gives the appearance because I thought like at these big events that the shrine auditorium that they have every year, right? They show what Scientology is doing and they use things like hundreds of millions and these really kind of of electrifying statistics, right? And we bought this building and we bought that building and that went into Kate growth, right? That's the subliminal message to you, you know? Yeah. There's people in there, but there are just buildings. And but you believe that those buildings are being built in buildings. Well, they have to have a tax purposes, right? And the appearance that it's growing. Wow. But it's what, but they have to get offload some of this money. Do you have an endgame with all those? My endgame is just to tell these people stories to validate their pain is real. I'm not going to let the church bully them or Scientology bully them into believing that they made it up, that they're out to get money or you don't make money doing this show. Right. You know, I'm not saying. And how long are you doing it for? Like, how many? I don't know. I don't know. I really do. How many episodes have you done? We've only done eight and then two specials, you know, like some, you know, the Reddit specials that we've done. But, you know, there's a whole other there's a lot of stories to be told. I didn't even scratch the surface. So how many stores are we going to tell? I don't know. What's my endgame? My endgame is that these stories get out there that people get incense enough or this church. Well, it's just I have to calling a church. This organization is held responsible for the things that they have done. And they stopped destroying families. I mean, there's so many tears to it that I don't know where it ends. I don't know where it ends. But somebody... So there's no plan as far as I come up to tell you. You're going to stop hurting people. That's it. You're going to take some responsibility for what you've done. These stories are real. These are not liars. People don't say they were hurt and molested. They don't go on television for fame to say they don't get money from doing that. They don't get money from doing that. Who wants to go on television and say I was coerced into getting an abortion? And who does that for fame? Really? Joe? I was hit. I was abused. I was sexually molested. I allowed this to happen. These things are not easy for people to admit to. Right. You know, you think it's easy for me to say I was, you know, I believed in this my whole life. That my mother believed in it, her whole life. That my stuff... Like we gave our life to this thing. Well, you're very fortunate. Your mother made it out too. Oh, my goodness. God, I've been here a little time. I should go. Yeah. And I'm sweating. That's okay. We'll wrap this up. But you know how I feel about sweat. Like I can't even wait to get the shirt off. You know like sweat? Well, it depends. I mean, if... Well, I do like sweat, but I don't like it when I'm dressed. Okay. All right. You like naked sweating. Congratulations on that. But I think... I think you're very brave. I think what you're doing, not just didn't... It's like what you're doing with your show, but the way you're admitting your own personal demons and the battles that you're having with your own mind trying to sort of reformulate your view of the world and figure out who you are. Thank you, you know. I think... Thank you. It's very important. So thank you for your view here. Thank you, baby. And honestly, I really thank you for having me because it's that it doesn't come without summary precautions to you. I'm sure. But I want you to know that I appreciate it. I really do. Listen, my pleasure. And let's say hi again and not over some whackiness like this after all these years. It's been funny. I've seen you in so long. I gotta tell you, the seven minutes before we started this, we had a very funny conversation. It was very funny. No, seriously. We talked about it all the year. What I thought for sure now. No, yeah. Oh, yeah, for sure. But I think there's something there. I don't know. There's something funny about what we're talking about. Not really going to say what was it? What was it? What was it? Jels, smells and things. Oh, smells and things. Periods. Good night, everybody. Leah Remney. Your show, when it's not. Well, it's done now. Yeah, but what Oh, I think you could see it online. Well, it's on A&E all the time. They show it constantly. It was on just a couple nights ago. Yeah, so I'm so glad. Yeah, they're there in the show that about. Yeah. So if people want to follow any of this is their website, they can go to... Yes, I think they can go to eight. Look, I should have seen the names right. Don't find it. Good. Cool, but folks, thank you. Thank you very much. Bye, everybody.