Joe Roman Feignon. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan Podcasts, by night! All day! Why would I hit my tattoos? Because you get older and they get all smudgy and... Why not gettin' down smudgy? Yeah, well, I'm not gonna... Look at this one. It's pretty smudgy. It's pretty smudgy. I owned a tattoo parlor and... My year was mid-80s and they were illegal in Indiana. But because it was me, they said, okay, leave them on. Really? I remember when they were illegal in New York. I went to Connecticut to get my first tattoo. Yeah, I... I didn't know it was illegal, but I met this guy in LA and... He worked at Sunset, you know, where the high-at-house is and never sat at two parlor right across the street. Anyway, he was there. And... So I brought him to Bloomington because you wanted to get out of LA. And guess why they closed me down? Why? Fucking guy was a heroin addict. I know. And he did this tattoo one time and I went over... I just remember the shot by said, hey, let's do this little... And he was all fucked up. And it was just like, what's wrong with it? You know, because I didn't know. I don't know anything about heroin addicts. So... There wasn't a lot of heroin addicts back then. That was a rare thing. Now, we think about how many people are... Because of the Sackler family. I think how many people are hooked on opiates today. I mean, it's gotta be. Lots. It's off the charts in comparison to what it was like in, you know, the 1980s. I mean, I knew one guy that had a friend who did heroin. That's it. Well, I was there... The first time I saw somebody do heroin was... I was in college and there was a place called Bull Island. That tried to imitate Woodstock. And me and my... Then wife and my kid and my little girl. And my roommate who lived with us, we're just walking down here and we see this guy shooting up. So we just thought, well, we'll watch. Because he was just sitting right there. I mean, there was like 200,000 people there. And he shot and he went out. And I never looked at the guy I was going to go, well, we won't be doing this. We're not gonna do this. I had a friend who was a longshoreman and he worked with this guy that every lunchtime he would go and score and sit in his truck and shoot up. And that's what he did every lunch. He was a functional heroin addict. And he was show for work every day and he did his job. But during lunchtime, during his hour, he would do heroin and just fucking find his happy place and then an hour later go back to work. And the one shot that last all day. I don't know. I don't know if he did heroin. I didn't ask if he did heroin after that as well. I'm assuming he probably did. But he was a functional heroin addict. Like, I kept a full job. He was in the union. And everybody knew. The guy would go on his break, shoot up. Last time I did drugs was 1973. What was the reason you stopped? My ear? Yeah. Yeah. Well, I used to like to smoke and drink whiskey. And then I like to fight. Oh, that's problem. I couldn't whip anybody. I couldn't. I couldn't. I couldn't. But I loved the contact and the rush of like, you know, starting to fight. But so I was in college and my roommate and I went to this downtown bar, which we never meant to. And I sat at the bar and I would start these fights. You know, just I was sitting next to this big guy. And for whatever reason, I thought it was a good idea if I'd spit on him. Oh, one of those guys, you know, you know, those guys that get doing it. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that was me. So I did. And we went out back and he left me in the alley like a wet rag. I mean, he beat the shit out of me. Beat the shit out of me. And I was a hippie. I had hair down to here. And the guy in my roommate was driving me home in a no-pinto. And I was leaning on the door like this. I was so fucked up from getting beat up. I mean, the ores around my face were this big. And I was leaning on the door and all of a sudden he went over a railroad track. And I fell out of the car. Got my hair wrapped around the jig of the flop that holds the car. And the guy that I'm with drunk driving, he didn't even know I fell out of the car. And I'm going to stop the car. So he didn't even know. And so I got up the next morning and I looked at myself. And I was unrecognized. But I had road drives on my arms. My knees were all fucked up. My face was beat up from the end. And I just said, you know, this drug and alcohol thing is not working for you. And so I went and got all my hair cut off. Not as sure as yours, but not much longer. And that was it. Well, you found your rock bottom. Yeah. That's what they say. I would say you need to find rock bottom. I would never imagine that you would be the type of guy that would fuck with people at a bar and spit on somebody and start to fight. It just, you just don't seem like that at all. Well, I grew up in a small town. And there was not much to do in a small town. You know, you would either find a girl or a fight. I figured you for the find the girl cup guy. Well, you know, I was, I did okay with that, but it didn't always work. So yeah. Yeah, it was like, don't forget Joe. It was like 1967, 66. You weren't even born yet. I was born in 67. Yeah. So this was like 1967. Wow. So, you know, so from that time on until I turned 21, I was 21 when I quit using drugs and quit smoking, quit drinking. Wow. So nothing since then? Not a drop. That's impressive. Not a drop. Well, you know, I think I thought about it. And I think that I didn't really like it that much. You know, as much as I thought I did. We certainly didn't like the results. Right. One bad result. Well, do you think it's straight? Yeah. What do you mean? Yeah. You were a big part of my high school experience. It was interesting because you, your song sort of introduced the idea of nostalgia to me. You know what that mean? Well, when you were singing songs like Jack Diane, I was kind of realizing as I was a very young guy, listening to those great songs that there's going to be a, like this is a weird time in life. And there's going to be a time where you're going to look back on this. And it's probably one of the best times of your life, but even though it doesn't feel like it. It felt, you know, felt confusing and weird. And I remember thinking at the time like, my God, like, is this as good as it gets? You know, some people look back on this weird, confusing time of adolescence as the happiest moment of their life. I'm like, I can't wait to get the fuck out of this time of my life. And it's like, you know, you were singing from a position of like an every man position of, you know, you were, you were singing the, there were great fucking songs that heart and it was, it was soul to them, but it was like, it was a lot of sadness. You know, a lot. Oh, yeah, life goes on long after the thrill of living is gone. And I was like, Oh, Jesus Christ, life's going to go. This is it. This is it. This is it. This is it. Well, I listen, I struggled with that. Probably like you did, or he did. You know, there's a point in a man's life where he feels like, it's like, it's like it'd be more to life than this. I mean, I had huge hit records and, you know, very, very, very, very lucky, very lucky. You know, everything was just, you know, just, it's just lucky. And I would go home and I would think, I'm not happy. There's got to be more to life than this. And then guess what happened? I got a little bit older and I found out there's not. And I'm good at it. I'm good at it. So, you know, we're only on this earth for a few minutes, quit feeling sorry for yourself, quit being confused and accept your responsibilities and try to, you know, maintain some humility, which was a million miles away from me spitting on people. Right. What didn't you enjoy about being this enormous rock star in the early days of MTV? I mean, you were a rock star when it became a totally different thing because it was like this visual thing that was in everyone's household now. It wasn't as simple as, no, you were on the tonight show and you would sing this musical segment and people have to go see you live to go see you perform. Well, I know you got to see of guys in rock bands or album covers. You know, you would go to a record store and file through the records and if you liked the way a band looked, you would buy the record, at least I would. I would too. And so, I forgot the question. Well, I was just saying like what was not good about that? I mean, what was that experience like being this enormous rock star that left you feeling like you wanted more that you weren't happy? I think that for me, I think when that happens, it's the age you're at and I think it's a chemical imbalance in our brain. And as we grow older, it kind of finds its way. And like I said, I just woke up one day and just went, hey, this is all there is, except it and try to show some humility and try to be good at it. And I never thought about it again. That's interesting. Well, you're a snap out of a type of guy, right? You snapped out of drugs and alcohol. You snapped out of film sorry for yourself. Yeah, that's a good trait to have. Well, I'm very lucky that I'm just listening to you. You're looking up to luck is fucking guy. You've ever interviewed. I don't give a shit to you, interview it. I'm the luckiest guy, you know. I was born with spine and bifida. Do you know what that is? I don't. That's where you have a hole in your spine and the fluid and all of your nerve endings, like on me. Well, that's crazy. Yeah. That's cars huge. That's 1951. In 1951, you got that operation? I was born with your born with spine and bifida. So what did they do to what was that operation exactly? Well, there's the story. My parents were only 20 years older than me. So I was born to form my parents to know what the fuck to do. You know, what are we going to do with this kid? So they just went like that to my grandmother here. You're taking. And so I was in the hospital and there were four other kids. And there was a young doctor named Heinberger who was just a young neurosurgeon. Don't forget, neurosurgery in 1951 was in its... So he just said, well, we've got to try to do something with these kids. And so he operated on all of us. I was on one that lived. Oh, boy. You know, the fact that... And he charged my parents a dollar for the... Because it was an experiment. I was like a guinea pig. And these other poor kids who had the same thing I did, they all died within, you know, six months. I remember seeing one girl that made it to issues 14. She was in a wheelchair. I would see her basketball games. Parents would go, that's the other little girl that had the same operation you did. And then she died. So my whole life has been full of luck. I mean, I'm not supposed to be. What did they do during the operation? What is the procedure? Well, they have to cut your head off for starters. They had to cut my head and lay it open to get to my spine. And then they would push each individual nerve-ending back down into my spine, drain the fluid off, sew it back up, and make sure that everything was working. And they told my parents, you know, look, here he is. He's probably going to die, become get into a phthalitis, and his head's going to fill up with water. We don't anticipate him living much more than six or seven months. And I was, I think I was in fifth grade. I didn't even know I'd had the operation. And some kid in my class said, hey, Malin Camp, what's that big scar in the back here neck? Now we're talking, you know, 1957-5860, maybe. I didn't even know there was a scar back there. You know, wow, I wouldn't like I was going. And my parents never told me. So I came home and I smelled man. I said, dad, what's with the scar in the back of my neck? And he goes, oh, don't worry about it. Yeah, an operation when you were born. So I did it. I played football, my ran track. I fought, you know, I did everything that every other kid did without a thought of that. Not until I got older, and I had started having panic disorder. I was just out of college. I could leave the house. I became what they call, what's that call to Gorofobia? Yeah. Yeah. So I had a Gorofobia for about a year and a half. And then I got a record deal. And I had to leave the house. I mean, I was married in high school. I got married in high school. about a year and a half. And then I got a record deal and I had to leave the house. I mean I was married in high school. I got married in high school. And the girl I was married to was five years older than me. You know. How old were you? 18? 18? Yeah. You had a kid right? You had a kid really young? Yeah. She's 50 something now. I have three girls and two boys. Where are you? Grandfather when you were in your 30s? Maybe. I think you were right. Yeah. And if I'll play offs, let's go. Draft King Sportsbook and official sports betting partner of the NFL makes every moment feel bigger. A running back cuts through the line. A strip sack flips the field. A tight end halls in the kind of touchdown grab you'll talk about for years. Post season games shift fast and with Draft King's live betting options, you can stay right in the moment. Plus Draft King's has your back with early exit protection. If the player in your eligible NFL prop bet goes down at any point in the first half, you still get paid in cash. New customers bet just five dollars. And if the bet wins, you get 300 in bonus bets instantly. Draft King Sportsbook every drive, every play, every moment, download the Draft King Sportsbook app now and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets. If your bet wins in partnership with Draft King's, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called one 800 gambler in New York called 877 8 open wire text. Hopen Y 4 6 7 3 6 9 in Connecticut called 8 8 8 7 8 9 7 7 7 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of boothill casino and resorting Kansas passed through a per-way dirt tax may apply in Illinois. 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Cinnamon odds required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. Because that oldest daughter mine got married when she was like 19. Wow. I'm much doing a small town man. Yeah. I don't know much to do. So that's the spine and biff at it. But it never bothered you again other than the panic. Were you performing when you were having the panic stuff? Oh man. I have been on stage in front of like 20,000 people and had a panic attack. We yeah. It's like I've ever had one. No. You're lucky because you feel like I can't breathe. My chest hurts. And I've seen it. I've seen people have them. It's it's horrific. You're still doing things for them. You're like, okay, you think they're having a heart attack at the time? Yeah. Well, I've been on stage and I remember having to plant my feet and just power through, you know, in front of 20,000 people. It was it was awful. Did it pass while you were on stage? I don't know if it did. I just remember it happening numerous times. And then guess what happened? I had a fucking real heart attack on stage at Jones Beach like 30 years later. Oh, jeez. I know. But you know what that heart attack led to? I was I just married a lane, uh, Earl and we had two little boys and I got to stay home because I said, fuck that I'm going to die. I didn't know about heart disease. I'm going to die. So I want to spend the last couple years of my life with my boys who were little teeny guys, which I want to tell you me a story about them and you. And so I got to actually kind of not be in the music business, which pleased me. How old are you when you had your heart attack? 42. Oh, jeez. And so I got to stay home. I stayed home for three and a half years. A lane didn't model. And we just, you know, we had two of the issues we watched, which is that hurt of in my life. You know, like, hey, it's 39. That's why it's, let's watch this, you know, which is where you come in. So the boys were little and I loved your show. They loved your fucking show. And I was kind of like, I don't know what the kids should be watching this, you know, you talking about fear factor? Yeah. Yeah. I don't know what the kids should be like. So I made a deal with them. All right, you guys, you can watch this show, but you have to watch 60 minutes too. So if you're going to watch this, then you got to watch 60 minutes and they obliged, which surprised the hell out of me. But it was like dad 60, medicine, dad fear factors on. I know. So we would watch it together. I mean, how lucky is that? Well, it sounds like it was a blessing in disguise. Yeah. Well, that gave you pause. You know what luck is? What thinking you're lucky thinking you're lucky? Yeah. What you think about yourself? Oh, come straight. I wrote it in the song once. What you think about yourself will come true. Hmm. So if you call yourself a dumb ass, guess what? You do it enough and you start your brain starts believing it. What caused your heart attack? It's such a young age. Maybe it's stupid. I would go in and to get a physical and they'd go, John, your cholesterol is off the charts. It's at 400 and I would go, am I all right now? And then go, well, yeah, you're all right now. Good. It's not anyone to get on medicine. You know, and statin drugs had just become, even when we were just were invented. You know, at that time, people started to use the stands and I didn't want to take them. I didn't know what they were. But I know all about heart disease now. Can you do any luck? Did you have arterial part? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it runs in my family. I have a sister that has, or she used to. I don't think she does anymore, but her cholesterol is a 500. Imagine. That's like it's crazy. Cholesterol is a very controversial subject now because people are starting to try to sort out what is the actual cause of heart disease. And there's a lot of people that don't believe in this cholesterol. They think it's arterial plaque. And what is this stuff called? Natocunacy. I don't know how to pronounce it. But there's a supplement like an over-the-counter supplement that's supposed to be able to eliminate arterial plaque in a very profound way that they just are in a realize. I don't know. But what's the talking of it? Listen, I was in New York once with a girl, and I went to the doctor with her. She was an actress, and she was getting a physical and she went me to go so I went with her. And she went to the best doctor in New York City. And I found myself along with that doctor. And I said, so the doctor in Bloomington just put me on Metformin. What's the side effects for Metformin? And this guy, Joe, is the big guy. He went long jubilee. And he said, if it was up to me, I'd put the entire United States on Metformin and a statin because the fucking food we eat is terrible. It's processed. It's this and that. You know, and he just said, you know, the human body was not meant to eat the scrap. That's the fact. Yeah. Yeah. I think the solution is probably eating food that you're meant to eat. But Metformin is one of those drugs that longevity doctors recommend. I've never been on it. But I know quite a few people that have, I think it isn't it a diabetes drug initially. Yeah. And my mom died of diabetes. So I was always borderline and I'm still borderline. And this was, she get type one or type two. Well, she started out with two. And then she paid no attention to it, went and taken medicine. We drive by crispy cream. Don't get your dad. Okay. And she'd get a half a dozen, you know, crispy creams that need them. And it's just, you know, that's where it's at. It's the food. It's a horrible thing that we've done to this country. You know, there's, I mean, this is the most controversial thing about RFK Jr. I guess, or one of the most controversial things is the elimination of all the stuff that's already eliminated in a lot of European countries. He's, I had a friend come here from Europe who had not ever been United States and got sick. Just from eating our food. Yeah. It's crazy. Just our bread. What is that that supplement? Yeah. How do I say it? Can you find out what it's supposed to do? Like what? Because there's a recent study. There it is. Okay. So Natto can, yeah, that's it. Natto canay supplementation can significantly reduce the size of existing arterial plaques and slow the progression of our our terriers, sclerosis. I never say that word. Our theory, a theory, or sclerosis. Eth, no, atherosclerosis, whatever, particularly at higher doses. Natto canay son arterial plaque reduction. Multiple clinical trials provide evidence that Natto canays and enzyme derived from fermented Japanese food. Natto has a positive effect on arthereoral sclerosis, hardening and narrowing of the arteries due to plaque buildup. Yeah. So folks, go take that stuff. High dose supplement shrinks arterial plaque by 36%. Very interesting stuff. Yeah. And it's a very common supplement. It's an easy to get supplement and comes from fermented food. Well, you know, if you, you know, I've watched a lot of things about the food that we eat and terrible, terrible. Well, bunch of monsters decided to make more money and the way they make more money is to throw a bunch of preservatives and bullshit and stuff in the food. So it keeps their shelf life as long as possible. Yeah, you've heard those stories about taking a hamburger that you would buy at a very popular store and just putting it in a box and even it for five years and you five years later, it's oh yeah. My, my, some of my grandkids were at my house on, on Dafoski and they had an ice cream sandwich and the only half of it in it's at there for three hours and did not melt. Yeah, I've seen those. Yeah, that's my ice cream. I don't know what the fuck's in there, but it's not regular ice cream. The Burger King or the McDonald's hamburger thing is nuts because what is the longest that that guy? There's one guy that's had one on a shelf at his house for God, I want to say it's close to 20 years or something crazy like that. It's just sitting there and you would think that he got it five hours ago. Yeah, yeah, and we're supposed to be eating that. Yeah, for a lot of people, that's a big portion of their diet is fast food, which is just crazy. You were just sucking down all these chemicals and preservatives because if something cannot rot, you can sit there and not rot. It's a quarter pounds, it's 30 years old. Wow. That is insane. Yeah, that's insane. That's crazy. Wow. Yeah, our food source and I don't know about our kids union. I don't follow what he says or listen. I try not to listen to much politics. Good for you. That's another good way to not have a heart attack. You know, I don't follow what he says or listen. I try not to listen to much politics. Good for you. That's another good way to not have a heart attack. Well, you know, I was a hippie. And I grew up thinking that anybody over 30 was the enemy. Right. And it's kind of like, I remember when Kennedy was shot, I asked my dad, I go, do you know, I was like a kid. I go, do you really think one guy did it? He just looked at me and went, what do you think? And that was the whole, his whole answer. Wow. Well, he knew it back then. And that's interesting. Because it took a long, it took until the Dick Gregory brought the Zapruder film on the Haraldo Rivera show, which is I think it was 12 years after Kennedy's assassination that people realized that he probably had gotten shot from the front. Yeah. Because his head went back into the left. Yeah. And I've seen that. And I remember my dad was a young Democrat. You know, and so he was involved a lot with the Democratic Party back then. And I had asked him questions. And he never would really give me answers. He would just give me looks. Oh, he's got like, and he knew the look. It was just like, what do you think, John? You really think somebody did that? You know, pick it up for yourself. Yeah, not much has changed. And that's why I don't watch. I don't, you know, I used to be very politically minded and cared about what politicians said. I don't get fucked with this. I don't trust any of them. I don't like any of them. Not the man. Like them. Well, it's just that I don't. I, you know, it's just hard to believe anything that anybody says, because everybody's spinning everything in such a way that it's just like for their purposes. You know, so, you know. And unfortunately, we're more aware of it now than ever before. There's less trust in politics now than there's ever been. And then there's more people talking about politics than there's ever been. There's more polarization. I mean, I don't know what it was like when you were a kid. But when I was a kid, there wasn't this polarization between people that were conservative and people that were liberal. Like you could hang out and talk to each other. You didn't, they didn't hate each other. They just thought the other person was a fool for having a different opinion than them. But there wasn't hate like there was today. Well, here's why you got to look at it. This is that when you used to vote, you would go inside a place and they would shut the curtains and you would vote. And that was your fucking business. Yep. Nobody else was business. So like, you know, it's like, you know, I'm for anybody that's doing good. If you're doing good and you're not hurting somebody, go man. But you know, I'm not for cheating and how about a little morality and integrity and what you're saying and doing. That will be nice. It will be nice. Well, it's never been that way. No, never. It's never been that way. I mean, in the in the 60s, when I was a hippie, I mean, people think that this is like really bad. No, it was really bad when fucking Russia had had a missiles in Cuba. And it was really bad when kids with long hair were getting shot at Kent State. I mean, it was really the separation of adults and kids. You know, there was a change that was happening. And of course, the change happened and all my generation did was get to where Blue Jeans were. That was about all the way accomplished. Well, the change was because it was the first generation that realized that the war that they were being sold was bullshit. You know, the people that were involved in World War I, World War II, they thought they were stopping the world from an evil dictator taking over and just ruining the world. That's what we were in World War II. United States is fighting Hitler. You can't get a more evil person. It's leading an army that you want to fight against than that guy, right? So everybody felt like that was a just war. Came back from that war, victorious America had national pride. We did it. We're the good guys. And then also we're in Vietnam. What the fuck are we doing in Vietnam? Didn't make any sense. Back up, Joe. What do you think the Civil War was fought about? Civil War? Yeah. Well, slavery was a big one. No. No. Ports. Ports. They fought. It was fought over ports. The port in Savannah, Georgia was the biggest port in America. And the ports in Boston, New York were struggling. And the north said, hey, why don't you guys send some of that our way? You guys got more than you can handle. And they said, fuck you, no. No, we're not sending you any of our stuff. And they just kind of went, well, then fuck you, we're going to come down and take it. But how are we going to get the American people to get behind that? Slaves will say it's to free the slaves. Really? Yeah. I have a house in the south. And that's what I was about. It was about the ports. Slavery was just in his case because nobody cared about black people. So the north or south? Wow. I think that if they had just spread the wealth a little bit, that that would not have happened in slavery would have still continued. Don't you think that, I mean, there was already a distaste of slavery because it wasn't ubiquitous in the north. But it was. But it was. In the north it was? Yeah. I mean, Lincoln had slaves. Right back then. But not in the 1860s when they were fighting the Civil War. He was president. He had slaves when he was fighting in the war. Yeah. I wasn't aware of that. Yeah. A lot of people in the north so, you know, they weren't at, they hadn't spun it to be so cruel as the south was, apparently. Well there was more in the south, right, because of plantations and you know. So here it is. Abraham Lincoln never personally owned slaves. This is according to perplexity, which is our AI sponsor, which is always very accurate. Either before during his presidency, according to mainstream historical scholarship, claims that he had slaves through inheritance or marriage come from fringe or highly disputed sources and are not accepted by most professional historians. That's me. I'm great. I was born in Kentucky, raised in Indiana and Illinois all as a non-slave owner working as a laborer, a lawyer and a politician. He was a really good wrestler too. Being related to slaveholders did not legally make those enslaved people his property and the best documented homes linking himself, maintaining Illinois and Washington employed free servants, not slaves. Okay. Okay. Let me stop for a second. You can call it what you want. Free servants. Call it what you want. Well, they were free. and they were getting paid as like you said, yeah, the house. It was still a menstrual show no matter how you got it. Okay. Some modern writers and websites argue Lincoln inherited or ordered. This is where the idea Lincoln had slaves came from. Websites argued Lincoln inherited or ordered the sale of slaves via the Tada state, but these claims hinge on a small number of contested documents and are rejected by most specialists in Lincoln studies. Here you go. It's interesting that the fact that we're even talking about it. What's kind of crazy how recent it was. That's really crazy. Oh yeah, I went that long ago. Two people ago, you know, people lived to be 100. Yeah. And 1865 was roughly two people ago. That's fucking crazy. Well, I know that I bet you when you were in school, you thought World War II was ancient history. Oh yeah, which is nuts because I was in high school in the 80s. So World War II ended in 45. It is nuts. Like yeah, I thought it was ancient. I remember sitting in history class in eighth grade going, what do I need to know this ship for? You know, and I was born in 51. So it was only like three or four years and we were just into it. That's nuts. But to me, it was ancient history. Isn't that crazy because essentially what we're talking about now is like the 1980s. Yeah. Well, that to us, the 1980s, like to kids today, they almost feel like, oh my god, fucking dinosaur days. No internet, fucking big old tube TVs. It was a giant box. Yeah. A big one was 14 inches. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I, I remember being at home once and I told my dad, I said, hey, dad, the people down in the street have got like a changer and it's got a core on it. And he goes, I got to change your two, change it to channel four. I would the changer. Yeah, I remember we used to have a pliers because the thing broke up. So you know, change the channel with the pliers. You didn't know what channel it was until like, oh, it's CBS. All right. So we're on five go like this. Then you're on ABC, go like that. You're on NBC. Yeah. Yeah. Remember the day cable came out. I was like, this is fucking bananas. Yeah. Look at all these channels. Well, I remember seeing a home box office all the time. It was like what on earth? I even remember what movie it was. It was some miracle man or something. And I thought what is it? It's past 11 o'clock. And this movie's just starting. Yeah. Yeah. Do you remember in the old days when the TV would sign off an American flag would wave? And it would just play music. And then I would just go, I think well, being in Denver, always show up. Yeah. And then in Denver, always show up. And it had like this. Mm. Mm. Yep. And then it would go to nothing. Yeah. They would stop broadcasting at night. Yeah, 11. Yeah. 11. Those are wild times. Cable changed everything. Home box office changed everything. Because when HBO came around, all of a sudden you got to see stand up comedy uncensored. I remember the first time I watched Sam Kenneson on HBO was like, this is fucking crazy. Yeah. Like I had never seen anything like that before. Like wild, raw comedy. Do you ever know Sam Kenneson? No, I never met him. I did. What was he like? Wild. Yeah, I would imagine. He was very unpredictable, very, you know, he was Sam Kenneson. You know his story, how he became that way? No. Got hit by a truck when he was a little kid. He was real normal. Like a normal kid, his brother Bill wrote about it. His brother Bill wrote a great book called My Brother Sam. And he said that Sam was just a normal kid. Got hit by a truck, got really fucked up, bad brain injury. And then from then on, wild and reckless, just like impossible to control just maniac. You could imagine. I mean, you know, that's, I don't know about you, but if you grew up in the 80s, you know, our parents used to just tell us about that. Yeah. Yep. And we'll see you at dark. Yep. And you know, I could go, I was, I don't know, 10, 9 riding my bike all over Sam there. Yep. Which I grew up and just nobody kept an eye on us. Nope. Nobody, you know. And nobody had any idea of knowing where you are either. It was just your responsibility to come home. There was no way to find you. It was funny. They had to remind us that, remind our parents that you have kids. There was a thing that said, it's 10 o'clock. Do you know where you're children are? Yeah. Because a lot of people didn't. They didn't. And people would yell. They would open up the window and yell their kids name. Billy! I'm just hearing in the neighborhood. Someone like rolling down the window, rolling up the window and just screaming out the kids name to down to come home. I was in the air shot. I remember somebody in my neighborhood. I would hear every night at dark Henry. And I'd hear it and go, I better go home. It was time for Henry Earl to go home. I better get on. What was it like when MTV rolled around? I mean, I liked it. And how long had you been performing by then? Oh, I was in my first band when I was 11. Wow. You know, a little garage band with a bunch of kids playing along with records. And then I was in a band called The Crapes Hole. I think about this show. I was 14 years old playing in bars. Wow! And my parents were cool with it. It was like, first John, he's playing tonight. Playing what? He said, he said in the great soul. Oh. And it was me and a black kid named Fred Booker. And we shared the vocals. And we would do, you know, we would do songs like pool strings and our kiss. Your lips on your puppet. On your puppet. And we had, you know, neighbor jackets on. And I was cute back then. And so, you know, it was great for me. I would have done it for free because I was 14 years old making out with 18 and 19-year-old girls. Wow! I know. It was great. Are you kidding me? And then we played at every fraternity, every sorority. And I came home with maybe, you know, over the weekend I might make 60 bucks. I was the best at Skid School. Wow! That mountain camp kid is just dressed up hood. That's all he is. So did you know back then that you were going to be a professional musician or were you doing it for fun? Did you think it was going to be a career? I thought, here's what I thought. I mean, there are going to be a professional football player, a professional boxer or singer. That was my choice. You boxed? Yeah. Yeah. I will whip your ass right now. That's 74. Is that why you were getting in some of these fights? Yeah, I liked it. Wow. I liked it. I liked the contact. I didn't like it and whipped every goddamn night. But, you know, it happens. Did you have any professional boxing matches? No, but my son, I'm going to brag on my son, was National Golden Globes channel. Wow. And then he played football for Duke. And he was, you know, messed with that. I want to mess with that. And so he's 31 now. When did the music thing really start taking off for you? Well, I went to college and I got a degree in broadcasting technology, which at that time was pretty. And I would have dances at college and bands playing. And I would sit there in the audience and go, I can do this better than that. I know I can. And so as soon as I got out of college, I got into a band called The Mason Brothers. Wish I have so many funny stories. Like I said, I'm so lucky. I got into a band called The Mason Brothers and we played every weekend. I was a bar room singer. You know, I never rode any songs or anything like that. Going to hear a funny story about The Mason Brothers, how The Mason Brothers ended. Yeah. This is good. The guy that ran the band, I was just a singer. And the guy that ran the band was going to Dave. And Dave talked to the booker. And we had a gig on a riverboat up and down the Ohio River. And it was a fraternity show. and we had an old Plymouth and a U-Haul on the back. And we get there. And the guys in the fraternity show are so fucking mad at us. Dave failed to realize that there was a time change between Seymour and Cincinnati, which is on the Ohio River. So all these fraternity guys are going, where the hell have you guys been here an hour late? So it really pissed me off. I go, Dave, God damn it. If you're going to run the band, you've got to keep track of this shit. He said, oh, don't worry about it. And as time went on, and so as you had to do four sets back then, you know, four 45 minute sets, which was plenty of time for Dave to get drunk. And he would drink and he was the bass player. And the fraternity guys already hated us, you know, because we weren't really any good anyway. Dave's playing and he's going along really good. And he was putting on a show and he leaned back and man overboard. He fucking fell off the ship. And yeah, I had to stop and fishing. Oh my God. So I got so fucking mad at him that he said, I said, Dave, I'm going to quit. This is it for me. I'm done with this crap. And then Dave said, no, John, give us one more chance. And then the drummer quit because he went to, he went to medical school and then the guitar player was still high school. Wow. And he was my mom and dad's paper boys. And so Dave said, John, let me put the band back together. I'll get some of the new guys. And I'd call him up. My good Dave has the band going and he'd go, oh, it's going great, man. Really great. I said, good. I said, really these new guys, he goes, you'll see when you get there. Don't worry about it. I got it covered. I said, oh, you mean like you did with the time change? And he goes, no, no, no, these guys are good. So I show up for this gig. I haven't even rehearsed with these guys. Not even rehearsed with them. But it was the same shit, you know? We were just a cover band and I was just to bar room singer. So you know, if you want to see taking care of business, I'm your guy. You know, and Dave Agar, who business, you know, who can't do that? So I show up. Dave has recruited two sophomores in high school who couldn't play their instruments at all. the drummer was like boom, boom crack ass, all boom, boom, and crack. That's all you got to do. And he was, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, look at the whole fuck of time. And so the show was about half over I just said, I looked at Dave and I go, you're the lead singer and I just left because it was just too embarrassing. And then I got, I went, I went to New York and I was afraid. And Joe, I was afraid, I mean I'm from a fucking down 18,000 people. And I'd been Chicago once. I've never been on an airplane. And so I flew to New York because I came into some money. That's another funny story. I came into some money and I went there and I was afraid to come out of my hotel room for the first two days. New York in the early 70s was broke and never prostitutes and pimps and everything everywhere. You know, and homeless people, which reminds me, you guys got a lot of homeless guys here. There's a few. It's not as bad as LA. Well that doesn't. You can say that about anything, Joe. That's true. Yeah. It's a lot better than it was during the pandemic. During the pandemic they allowed them to do the camping on the street thing. So you'd go down like Caesar Chavez and you'd see like 15, 20 tents where people were just hanging out and people were trying to jog and ride their bikes past them. It was pretty bad. But former mayor cleaned it up. And they have pretty good programs here to get people into housing. Everybody here. Everybody here much love. And I'm not putting Austin down. I'm just, I had, you know, I played here about three years ago. But everybody must love graffiti here. And that's the thing about graffiti. I don't mind if you want to destroy somebody else's property. But at least do something original. Right. Because it all looks the same. You know, it's big letters and outlined and it's done in black and outlined in yellow. And it's the same fucking shit you see in New York or Los Angeles the same. Right. If you're going to be an artist, be an artist. Well, a lot of these guys are just tagging. They're just like sister gang affiliation or whatever it is. I guess. I don't know. Yeah. But it wasn't that way first time I came to Austin. No. Well, I think all cities have deteriorated. But I think Austin's deteriorated quite a bit less. We found it recently that Skid Row in LA is 50 blocks. 50 right now. Right now. 50 blocks of homeless people just living on the streets. And like almost impossible. Like if you've ever been down Skid Row, it's fucking, I went there once accidentally. And this was in the 2000s. We were filming Fear Factor downtown in LA and I took a wrong turn and wound up in Skid Row and I was like, I couldn't believe it was real. It was like a zombie movie. And that's, I mean, it's a fraction. So you decided on Fear Factor. You go stay in here for three days and you win. It's three days of due no coke. You could do three days with no meth and you win. Yeah. It was sobering. And then we looked up the history of Skid Row. And the reason why it's like that is they would take people out of Hollywood and Beverly Hills and homeless people then and they would put them in Skid Row and force them to stay there. And they sort of built it as a place where they could deposit vagrants and homeless people. Well, there is a long-distance country called vagrantcy. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Not very enforced. Well, it would be, let me tell you something. If you grew up in Sea Morandian, it was enforceable. Right. If you stand up town too long, which is all kids did back then, the cops come up and go, hey, you've been here for three hours. We've been timing you. This episode is sponsored by BetterHelp. New Year's resolutions are great and all. But sometimes I don't want to upend my entire life to create a new and improve me. If you're feeling the same way, I've got a tip for you to let go of those big New Year's expectations and start small. Focus on one thing that's been weighing you down lately. Maybe you want to stress less about what you can control or put less pressure on yourself at work or reconnect with an old friend. Whatever goal you have, BetterHelp can help you get there. Therapy in general is a great way to discover more about yourself from an unbiased outside perspective. It can really help take a weight off your shoulders. BetterHelp makes connecting with a therapist straightforward and simple. And with a network of thousands of fully licensed therapists, they can connect you with the right one like they have for millions across the globe. According to those same people, BetterHelp works great too. Their live sessions have an average of 4.9 out of 5 rating. So do yourself a favor and try BetterHelp. BetterHelp makes it easy to get matched online with a qualified therapist. Sign up and get 10% off at BetterHelp.com slash JRE. That's Better H E L P dot com slash JRE. Yeah, move on. You want to keep a nice clean town. That's how you do it. But if you let it go long enough, it will be like Skid Row. I mean, and I think that what we're saying like the documentary, what was the hotel again that won the hotel Cecil? The documentary is about the hotel Cecil, which was a beautiful hotel in downtown LA. This is now a fucking disaster area. But it's in that whole area and they just, they could figure out a way to deal with the homeless problem, but they didn't want it messing up the beauty and glamour of Hollywood. So every time they would find homeless people, they would just ship them to downtown. Downtown LA is really the only downtown of any major city that I've ever been to where nobody wants to go. Downtown New York is fucking downtown like, holy shit, we're downtown. Look at all the restaurants, look at all the shops. But there wasn't that way in the 70s, right? I mean, the first online went there. It was just like, yeah. It went to Times Square, it was frightening. The first time I went to New York was to fight. I was fighting in a martial arts tournament in 1980. Oh, it had to be, I guess it was 85 or 86 and it was bad. We went through Times Square and I was like, oh my God, I couldn't believe people live like this. I remember the first time driving through it, I couldn't believe how big it was. I was like, this is crazy. It was so, because Boston, where I was from was, you know, I'm the big city, I thought it was nothing compared to New York. I mean, this is nuts. I couldn't believe how many streets there were and how many buildings there were and I'll tell they were. But the, just the seediness of it was so strange to me. The peep shows and all the weird people and I was a kid back then. I was probably, you know, 18. It was very strange. It was frightening. Yeah. Yeah. Like I was, I don't know how I probably got sidetracked, but the first time I went through, I didn't leave my hotel room. I had a, I was in a holiday and on 57th Street and I just kind of peeked these accruents and looked in a, I can't go out there. I mean, I was, you know, coming off a agoraphobia and here I'm in New York because I have a meeting with some record company people and, you know, they like to demo. So let's go back to that. So you were, um, your fucked up drunk friend, you quit him. How do you get back on a music after that? Oh Dave. Yeah. No. I got my first record deal, the first guy called with today. No, he was, he was a great bass player. He was a great bass player. Did he get a shit together before then? No. Nope. Still not. No. I got a funny stories about Dave and Max is gay. Can you still around? Yeah, he's a professional. I found God and all this stuff. Oh wow. He's a professor of Vincent's University. He's a professor. Wow. Was he teach? I'm music. Oh wow. And now he was really handsome. Really good bass player. Really, really, really good, but he just, you know, did it. Now he was really handsome, really good bass player, really, really, really good, but he just, you know, Dave and we were 20 years old, two years old, you know. We know about anything. Yeah. Nothing. Nothing. So when you left Dave and you left that band, what happened next? What was like the big break for you? I never really had a big break. Well, something must have happened. It was a slow climb. Yeah. It was a very slow climb. Yeah, I, I got a record deal and of course being me at that age at 22. I went out to California and I met with a guy named Mike Maitlin who hated my new record, but said I had great possibilities. And I told, I just ended up, I said, motherfucker, you're an old man. What do you know about rock music? He must have been 4D. And of course I got dropped immediately. I was on MCA and I got dropped immediately. But there were a couple people at MCA who believed in what I was doing, and so they helped me along and then I got introduced to Rod Stewart's manager. And I moved to England for two years, made a record and lived with a whole band on Chelsea and Chelsea. And punk was just starting. I mean, the other class and the Sex Pistols, I mean, they were brand new bands. And there I am with the Duchista guitar going, I need to love her that moment and try and then it's like, however, that song became number one in Australia. And so Australia was ahead of us with televising rock band. And they had a whole bunch of rock shows. And I had the number one record album and single in Australia. And it couldn't fill up a bar in Bloomington. Wow. Good, nobody'd come to see me. So anyway, I went to Australia and then a girl covered I need to love her and she had a big hit with it. I mean, mine was like, went to like 30 or something like that. But hers went to like two of that song. And that's how it all started for me. That was the very first thing. Wow. Well, with some girl covered in one of my songs. And you were living in England? I lived in England for two years. And they had the national front there at the time. I don't know if you know what that is. The national front was if you're not English, get out of our country. Oh. A couple of guys in my band got beat up because they heard, you know, some of the national front guys heard their accent. And it was an English. So it was like dangerous to even go to the movies. Really? Keep your fucking mouth shut your head down. What year was this round? 70s? 70s? 77s? 76s? Wow. Yeah. Yeah, the national front was, you know, they were like all about your skinhead guys and violent and didn't did not want any foreigners in their country. At all. And even in Americans, you know, so, you know, you had to keep your eye, you know, I learned real quick to keep your head down your mouth shut. Wow. And so you got out of there because of that? No, I got out of there because I got mad at the, I know it's hard to believe that I got mad at somebody that I got mad at the manager because I could never get the the cox ecker on the phone, you know. And then I came back to the United States and he had a record deal based on the number one record in Australia. And I used to go, well, we have a number one record in Australia and they would look at me and go, not many Australians in the United States. So, you know, and then it's just kind of built. But see what happened. And I don't mean to sound arrogant. I got to the point where it was like, I don't give a fuck, you know, deal with the fuck you want. Because I didn't want to be Johnny Cougar, which is how they made me start. The whose idea was that to turn you into John Cougar. It was Johnny to start off with Johnny Cougar. Tony DeFreeze managed me, David Bowie, Lou Reed, Matahou Poel. You remember all these bands? Oh, Lou Reed for sure, yeah. Yeah. And obviously, Rod Stewart obviously. Yeah. Same guy. Well, Rod Stewart was different. Different manager. Different man. But he was English too. So, it's hard to argue with someone that's got that kind of talent, right? Well, it's hard to argue when you're 22 years old with a 45 year old man who has had success. Right. Yeah, like I signed away my publishing and stuff. This is an old story. But I mean, an old story from everybody from the Rolling Stones. You name it. Prince. If you were black, you know, it was like, here's a new car and a shiny ring and some money. Yeah. And I remember the, I was in getting ready to leave England. And I heard that Gaff had good news for me in America. So that's the reason I went home. And the good news was is that he just got a deal for me on Mercury Records. And then, so I went back to the United States. And we started, you know, started making records and just kept plowing away. And the critics hated me. You know, they parked in the A. Did me because of Johnny Cooper. And Maine man came up with that name Johnny Cooper. And his excuse was, his name was David Jones. And I called him David Bowie and look how well that worked out. And I was, and I'm 22 and I'm going, but I don't like this name. And they go, well, you don't have to participate. You can go back to Indiana if you want. It was like, well, fuck you, then I will. And then I walked outside and thought for a minute, thought, I guess I'm Johnny Cooper. Wow. And I hated it. And they compared me to James Dean and Bruce. And, you know, the critics just hated that. It was like, you know, we saw American. You saw American. You know, yeah, I was a fucking nail building. I was a fucking critic. You're always going to be a problem. Yeah, but you know what? I learned stuff from some of the critics that were good. Like what? Well, one of my best friends was a guy named Tim White, who was the editor of Rolling Stone and the editor of Billboard magazine. And he died a few years ago. And you want to hear some insights baseball. Sure. Tim and I talked every day. And Tim is as different as me as you. Tim Moore, Bo Tye, White Bucks, you know, Blue James, Suitjacket every day. And he was the editor of Rolling Stone for a long time. And then he became editor of Billboard. And he called me up. And he said, I'm going to have to sign a deal with Sound Scan. I said, so I didn't know what that one. He goes, John, you don't understand the ramifications of signing a deal with Sound Scan. I said, well, what are the egos? You'll be out of business. I go, why do you say that? He goes, because now the way the Billboard charts work, is this getting too inside of the video? No, no, no. No. The way the charts work is that if you get played in Indianapolis and you get played in New York, it counts as one play. New York counts as one play. Indianapolis counts as one play. A play is a play. When Sound Scan came in, they changed it. So it's like the number one record of the week. So if you got to play in New York, that was with five points. If you got to play in Indianapolis, that was with a half a point. Oh. So what does that mean? That means that people who grew up in St. Louis and were rocked to a place, all of a sudden, you know, where I got played all the time, the points didn't amount to shit. But what did? Urban stations. Urban stations played what? Wrap. So do you remember when all of a sudden, rap music took over? It was because it wasn't because these guys were so great. And I'm not saying they were bad. I'm just saying that it was because of Sound Scan. And my friend Tim knew this was going to happen. As soon as I signed this deal with Sound Scan, and there was a magazine called Radio and Records at the time, who was rivaling Billboard. And if Tim hadn't bought Sound Scan, Radio and Records would have bought them, which would have made them the premier record come because they were the most modern. And so Sound Scan changed everything. So I'm sure that you remember that there was a time when you knew every song that was number one. Then all of a sudden you woke up one day and you didn't know what the... What's... How does this song become number one? But the way that it was before Sound Scan, each song had to work its way up the charts. So if you had like, you know, let's say 20 plays, I'm just throwing out low numbers. But if you had 20 plays, that got added to the 20 plays that you got the next week. So now you have 40 plays. So you might move up from 36 to 31. But Joe Rogan in Boston was here in the fucking songs as they move up. Oh, I heard this new song. You talked to your friend. And they said, yeah, I heard that song. And then all of a sudden the song was built and built and built and built and built and built and built and bycult Jackson maybe number one. Or whoever. And once Sound Scan took over, if you were in Rock Band, the record company said, well fuck this. We're not even going to advertise it in Indianapolis anymore. The biggest numbers are our B stations and they're playing rap. And that's where we're going to serve as those people. And then there was pay over that stuff going on. Of course. So there was like no money coming in to Indianapolis all of a sudden. Or they used to be. It was all going to New York Los Angeles, San Francisco to all these R&B stations. And then what was a thing called when you could like download records for nothing. Napster. Yeah. And then that really put us out of it. Put all Rock Guys in. Out of it. So if you check the Billboard charts right now, I bet you you'd be hard pressed to find two Rock Band's in the top. Rock Band's right now just in general are almost non-existent in terms of like new band. It's really weird. There used to be so many Rock Band's. And Rock and Roll is still a very popular form of music when you listen to the older stuff. So that's why I've decided I don't mean to plug myself, but they have been asking me because I got tired of going on tour and being a cheerleader. Which is what I was. Let's do a rounding hit of small town. I was born in on everybody's saying it was saying it was playing the 20,000 people and everybody was drunk. And I was just kind of the cheerleader. You mean people's good time. Yeah. Giving them the opportunity. I just thought, you know, I'm here to be a musician. This is not being a musician. This is being a fucking clown. I don't want to be a clown. So I started playing in theaters which pissed everybody off. I said, and you know, when you come to one of my shows and this has been for the last 20 years I've been doing this. You come to one of my shows in the theater. It says, please recognize. Back then pull that sucker up close to your face. The microphone. Otherwise we're barely here. Very soft. There we go. There we go. I am. And I am soft smoking. Yeah, a little bit. You know what? Why? Because I'm deaf. Are you really, oh from all the singing, all the music? Yeah. Oh, every rock star's deaf. Yeah. No one knew shit about hearing protection back then. No, I'm deaf. I can't. All my friends and bands. And all my friends are hunters. Deaf. Can't hear. Yeah. Guns and loud music. Yeah. My kids would love it because they could walk up and say shit behind my back. I heard that. I got three girls and two boys. And I'm a kid you go. Three. Three girls. Girls are about 12. You lose them. And about 21 they come back. I have lost them. You haven't? No. No. I'm broke close. Yeah. I can't. I can't. I kind of lost mine. You know, it's like, but now it's kind of like, but I do have a daughter. It's really sick. She's not fucking fine. Well, that sucks. I'm sorry to hear that. She's got cancer in the brain. Oh, Jesus. And she's suffering right now. But that kid used to call me up and I'd go, Teddy, you can have a thought without asking me. If it's, you know, figure it out yourself. You don't have to ask me everything, you know. But I love having kids. I do too. It is made me a much nicer person. That's for sure. Yeah, I mean too. But I've stayed close with them even through the teenage years. Luckily. But you know, I worked hard at it. And I was on tour overtime. Yeah. Well, that's one of the things that I did when we moved to Texas. Almost six years ago now. Is that I decided to be home a lot more. In the beginning, when hero is still touring a lot, I would do, you know, weekends. I'd go do shows. But now I hardly ever. Now I have my own comedy club. So I'm in town all the time. What do you think is stand up now? I love it. It's a great time. For stand up. You think? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you don't have to like worry about crossing the line. Yeah, you do. Yeah, you do. You'll cross the line, but not with the people that you care about. You know, you cross the line for people that are looking to be offended. Well, which is a lot of people. Yeah. So they're going to be mad. Let them be mad. Yeah. I just can't pay attention. That's the thing. It's like I tell all the comics. Stay out of the comments. Don't read anything about yourself. And you'll be all right. I'm just, the audience is what matters. It's the audience laughing. I've never googled myself. Good for you. In my life. Good. I've never googled myself ever. And it goes, I don't give a fuck. Well, that's a good practice to keep. Well, where were we? So we were talking about how they stuck you with the Johnnie, Cougar name, you're in New York City. That's kind of where we left it off. I was trying to figure out like what was the MTV days like and when did it like really start cracking pull that microphone close up to you. I never really start cracking. But do you know John Sykes? No. He was one of the guys who started MTV. Okay. And I remember calling him up and I didn't know him. This was like 1981, 82. And like I said, you know, it was like all you really saw guys in rock bands were the album covers. You know, maybe on midnight special or something like that. Or Don Kirchner's rock concert or something like that. But then with MTV going all the time and not many people made videos. But see, I was making videos because I had a hit in Australia. And like I said, Australia was way ahead of us. So it was the video that I just made in a club in London that was shown that made that record number one in Australia. And so when MTV started, there wouldn't be many people making videos. But I was. So they had every content. So they played me all the fucking time. Just because nobody else had videos yet. Right. People hadn't caught up yet. Right. And I remember sitting with, I came to the guy, some English guy. And I said, what is this MTV thing? He goes, I don't know the record company told me, I can't remember the guy's name. He's really a good songwriter. But you don't hear of him much anymore. Anyway, I had a conversation. I mean, he's a one of them, but he's going on. And then I met John. And I was the first. And John and I got along great. I was the first promotion that MTV did. And we gave away a pink house. Oh, wow. You know, and you had to register and do all this stuff. And there's a funny story that goes for that. So Sykes and somebody else came to Indiana to find a house in Bloomington that they were going to buy. And then they were going to do a show. And I did an ad where I went. And you can win a house and we're going to paint the mother pink. And that's what they did. Except the house they bought Joe was on a chemical dump. Oh, no. But I didn't know it. And they didn't know because they were from New York. And so when I found out, I called him up. I said, guys, we can't give away this house. It's on a fucking chemical dump. Because RCA was dumping chemicals out in this field that was right next to the house that we bought. You know, and back then in the early 80s, there wasn't much legislation about where you could dump that kind of stuff. So they had to buy another house, which they weren't happy about. So they had to buy two houses, couldn't sell the other one, gave it away. And Sykes to this day, Altizie and about it. And he'll go, I'll be took out off the books a year or so ago. Which is. But it went from walking down the street to nobody knows who the fuck you are to walking down the street and everybody knew who you were, everybody. I mean, you got to... At the height of MTV, you couldn't buy it. I couldn't buy it in place. Did you get the agoraphobia before that? Oh, yeah. Oh, boy. So that probably just made it way worse, right? No, actually. Again, Joe, lucky. It helped me get over it. It helped me. And, you know, like I believe that all growth takes place in the chemicals inside our body. So I was growing still. Because I grew up in public. Right. You know, I mean, I literally grew up. When I got my first record, Deal Joe, I had never written a song. Wow. Never written a song. They asked me, but plays some of the songs you've written. I was like, I have no fucking songs. I'm a barber, I'm singer. I sing other people songs. But you want to sing, I know you're the right four. Deal them as writing great songs. You haven't written anything? Nothing. Wow. So when did you start writing after you got a record deal? Yeah. Wow. But it turns out you're a great writer. That's crazy. And I have dyslexia. Which means I can't read. You should see my songwriting books. It's absolutely terrible. It looks like, you know, I have to have somebody now. And after I write a song, I have to give it to somebody right away and let them copy it and I'll read it to them so that we can read with the fucking. You know, what I wrote. Because songwriting is not what people think it is. But anyway, back to MTV, it just blew up. And you couldn't go anywhere. I couldn't. I would walk down the street and all I did was sign autographs and shake hands. And I didn't like it at all. Well, happy. Very weird. Yeah. I mean, it was like, you know, you've been in rock bands since you were 13. Nobody gave a shit. And then all of a sudden, they did. And, you know, it was the baby boomers coming at age. And, you know, I was very fortunate. But I appreciate it. So when you first started writing songs, what was your process? When you knew you had to write songs. How did you... Well, I figured out. Just don't forget the critics hated me. Already? Yeah. Oh, yeah. They hated Johnny Cooper. And they hated him. And I didn't like him much either. Because we weren't any good. You know, which is for him. We did not write songs. We didn't know how to do anything. So I figured, how do you reach a lot of people by being on the radio? So keep it simple, stupid. So I would write like I had a song called her, it's so good. Do you remember that? Sure. Yeah. I wrote that in the shower. And I came out real quick and I wrote it down. And then I had somebody write it down. And I remembered the melody. And I sang it to a tape machine. And I got so many funny stories. I was down in criteria, which was in Florida in Miami. And you know, it was the early. So we had this, and criteria had five or six studios. And you know, there were like, I don't know. All kinds of bands. The PGs are over here. And this band was over here. And we had the studio blocked out. We went show up. We had other things to do. There was a place called Scaramooch that had the previous girls who were selling her in life. So it was like, we did not have time to go to the studio because we had been up till daybreak at Scaramooch. And so I was spending a lot of fucking money by now. And it was like maybe, you know, at the time, I have a million dollars and I had three songs done. Whoa. That's exactly right. So, and I had a couple of kids. I had, I had to love her any event I'm with. And this time, I think, and so those songs were like, got into the top 20. Anyway, the record company came down and said, no, I can't, but it's a fuck. You know, you're spending all this money. And if you don't get on with it, we're going to drop it from the label. You can't drop me from the fucking label. Are you kidding me? I'm just darden. Well, we want to come down and hear what you've done. I said, well, come on down. I played him three songs. The three I had done in six weeks. Anyway, I played him three songs. What songs were they? Jack and Diane. Oh, God. Heard so good. Oh, God. And hand a hold on to you. Oh, my God. He hated those? Oh, they hated them. They said, wow. They said, John, this is their two rough, their two raw. And what is this sound in Jack and Diane? There's not even what is that sound. Well, the sound was I would walk by the BG studio and they had just invented drum machines. And the BG's were using it to keep time. Because you know, most drummers, they speed up. You know, they start to song at this tempo and all of a sudden they're like, no, no, no, no, no, but then it's just like, I can't keep up with it. You've got damn it. So down. So the BG's were using it to keep time. And I heard this sound. And so I knew the engineer, his name is Albie Gluten. And Al, and I said, Al, because I borrowed that machine. And he goes, yeah. Because we're not going to be in the studio for a week. So we were doing a song called Jack and Diane that just was not working out because the drummer kept speeding up. And when you're trying to keep it simple, stupid, simple is hard. Because if you make a little mistake, it's a big mistake now because you're not a bunch of shit covering up your mistake. Right. So. steak. It's a big mistake now because you're not a bunch of shit covering up your mistake. Right. So I called up Mick Ronson. He was the guitar player for David Bowie. Remember Mick? No, I don't. Joe got damn it. Sorry. Anyway, Mick was a great guy. He was, he was Bowie's guitar player when Bowie was great when he had singing his guitar discs and all that stuff. And Ronson was an English guy. He'd call me Johnny all the time and you know and he said Johnny maybe you should put those baby rattles on there and I go, what? He goes, you know, that drum machine thing that makes that noise just to keep time. And I said, okay, we'll try it. So we put on this, doo doo doo doo, doo. And it was perfect timing. Perfect. So the idea was, is that we'll take that drum machine out when we get everything. We'll take it out. And now the drummer had to play in time because that machine did not budge. That machine was perfect. And it was, it was a prototype of a drum machine. That's how new it was. It was a prototype. And it was the only one that gave them the VGs to try it out, see how they liked it. And so we got it all together and we took the drum machine out. Sounded like shit. But it sounded great with the drum machine. So I said, fuck it, we'll just leave the drum machine in and it worked because nobody had ever heard that sound. And the record company didn't like that. Well, they hated, they hated that fucking sound. But that song was so good. Well, you know, and it's surprising to me that to this day, how many people still love that song. Fucking great song. You know, and every time. What year was that? 1981. Wow. So how, so how old were you in? 14. Yeah, high school. Yeah, you were there. Yeah, that's great. See, that's great. And I love hearing, you know, guys your age talk about it because it's just like, I didn't know what the fuck I was doing. And the fact that that song today, I had somebody tell me one of the nicest things anybody said to me was that John, there was Romeo and Juliet. There was Frankie and Johnny. And now there's Jack and Diane. And you've joined those two kids have joined those people of importance in American culture. Yeah, I think about it. Now, who would have fucking thought that some dumb ass like me would write a fucking song as a child when I first started writing songs and create those two characters that made such an impression on everybody? The only other one I think about is Brenda and Eddie from Billy Joel, scenes from Italian restaurant. Yeah. That's another one. Yeah, Jack and Diane was fucking huge when I was in high school. I can't believe the record company didn't like that. They didn't like hand to hold on to God. And they didn't like me. And they didn't like me. And they didn't like me. So how could you be more wrong than Jack and Diane was fucking huge? Joe, look at, I don't know that much about your career, but look at your career and look at what suits have said to you and how wrong they were. Well, the most successful thing that I've ever done, nobody had any input on at all, which is this. No, there you go. Yeah, they would, there's not a chance in hell. Anybody would have said, yeah, I have unfiltered conversations for three hours with random people and, you know, millions of people will listen and watch. No one would have believed it. But when we did it, we didn't do it for anybody else. But you were an actor before. Yeah. Well, I was a comic first. And then because I got a development deal that gave me some money to be on a sitcom. So I did that. That sitcom got canceled. Then I did another sitcom that was kind of successful called news radio. That got canceled. And then I wound up being on fear factor. Yeah, it's a bunch of weird circumstances that a lot of luck, what a weird stuff happened. Lot of luck. Yeah. Yeah. See, and you know what? I walk in my house sometimes. And I look around and think I get to fucking live here. Yeah. I get to fucking live here. I think that all the time. Yeah. I get to live here. And, and how lucky I am to have had that kind of success from such an horrible beginning as Johnny Cougar. And, you know, to be able to, you know, do, I've done what I wanted to do ever since I decided fucking guys. Yeah. After, after American fool came out and no songs became hits, nobody has ever said shit to me about anything. Well, they realized they were wrong. Well, those guys, I'm sure, out of business. And I have to kind of smile about the rock critics because it got to the point where I had such so many songs on the radio that they couldn't ignore. Right. You were undeniable. Yeah. And that's, and you know what? That's the word I used to say. That's the key to success. That's the word I used to say to the guys and man, we have to make this song undeniable. Yeah. And give them an inch. They'll find a fucking reason. They definitely will. And it's, there's good in that too. There's good in those people that hate that they're valuable. They, they can feel you to greatness. They can feel you to be better. Because if you know that there's people out there that are just going to fucking hate on you, no matter what you do. And you just got to come up with something that listen, this will be undeniable. And they'll still hate it. Look, I was watching a fucking interview yesterday where this lady was talking shit about the Beatles. She was talking about how she thinks the Beatles are terrible. And this lady was not particularly articulate. She wasn't interesting or compelling. She didn't seem very intelligent, but she was speaking with such authority about how she thought the Beatles were terrible. I was like, well, you're fucking wrong. You're, you couldn't be more wrong. You couldn't be more wrong. They are one of the greatest bands in the history of the fucking known world. Yeah. Fact. But this lady was just going, what shows you? You cannot make everybody happy because some people don't want to be happy. They don't want to see good. You had four really talented people in that band. And it showed because some of the songs hear me out, some of the songs, it was good for my generation. Because we went from cartoons to rock and roll. So in a town where I was born, lived a man, sailed a sea. It was a cartoon. Right. Right. And the guy that produced Martin, the guy that produced the Beatles up until that point, he made comedy records. Yeah. He made comedy records and cartoons. And so that's, that's my understanding. And he brought that to them. You know, and, you know, you have four guys writing songs. It's like better than John Melon Camp writing songs. You know, so yeah. But my point is it's like you can't make everybody happy because everybody's not happy. Well, they don't want to be happy. I have said for years, I'm not for anybody anymore. If you're coming to my show, and this is when I started playing theaters, if you're coming to my show to hear all these hits, you're not going to. But that's why I'm after 20 years, I'm going to go back out and I'm going to play nothing but it's for two and a half hours. That's how many hit records. That's incredible. Yeah. That's going to be, you know, and I'm now I'm looking forward to it. Yeah. Because I have not played. I need to love her in 25 years on stage. I'm not so fresh. Yeah. It's a brand new song. Yeah. I'm going to be playing it in a way that nobody's ever imagined. Wait till if you come, come and see me. Where do you hear Jack and Diane? I have jammed it up and it's a soul song now. Wow. Yeah. It's, I, there's a term for smash, a smash, what do they call it? Smash something. Anyway, we turned it into a soul song. I mean, what would it be like if Jack and Diane was a soul song? So you leave the melody the same, but you put the instruments around them differently. You know, to make it interesting for you. Well, and to the audience, because when the course comes in, they're going to be singing that course. Right. Because if I play it now, it's trying to push that thing up to your face. If I play it now, you know, it's just usually me and acoustic guitar and, and it's good because a little ditty and I don't have to sing anymore. Right. They sing those songs. Right. And I might go, oh, yeah. And that's it. And then they, the audience sings it, which is great, which is great. It's got to be really cool. I got to come see you live. Are you in Texas at all? You don't know. When did you drop the cougar? Because at first, you were John Cougar, Mellon camp. And I remember that. I was like, what is going on? Why does he have another name? It was confusing to me. Well, I was trying to, and I think I did it successfully. Was a good transition. I didn't, you know, I could call up somebody and go to it's John Mellon camp. They wouldn't take my call. I could call back two seconds later and go to John Cougar and they would take my call. So I figured it just so have to be a slow change. Elvis Costello tried to do the same thing and didn't work. What was his real name? I don't remember, but that's not his real name. But you know, he was tired of being Elvis Costello and he went back to his real name and people just went and accepted it. But with me, it was such a slow burn thing to get over. So, you know, it again, what? Lucky. It was the first time that I'd recognized that artists were forced to change their name with you. I didn't know. Really? Yeah, yeah. I had no idea. Do you know that every fucking movie star that we ended up watching on those black and white things? That's not any of their real names. They're all chains. Yeah. They're all chains. Yeah. You think Rock Hudson was his real name? Sounds good. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. Now, yeah, somebody decided they wanted to come up with a catch here in him, which is interesting for a guy like Arnold Schwarzenegger had kept his real name as bizarre it was and hard to pronounce. Yeah. Yeah. And I just saw him smashing the president. Yeah, he's always smashing somebody. I think he's bored. He needs to get back and run. He was a great governor. He really was. He did a really good job with California. California is fucking messed now. When you transitioned to John Cougar, Melling Camp, and then eventually, how long did would you John Cougar, Melling Camp before he became John Melling Camp? Yeah. I think the last John, John Cougar, Melling Camp record was called Scarecrow and had small town on it had small town on it had five here. Can you imagine five? It had five fucking hit records off the one album. Pretty amazing. Yeah. Lucky. Don't forget, I had never written a song. That's what's crazy. Yeah. Never written a song. So I grew up in public. And if you listen to my songs now so much more mature than than those young, I got so sick. I've heard that I wrote a song called Pop Singer and like 90, 90, one. Everyone to be no pop singer and everyone to sing no pop song. Remember that? Never wanted to have a manager hang out after the show. I just, it was I wanted to be a musician and not a clown, which if you remember back Joe, and I put anybody down, but there were a lot of clownish guys from MTV. Sure. You know that we're like, what? Yeah. You know, and a lot of sexism and stuff from MTV and no black people for a while. You know, they didn't play any black people. They might play Michael Jackson, but other than that. Right. But they just didn't. And I remember talking to Sykes about Sykes, me, Don Henley, and somebody else went and did. They were going to drop MTV off a whole bunch of stations and we got on a plane and went there, went to all these different stations so that we're going to drop MTV and talk to them why they couldn't do it in their work. Why were they dropping MTV? Too lewd to, I don't want to tell you something else young, man. I want to tell you something else. I showed that my accident in a video and MTV went and going to play one going to play the video. Because you had a tattoo? Yeah. That's hilarious. Yeah. Because you know, I had a tattoo. That's hilarious. I know. Oh my God. It's so funny when you think about what music is like now. And then especially like in the late 80s when hip hop really took off and then gangster rap took off. Well, and now you know why? Because what we were talking about, about sound scan and stuff. Yeah. That's how all that happened. And my deceased friend Tim White, who I love dearly, told me it was going to happen. And I just sat back and went, I can't believe that this is right. Wow. I can't believe that that can happen. You know, rock is too, too important to the culture, too important. You know, and there's a lot better songwriters than me and we all got 86. I mean, like the fucking Rolling Stones just put out a new album and I never heard it. You never heard it. No. I saw them alive a couple of years ago here. They played at the circuit of the Americas. Fucking incredible. It was like having an out of body experience. It's like I couldn't believe they were really there. Yeah. I remember watching Mick Jagger on stage and my friend was talking to me and I was watching them and he's like, isn't this fucking credible? And I was like, I can't, I can't believe it's really him. It's like they were so iconic. And here he is in his fucking 80s, just jamming. The guy brings two trailers, two whole trailers that are just gym equipment. Yeah. Everywhere he goes. Works out every day. Every year we started far made in 1985 and every year because you have a far made, you have a press conference in the beginning and then I don't go on until like nine o'clock. So I got all day. You know what I do half the day? Neil, can I use your fucking gym equipment? Because he's got a trailer. Mike, you know, you've got all groceries and couches and shit. And it's full of gym equipment. Can I use your, so I use his, not his weight so much, but, but his, you know, his weight is cold. And I call it the lace machine where you can be lazy. A elliptical? Yeah, a lip cross trainer. Hey, listen, it's better than nothing. Yeah. But I mean, watching Mick in his 80s dancing around on stage and doing that, you know, two-hour concert was full energy. So impressive. It's so inspirational that this guy still loves it that much. I mean, he wasn't phoneing nothing in, you know, I mean, it was fucking him dancing. But no, that baby. I mean, it was full on. It was like, wow, it was amazing. And what I find amazing, and I don't know why I find amazing, but I find it amazing that people relate to music in that fashion. Because I didn't know that as a kid. I just thought, you know, I thought I'd make two records and that'd be done. That's why I stayed in bloomings and I had a little bit of money. I didn't know how much more I'd have. You know, how much longer I was going to last. So let's try to like buy a little house. And I talked to, I'm good friends with Bruce and him and I both kind of just look at each other and go, can you fucking believe it? Because he's from a real little shitty town in New Jersey. And we both just look at each other and go, you believe it. It's unbelievable. Well, gratitude is an important thing. It's kind of co-opted today with a lot of like this spiritual movement, you know, people say it and it kind of sounds hollow and fake. But real gratitude and real thankfulness for a life that you've been so lucky to have and I've been so lucky to have. It's very important. It's an amazing thing. I mean, how could you not look back at your life and not think? Can you fucking believe it? Yeah. And, and you know, the thing of it is, is that I sometimes ask my audience, I go, where are you right now? And most of you probably say, I am at a John Melanchamp concert in Austin, Texas. And my answer is yes, but also where you really are. You're on a fucking rock that's going around the fucking sun that has been here for me and since the fucking years. And so we are only here for a blink of an eye. So stop worrying about everything. So fucking much. It doesn't fucking matter. Don't be pure horn because the fucking guy in front of you didn't take off right when the light turned red. It's not that important. Don't take yourself so fucking seriously and try to have some humility. You know, that's what I hate about politics today. There's no fucking humility. How about some humility? I don't care what part of you. Well, I don't give a fuck. But show some humility and some, you know, respect for each other. Which it just don't. Right. It's just don't. It's terrible. Yeah. There's a lot of that. We can get more people to recognize how brief and fleeting this moment alive is. It's it's it's so well, I got it tattooed right here in my arm. And my grandmother told me this when she should have to be 100. And I would go around laying bed with her when she was like 9998. And one day she said to me, she goes, you know, John, if you don't stop this pussing and while living, you're not going to get into heaven. I know, and I had grandma choose she goes, yeah, you know, you need to change your ways a little bit. And I said, yeah, well, you'll get me into heaven to worry about it. And she said, no, she said, you're going to find out real soon. Now listen, life is short even in its longest days. It certainly feels short when you look back, right? Oh, yeah. But just think, just think about those words coming from 100 year old woman. Yeah. You know, life is short even in its longest days. Really the opposite in its spectrum. Oh, yeah, life goes on. Right. Right. Right. So I wrote a song called life is short. And I love playing. I love playing it because it really hits the nail on the head of, you know, getting, but I would just say you were 58, 58 years old. Still a kid. Just a little kid. How old do you know? 74. Wow. Well, you look great. Thanks. Maybe we can go on a day tomorrow. Just is singing and performing? Is it different now? Did you do you appreciate it more now when then when you were younger? Is it a different feeling because like you've done so much? And it's the scope of it is so big now in retrospect. Well, like I said, I'm really looking forward to going out and doing a greatest hits to where I've never done one. I can't even imagine thinking back to when I was like 35. That idea would be like, set the fuck up on that doing that. Right. But now at my age, it's kind of like, and I just, I did a thing with Sean Penn and Sean and I were talking and he goes, John, just go do it because I was on the fence about doing it. He goes, what's wrong with you? Yes, go do it. Don't you think that if I could like show the best parts of my movies to people that I would do it and I go, I don't know. He goes, yeah, because it's you're really sharing something. What's also not a whole lot of people have ever done it before. Right. Not a whole lot of people have ever had the kind of hits that you've had. So the opportunity to go out there and do two and a half hours of fucking hits is amazing. And I said, I have to, like I said, I walk in my house and I go, I can't believe I can tell it. And you know, I feel good about, you know, I'm the only father in the world that does not encourage their kids to work. It's like, what do you want to go to before? You know, my son graduated from Duke and it's just like, do what you want to do. You're 31 years old. Your handsome, your 31 years old. You could beat anybody up in the room. You know, what, what he wanted. But I think he's getting to the age where he wants to get a job and I don't want him to leave because he still lives in my on my property. And it's nice. I love having him in there. I love having a live with me. And I live with me. He lives in a different house, a different building. And but I love having him there because I know that I think I've gone and go ahead. And he's there. And I'm telling you how many kids were from the best things I ever did. It's interesting too because having a kid when you're in high school, a lot of people think is like a death sentence for your career. You know? Well, it was a death sentence for my kid. I was 18 years old. I was on drugs. You know, my idea of raising a kid back then when I was in college was to learn water balloons. That's all I knew. It was like, this is fun. It turned out, you know, but yeah, I really enjoy my kids. And my dad told me that he told me, have as many kids as you can because when you get older, because see, I had, I don't know about you, but I had seven of my best friends die in 18 months. Wow. Yeah. Because they got off the party. They just couldn't get off the party because they were drunk all the time. I mean, if you drank crown royal every fucking day, it's going to fuck up your liver and 100%. Yeah. And that's what they did. I mean, you know, except Tim, Tim had a heart attack. Tim White, the guy I was telling you about. He died on an elevator ride from in New York from the ground floor to his office. And by the time he got up there, he was dead. Wow. But he would call me up every day, go man, my chest really hurts, my back really hurts. You know, and I would go, Tim, your dad died of a life 49 from heart disease. You think burger the doctor? I don't want to go. That's what most guys do. They don't want to go the fucking doctor. Yeah. But I do. Do the doctor tell you stuff smoking? All the time. But see, here's here's something about cigarettes. Find something you love. It's not killing you yet. And I just had a heart mammogram and all that stuff. And the doctors go because the heart is shaped like this. You know, like that. And then what happens is that as you're longer, you smoke, it flattens out. And that way it's full of crap. Mine's still like this. And he said, last two years ago, he said, well, I'd like to tell you you need to quit smoking. But if you have been smoking as long as I know you have, the only thing that's really happened is that your heart looks like a teenage years and your voice sounds black. So do you think it's because you smoke American spirits? I talked to a doctor that said that to me. She was Suzanne Humphrey. She was like, I think that one of the things that's killing people cigarettes with all the additives in it, all the different chemicals that they put under it in 20 chemicals. I'm crazy. My girlfriend hates that I fucking smoke. Of course you knew I was smoking when she met me. But now that we've been together for three years. And my wife of 20 years, Elaine, never spoke to cigarette in a life till she met me. And she starts, she on one hand just said, well, fuck it. She can't be to join them. So she starts smoking. never spoke to Siri in her life till she met me and she started she on one hand just said, well, fuck it. She can't beat them, join them. So she started smoking. But Kristen hates cigarettes and I don't know what to tell her, because I don't do much good, but I'm really a good smoker. Really good. What is it they love about cigarettes so much? They're part of me. I don't know how to put it. I mean, I smoked my first cigarette at 10. Wow. 10. 64 years of smoking. That's crazy. And you're okay. I was addicted in high school. Wow. I used to wake up in the morning and my parents had a great big house and I would go down into basement, go into the fucking storm cellar and smoke, not knowing that I came out of that little area, smelling like a cigarette. That's true. Right. And my parents, you know, it's like, have you been smoking downstairs? Yeah, but they never said anything. Well, maybe it's better than having the stress of not smoking. One of the things about smoking and I'm not an advocate, I'm not telling people they should smoke. But maybe one of the things about it is that at least it relaxes you. I think one of the worst things for people is just stress. I was talking about a friend of mine who's going through something pretty heavy right now. And he's had a couple of heart attacks and there's nothing wrong with him. He's had heart attacks just from stress where his fucking arteries just lock up, his whole body just locked up just from anxiety and stress. And he's had heart attacks because that doesn't smoke, doesn't drink, takes care of himself, and just the problems in his life are so overwhelming. There's gotta be, there's a benefit, there's gotta be a benefit to just relaxing, just enjoying something and relaxing and not having that overwhelming stress. Well, it's amazing how much cigarettes take you away from, because you've got it, you know, nowadays if you're a cigarette smoke, you know, I'm lucky to be here with you that I can smoke in your area. But most people would go outside. I'd go outside. Yeah. But I'll tell you a funny story about Johnny Cash and me. John, John and I knew each other and I would go down and I would see him in Jamaica and then he got really sick. But John quit smoking and John and I did, did something for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and another funny story. We were standing around doing, getting ready to do sound check and there was a whole bunch of people playing, a whole bunch of people. And the Eagles were on sound checking and they were taking, taking forever because Don Henry is a perfectionist. Everything's gotta be just right. And I was standing with John and June and John must get irritated because we were like 40 minutes, you know, we've been standing there ready to sound check for 40 minutes. So while we're standing there, I was smoking and John goes, you're glad to quit that smoking, John. Come catch up with someday. I said, well, you fuck a smoke and he goes, well, I used to, but I saw this guy from London and he got me to quit smoking. I go, maybe I should see that guy. He goes, okay, yeah, I will, you will. Anyway, so anyway, we finally get on to sound check. And John sound checked without me because I just sang one song with him. And then when it came time to sound check, I went, you know, John, you know, because I keep zero-tated. Yeah, I don't know if you knew John occasion up. No, fucking temper. You know, he fucking John Cash. We just didn't. Anyway, I said, you know John, you know, I got this song and we were doing Ring of Fire. I said, I know that song. He said, you sure? And I said, yeah, I got it. I got it. He goes, okay, well, thanks, because, you know, I'm sick of fucking being here. So the next night we get up there and John and then he introduces me to my friend John Melingham and he started something, poo, poo, poo, poo, I fell into. I didn't realize that he had changed the fucking key from him smoking to a lower key. So I couldn't hit the note because it was I fell into. I, I, I couldn't find a fucking note because it was not the note the song was written. I've seen right along with the song. And I look over there and there's Chuck Berry going. And I look over there and you're expressing going. And all these people on the side, the stage, right? And they're all getting me a look like, you're fucking up, man. It was like, yeah, I know it. And so anyway, as soon as the song was over I ran off stage. I was totally humiliated, right? So I ran off stage and got to my trailer. I just get back there and I said, knock on the door. And I answered and it's John and he said, can I come in? And I go, I don't know why he'd want to, but yeah, come on in. He goes, I told you we should have sat on chair. Ah, ha, ha, ha, ha. Anyway, so that conversation led on to, I know this guy who will get you to quit smoking. And so he just made all the information. And me and two other guys fly this guy over from London and Joe here was his solution for not smoking. He gave me a good talk into. That's it? That was it. I was smoking on the way back to Indiana. My friend Ron White's been smoking his whole life and he just stopped and he went to a hypnotist. Same hip, he quit drinking fears back. Went to a hypnotist, quit drinking easy. He said it was so easy. And then just recently like within last three or four weeks, quit smoking. He's almost 70. Just said the hypnotist got him and said, now he doesn't have to desire. He goes, sometimes he goes after sex. He goes after a meal, sometimes I have like a, for a brief second. I don't know where, but I'm too old for sex. I don't know. I don't know where about that in him. Well, I guess Ron still gets after it. Cause after, he said he's just a brief second. And then he goes away. Well, I tell you, I was friends with the Newman family and Paul quit smoking and died. Right afterwards, was the smoking contributing to his health problems? And it was just like he was older. It was like, you know, I mean, he was like 80s. I don't know. Can you see how old he was when he died? Anyway, so, you know, I just kind of went. If I want you loving, let it kill you. Yeah. If I want you loving, let it kill you. 83. Yeah. I probably love that guy. Hustler, one of my favorite movies of all time. Well, I'm really good friends with Joanne, who now is, I love Joanne. And once Paul died, I became a boyfriend. And she and I would talk all the time on the phone and whenever I was in New York or the town, she lives in North New York. I'd take her to plays and we'd go to plays and we'd do stuff and I'd pinch her on the ass and she'd look at me like that. But then when she started when I would call her and she started calling me Paul, I would have to go, Joanne, it's not Paul, it's John. And now she, now I still go see her all the time. Not all the time, not as much as I should. But she, I can't remember the fucking down, she lives in. Anyway, she's, she can't talk. Yeah. She can't, you know, she has what do you call that? The man show? Yeah. Yeah. And she can't talk and she can, you know, I take my guitar and I'll play and sing for her. She'll, mmm, mmm, God, mmm, but you know, she's always happy to see me. I think she realizes that it's me. Though I love her. I mean, she was just, she was just great, she was a great woman. How I met her was at a democratic thing for, who was another man for president at John? John Kerry? John Kerry. And it was at Radio City. And I have a son named HUD and Paul Newman started in the movie, HUD. And so Newman walked in to my dress, remember, because I'm looking for HUD, now I can't. And he was with me, but he was running around Radio City somewhere. Have you been Radio City? Yes. Have you been backstage? Mm-hmm. There's all kind of shit going on. Yeah. Yeah. You can go anywhere and that's right. Anyway, so HUD was running around there and I just let him go wherever it wants. And I'm sitting here talking to Paul. I'm like, this is pretty cool. And then Joe Ann walked in. It was like, all right, Newman, hey, cuz she was beautiful. I mean, Joe, you cannot, she must have been in her late 50s, something like that. She was gorgeous. It's like one of the prettiest women I'd ever seen. And so I just kind of like, well, it's like me and you're Paul. Hey, Joe Ann. And that's how we became friends. And even before he died here and I were talking on the phone and I love Joe Ann. I hope she lives forever, but I know that people take care of her and sad. It's just hard to see someone in a deteriorated state like that as they get older. Well, have you ever seen the movie, yeah, I can't think, the fuchsia kind? What is it? The fuchsia kind? I don't think so. Broke and you gotta watch it. Yeah. It's great, you love it. It's called the fuchsia kind and it stars Brando and Joe Ann Woodward. And it's just such a written by Tennessee Williams. Oh, it's really, really good. Really, it's one of my favorite movies ever, man. The fuchsia-dive kind. I'll check it out. Yeah. Yeah. I know a lot about old movies because I don't watch new movies. If it's not in black and white, I'm not watching. Really? Yeah. Has it always been the case or is that a new thing? No. It's always been the real thing. Really? Yeah. My girlfriend Chris will talk to me. You know that actor and I'll go, no. I don't know anybody. In the entertainment business, same work, zip guys, my age. That's probably a good thing. But I don't know any of them. I know Sean. You know, but I've known Sean since he was a kid before Rich Mon High. Oh, wow. That's a long, I've known that guy. Wow. That was a fucking great movie. Yeah, it was. They can't make a comedy like that anymore. Oh, no, they couldn't even get it. They would make it again. Not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. No, not a chance. That's the thing with political correctness. And then the woke movement. That's the thing that really died was the great comedy movies and appropriate. Well, you answered me this question. Yeah. Why did anybody give a shit anyway? I mean, you know, 86 and what was the senator? The guy, the comedian that wrote for Saturday Night Live. Shit, yeah. Yeah. I mean, why did he let some other... I know the climate got crazy. People lost their fucking minds. And I think it's kind of turned around. And people were kind of recognizing that it was a massive over correction. It was. But the problem is the comedy films, like if you go back and watch, you know, like tropical thunder or any of those kind of crazy movies that were like really outrageous and funny, like, you know, you can't make them today. Nobody wants to fund them and finance them. Nobody wants to heat. Nobody wants to deal with the criticism. They essentially killed comedy movies. Well, and that's what I was asking you. How is doing stand up? You can't kill stand up. The problem is stand up. It's like people will come to see you. And that's all it matters. People come to see you and they laugh. That's all it matters. They're like, the critics don't matter. Who's your favorite stand-up comedian now? Alive? There's so many good ones right now. I don't mean Chappelle's probably the greatest of all time. And we're lucky we have him alive now. But, you know, Bill Burr's great, Shane Gillis. It's an amazing time for stand up. David Tal, it's probably like the most unhearled, great comic that's alive today. There's so many great comedy. So many great comedians now. Well, I'm Jim Jeffries. Jim Jeffries is funny. There's, I mean, I was telling you, I was telling you, I'm, you know, more comics now that are huge than I think have ever been alive in the history of comedy because of YouTube and Instagram and definitely Netflix because there's just more comedy to see. There's more comedy to go, there's more comics right now are selling out arenas than ever in the history of stand up comedy. Yeah, I've seen it on television. You just can't worry about what the haters think. You can't worry about that. You just gotta just do what you think is funny and what you think the audience is going to think is funny and work real hard at it. That's all you have to do. And just don't pay attention to the criticism. If you do, it'll kill you. The best stand up comedian movie I ever saw was the first Richard Pryor. Oh, live on the Sunset Strip, change my life. Well, that changed my life. That was the third one. Was it? Yeah. So wanted was before that, right? Yeah, and that took place in New Orleans. Okay, there was one he filmed at Long Beach. That is it when I'm talking. Phenomenal. Phenomenal. Unbelievable. Phenomenal. Unbelievable. And while he's getting on stage, people are still coming in and sitting down. I know. He's fucking with people as they're coming in and sitting down. I don't think he had an opening act. I think he just came in. No, he did. Yeah, he had a woman's name to singer. Oh, he had a musical opening act? Yeah, interesting. I can't remember who it was, but he thanked her. Okay. But I saw that in like 19, whatever, it was 79 when it came out and I was in Florida. And I had to go into the black part of Miami to see it. And I took a couple guys in my band with me. And this one guy named Ferre to my band was just the idiot. We walk in there and there's nothing but black people. So I'm okay. And Fred walks in like this. All right, you're doing. What the fuck? He walks in grabbing his dick. Yeah. Because he wanted to show them that he was a patty of hell. Yeah, that's who opened up. There it is. Nice. Yeah. So anyway, he's grabbing his dick walking in and I'm looking and I'm going, are you fucking mine? Stop. Stop. My parents took me to see Lav in the Sunset Strip when I was a kid. I was in high school. And I guess I was like 15 at the time, something like that. And I remember looking around at all the people laughing and I couldn't believe how funny it was. I couldn't believe how funny it was. I couldn't believe this guy could just be on stage talking. And it would be that funny. But I'd seen all these comedy movies that were really funny. But nothing never made me laugh as hard as this one man on stage talking. I'll never forget it. I was little. I was like looking around the crowd and people just fall at other seats, laugh and slap in each other. Couldn't believe how funny it was. Well, you know the backstory on that on that? Was the backstory. The backstory was that was take two. Oh, yeah, he bombed the first one. Yeah. Well, he, for whatever reason to hear that, he decided to do the show backwards. Oh, wow. So he started with, you know, how he ended and was going to work his way forward. And I don't know why he did that. But apparently people that knew him told me that he would always do shit like that. Well, it was creative. I had heard that he was working it out at the comedy store and they were coming in on a Monday night and it was bombing. And then by Friday night, he was destroying the same material. He just figured out a way to tweak it. You know, that was back when he was working with Paul Mooney. Paul Mooney was one of his writers. Who was the guy that I knew really well. I worked with him at the comedy store. And so Mooney and him would just figure out what the beats were. So did you play the comedy store alone? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that was my home club in LA. And how did you go to? Yeah. I got in. I auditioned in 1994. You know, I came from LA. I came from New York rather to LA to do a sitcom. And I didn't really give a shit about the sitcom. But that wasn't really that important to me. I was only doing it for money. But while I was there, I was like, kind of got to go to the comedy store. Because that when I lived in Boston, when I first started stand up in 88, they would talk about the comedy store. Like it was a religious experience. It was like Mecca. Because this was after Sam Kenison had made it. Of course, Richard Pryor had come from there. Bill Hicks had come from there. David Letterman. So many people had come from there. Robin Williams. And so they just talked about it with like hushed tones. Like man, you got to get to the comedy store. It was like a pilgrimage. Like you had to get there. And I got there in 94 and never left until the pandemic. Yeah. I was friends with Letterman. Because he's from Indianapolis. And his mom used to come down to my house in Bloomington. And his mom had stepped in. Would come down and have dinner with me at my house. And so Letterman, I did a couple things on Letterman where I cooked a cake with his mom. And he did an apple. And brought the cake to David for his birthday. And I like Letterman. He's always been nice to me. And his mom told me a story. I don't know if it's true or not. But I had just released my first album. And David was still doing the weather locally in Indianapolis. Oh, wow. And he said to his mom, if that kid can go out and do it, I can too. Oh, wow. That's what his mom said. I don't know if that's true or not. His mom told me that I never asked David about it. I shouldn't even ask. Let it live in legend. Yeah, I like the story. John, thank you so much, man. This was a lot of fun. It was a real pleasure meeting you. I really enjoyed it, man. And I've been a big fan of yours for years. So this was a real treat for me. I'm glad to be here. And I hope you come and see me play. I would love to. I definitely will. Yeah. And you're towards on your website. Is it JohnMellincamp.com or something like that? I don't know. People will find it. We'll find it. Yeah, I don't know. We'll find it. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. You're going to hate those fucking dead dudes. Yeah, I felt like mine too. I thought I liked mine too. Bye, friend.