What is your favorite gore lyric and can you explain it to me? Gucci gang Gucci gang. Hi, my name is Brandon Bowen. I'm here with concrete interviewing guar dance. What does guarism music mean to you? Chaos? War is the epitome of entertainment. I think there are much more of the metal version of the same concept. Somebody such as Marilyn Hanson was trying to portray your crazy and deranged and would like to have sex with farm animals and shaped in pigs and horses. What emotional connection do you have to guarism music? The latex monster cocks. Seem. What's the thing? You can see the men. He's got a grip on it. Guar or a little pong? Fuck that little pong. Why would that be even in comparison? Guar or low pong? Well, I don't know what that is. So it's a very upbeat kind of metal. I don't agree. Just fun. Good energy. If you had to explain gore to someone who's never listened to gore before, how would you do it? I would say giant latex spacebar barreons and ridiculous spectacle. Gucci gang Gucci gang Gucci gang Gucci gang. No. I don't know what that means. I don't know. I'm not a guar fan. You're not a guar fan. Why are you here? Cool. Cool. Are they any good? Yeah. I'm boop because Maxus. They called me that middle school. Can you illustrate for me how gore makes you feel and walk us through it? Alright. Also like, you know, excess for eyes. Cause you know, you kind of dead inside sometimes. I think there's a definite excitement to guar that is somewhat otherworldly to say the least. I do like a little picnose cause it's easy to draw. But like a big smile. Oh, it's a mushroom. Yeah. Yeah. Our tree was some hills. What do you feel about guar? Well, the big name is Hill. Everybody got demons and all of them saying so they don't say anything. Let the mother fucker sign. What face do you make while listening to guar? The same face that I always make. Yeah. That's it. Pretty much that. Yeah. Um. You can go in. Alright, next question. What kind of emotional connection do you have to do? Uh, sexually. This guy is what I'm talking about. Put my finger. What is your favorite guar, Larry? Fucking an animal. We'll go back to Old Gore. Old Gore. That's the Larry. Just fucking an animal. Sure. Well, it's what I'm listening to. That um, white wore a song where they go, oh, that's a fan favorite as well. Yes. No. This is mine. You know. No. So far, my favorite guar, Larry, has to be, oh, what? How do you feel about that? Down with the soup. Yeah, that's not, that's not guar. Now, Lopon recently spoke at the United Nations Council on North Korea. And he said that he completely disagrees with their nuclear program. What do you feel about that? I disagree too because nuclear bombs and nuclear anything is a threat in a home that all humans. Yeah, but they said low pump stan was a little misguided on that. How do you feel about his staff? I don't feel that the way he misguided because of the fact that we're a coach of this growing in this world. And at the same time, if you go back to when they did Hiroshima and they dropped a nuclear bomb over there, you look back at it right now today. He or she may steal fucked up. Very true. People that are growing with limbs missing the form of these of all sorts. So nuclear war, nuclear bombs, I'm against that 150% plus on. Now, do you think if low pump works hard enough, he can really bring a piece to the entire world? Only a person can try.