Joe Rogan, Mike, the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night, all day. All right, so if there's a dude that's day clock for AI, where we're fucked, what times it? A lot of ideas were fucked. We're going to write into it. You're not even going to ask us what we had for breakfast. That's not not not not not not not. Jesus, okay. Let's get freaked out. Okay, so there's one without speaking to like the fucking tomb stage of the mansion right off the end. There's a question about like where are we at in terms of AI capabilities right now? What do those timelines look like? There's a bunch of disagreement. One of the most concrete pieces of evidence that we have recently came out of a lab, an AI kind of evaluation lab called meter. And they put together this test. Basically it's like you asked the question, pick a task that takes a certain amount of time, like an hour. It takes like a human a certain amount of time. And then see like how likely the best AI system is to solve for that task. Then try a longer task. See like a 10 hour task. Can it do that one? And so right now what they're finding is when it comes to AI research itself. So basically like automate the work of an AI researcher, you're hitting 50% success rates for these AI systems for tasks that take an hour long. And that is doubling every right now. It's like every four months. So you had tasks that you could do, a person doesn't five minutes like, you know, ordering a new breeds or like something it takes like 50 minutes, like maybe a book of flight or something like that. And that's a question of like how much can these AI agents do right? Like from five minutes to 50 minutes to 30 minutes. And in some of these spaces like research software engineering. And it's getting further and further and further and further. And doubling it looks like every four months. So like if you if you extrapolate that. you basically get to task the take a month to complete like by 2027, task the take an AI researcher a month to complete the systems will be completing with like a 50% success rate. So you'll be able to have an AI on your show and ask it what the doomsday clock is like by then. I probably won't laugh. It'll have a terrible sense of humor about it. Just make you ask you would have for breakfast before you start. Yeah. What about quantum computing getting involved in AI? It's so yeah. Honestly, I don't think it's if you think that you're going to hit human level AI capabilities across the board say 2027, 2028, which when you talk to some of these, the people in the labs themselves, that's the timelines they're looking at. They're not confident. They're not sure. But that seems pretty plausible. If that happens, really there's no way we're going to have quantum computing that's going to be giving enough of a bump to these techniques. We're going to have standard classical computing. One way to think about this is that the data centers that are being built today are being thought of literally as the data centers that are going to house like the artificial brain that powers superintelligence human level AI when it's built in like 2027 and something like that. So how would how knowledgeable are you when it comes to quantum computing? So a little bit. I mean, like I did my grad studies in like the foundations of quantum mechanics. Oh, great. Yeah. Well, it was a mistake, but I appreciate it for the person. Well, I was a mistake. So academia is this kind of funny thing. It's really bad culture. It teaches you some really terrible habits. So basically my entire life after academia and Ed's too was unlearning these like terrible habits of it's all zero sum basically. It's not like when you're working in startups. It's not like when you're working in tech where you build something and somebody else build something, it's complimentary and you can team up and just like make something amazing. It's always wars over who gets credit, who gets their name on the paper? Did you cite this fucking stupid paper from two years ago because the author has an ego and you got to be on I was literally at one point. I'm not going to get any details here, but like there was a collaboration that we ran with like this. Anyway, fairly well known guy and my supervisor had me like write the emails that he would send from his account so that he was seen as like the guy who is like interacting with this big wig. That kind of thing is like doesn't tend to happen in startups, at least not in the same way because every people. So he wanted credit for the like he wanted to just see him like he was the genius who is facilitating this sounding smart on email. Right. But that yeah. That actually is everywhere. And yeah, the reason it happens is that these guys who are like professors or even not even professors just like your postdoctoral guy who's like supervising you, they can write your letters of reference and control your career after that. That guy you do with balls. They can do whatever. And so what you're doing, it's like a movie. Yeah, it's gross. It's gross. It's gross. It's gross. It's gross. It's gross. It's gross. And it's real. It's rampant. And the way to escape it is to basically just be like fuck this. I'm going to go do my own thing. Yeah. So yeah, drop down to grad school to come start a company. And I mean, honestly, even that it took me it took both of us like a few years to like unfucker brains and unlearn the bad habits we learned. It was really only a few years later that we started like really really getting a good like getting a good flow going. You're also you're kind of disconnected from like base reality when you're in the ivory tower. Right. Right. Right. And it's like a $10 time in startups. But there's something really beautiful about like it's just a bunch of assholes us and like no money and nothing and a world of like potential customers. And it's like you actually it's not that different from like stand up comedy in a way. Like your product is can I get the laugh, right? Like something like that. And it's unforgiving. If you fuck up, it's like silence in the room. It's the same thing with startups. Like the space of products that actually works is so narrow. And you got to obsess over what people actually want. And it's so easy to fool yourself into thinking that you've got something that's really good because your friends and family are like, oh no sweetie, you're doing a great job. Like what I wonder for like I would totally use it. I totally see that all that stuff. Right. And that's I love that because it forces you to change. Mm hmm. Yeah. The whole indoctrination thing in academia is so bizarre because there's these like hierarchies of powerful people. And they just the idea that you have to work for someone someday and they have to take credit by being the person on the email. That that will haunt me for days. Oh, it's really good. I'll be thinking about that for days now. I fucking can't stand people like that. It drives me nuts. One big consequence is it's really hard to tell who the people are who are creating value in that space too. Mm hmm. Of course. Sure. Because it's just like television. Show is so I'll give you an example of very good friend of mine who's very famous comedian had this show. And his agent said we're going to attach these producers. It'll help get it made. And he goes, well, what are they going to do? Because they're not going to do anything. It's just be in name. He goes, but they're going to get credit. He goes, yeah, he goes, fuck that. He goes, no, no, listen, listen. This is better for the show. It'll help the show. Right. Give me a few minutes. They'll have a piece of the show. He's like, yes, yes, but like it's a matter of whether the show gets successful or or not. And this is a good thing to do. And he's like, what are you talking about? But it was a conflict of interest because this guy was, the agent was representing these other people. Oh, this is completely common. So there's these executive producers that are on shows that have zero to do with it. So many industries are like this. And that's why we got into startups. It's literally like you in the world. It's like in a way, like stand up comedy like Jared said, podcasting. Or podcasting where your enemy isn't actually hate. It's indifference. Like most of the stuff you do, especially when you're getting started, like why would anyone like give a shit about you? They're just not going to pay attention. Yeah, that's not even your enemy. You know, that's just all potential. That's all that is. You know, like your enemies within you, it's like figure out a way to make whatever you're doing good enough that you don't have to think about it not being valuable. It's meditative. Like there's no way for it not to be in some way a reflection of like yourself. You know, you're kind of like in this battle with you trying to convince yourself that you're great. So the ego wants to grow and then you're constantly trying to compress it and compress it. And if there's not that outside force, your ego will expand to fill whatever volume is given to it. Like if you have money, if you have fame, if everything's given and you don't make contact with the unforgiving on a regular basis, like yeah, you know, you're going to end up, you're going to end up doing that to yourself. And you could. Yeah, it's possible to avoid that you have to have strategies. Yeah, you have to be intention about it. Yeah. The best strategy is jujitsu. Yeah. It's Mark Zuckerberg is a different person now. Yeah, you can see it. You can see it. Yeah. Well, it's a really good thing for people that have too much power because you just get strangled all the time. And then you just get your arms bent sideways. And after a while, you're like, okay, this is reality. This is reality. This social hierarchy thing that I've created is just nonsense. It's just smoke and mirrors. And they know it is, which is why they so rapidly enforce these hierarchies. The best like why we can have. And ma'am and all that kind of shit. That's what that is. Like you don't feel like you really have respect unless you say that. These poor kids that have to go from college where they're talking to these dipshit professors out into the world and operating under the same rules that they've been like forced in indoctrinated to. It's God to just make it on your own. It's amazing what you can get used to though. And like the it's not a, you're mentioning the producer thing. That is literally also a thing that happens in academia. So you'll have these conversations where it's like, all right, well, this paper is your fucking garbage or something. But we want to get it in a paper in a journal. And so let's see if we can get like a famous guy on the list of authors so that when it gets reviewed, people go like, oh, Mr. So and so. Okay. And that literally happens. And the funny thing is like the hissy fits over this are like the stakes are so brutally low. At least with your producer example, like someone stands to make a lot of money with this. You get maybe like an assistant professorship out of it best. That's like 40 grand a year. And you're it's just like what this is it's just. Well, what the producers it is money. But I don't even think they noticed the money anymore. I think a big part because all those guys are really, really rich already. I think you know, if you're a big time TV producer, you're really rich. I think the big thing is being thought of as a genius who's always connected to successful projects. Right. Yeah. That is like always going to be a thing. And it wasn't one producer. It was like a couple. So there's going to be a couple different people that were on this thing that had zero to do with it. It was all written by a stand up comedian. His friends all helped them. They all put it together. And then he was like, no, you want to firing his agent over it. Oh, yeah. It's good for him. Yeah, the fuck out of here. At a certain point for the producers too, it's kind of like you'll have people approaching you for help on projects that look nothing like projects you've actually done. So I feel like it just adds noise to your universe. Like if you're actually trying to build a cool shit, you know what I mean? Like how many people just want to be busy? They just want more things happening and they think more is better. More is not better because more is energy that takes away from the better, whatever the important shit is. Yeah, the focus. You'll have so much time until AI takes over. Then you'll have all the time in the world because no one will be employed and everything will be automated. We'll be on universal basic income. And that's the show. That's the sitcom. That's the sitcom. That's the sitcom. Much more people existing on $250 a week. Oh, I would watch that. Yeah. Because the government just gives everybody that. That's what you live off of. Like weird shit is cheap. Like the stuff that's like all like well, the stuff you can get from chatbots and AI agents is cheap, but like food is super expensive or something. Yeah. Organic food is going to be going to have to kill people for it. Like you will eat people. It will be like a soilent world. Right. So it will be really green. That is more free range than people though. It's true. It depends on what they're eating though. It's just like animals. You know, you don't know I eat a bear that's been eating me salmon. They taste like shit. Yeah, I didn't know that. Yeah. I've been eating my bear wrong this entire time. So back to the quantum thing. So quantum computing is infinitely more powerful than standard computing. Would it make sense then that if quantum computing can run a large language model that it would reach a level of intelligence that's just preposterous? So yeah, one way to think of it is like there are problems that quantum computers can solve way, way, way, way better than classical computers. And so like the numbers get observed pretty quickly. It's like problems that a classical computer couldn't solve if it had the entire lifetime of the universe to solve it. Right. A quantum computer right in like 30 seconds boom. But but the flip side, like there are problems that quantum computers just like can't help us accelerate. The kinds that like one classic problem that quantum computers help with is this thing called like the traveling salesman paradox or problem where you have like a bunch of different locations that a salesman needs to hit. And what's the best path to hit them most efficiently? It's like kind of a classic problem if you're going around different places and have to make stops. There are a lot of different problems that have the right shape for that. A lot of quantum machine learning, which is a field, is focused on how do we take standard AI problems like AI workloads that we want to run and like massage them into a shape that gives us a quantum advantage. And that's it's a nascent field. There's a lot going on there. I would expect like my personal expectations that we just build the human level AI and very quickly after that super intelligence without ever having a factor in quantum. But it's a good to find that for people. What's the difference between human level AI and super intelligence? Yeah. Yeah, human level AI is like AI, you can imagine like it's AI that is as smart as you are in let's say all the things you could do on a computer. So you know, you can, yeah, you can wear a food on a computer, but you can also write software on a computer. You can also email people and pay them to do shit on a computer. You can also trade stocks on a computer. So it's like as smart as a smart person for that. Super intelligence people have various definitions and they're all kinds of like honestly hissy fits about like different definitions. Generally speaking, it's something that's like very significantly smarter than the smartest human. And so you think about it, it's kind of like it's as smart as much smarter than you as you might be smarter than a toddler. And you think about that and you think about like the, you know, how do you, how would how would a toddler control you? It's kind of hard. You can, you can out think a toddler pretty much like any day of the week. And so super intelligence gets us at these levels where you can potentially do things that are completely different and basically, you know, new scientific theories and we last time we talked about, you know, new, new stable forms of matter that were being discovered by these kind of narrow systems. But now you're talking about a system that is like has that intuition combined with the ability to talk to you as a human and to just have really good like rapport with you but can also do math, it can also write code, it can also like solve quantum mechanics and has that all kind of wrapped up in the same package. One of the things too that by definition, if you build a human level AI, one of the things it must be able to do as well as humans is AI research itself. Yeah. Or at least the parts of AI research that you can do in just like software, like, you know, by coding or whatever these systems are designed to do. And so one implication of that is you now have automated AI researchers. And if you have automated AI researchers, that means you have AI systems that can automate the development of the next level of their own capabilities. And now you're getting into that whole, you know, singularity thing where it's an exponential that just builds on itself and builds on itself, which is kind of why, you know, a lot of people argue that like if you build a human level AI, super intelligence can't be that far away. You've basically unlocked everything because we kind of have gotten very close, right? Like it's it's past the the fermi, not the fermi paradox. The what is it? Oh, yeah, yeah, the, you're just talking about them. Yeah, the test the all the terrain test. Teri test. Thank you. We're just talking about horrible. What happened to him was, you know, the chemistry concentrated him because he was gay. Yeah. Terrific. Mine's up killing himself. The guy who figures out what's the test to figure out whether or not AI has become sentient. And by the way, does this in like what? 1950s. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Alan Turing is like the guy was a beast, right? And how did he think that through? He invented even minerals. He invented basically the concept that underlies all computers. Like he was like an absolute beast. He was a code breaker. He broke the Nazi codes, right? And he also wasn't even the first person to come up with this idea of machines, building machines and they're being implications like human disempowerment. So if you go back to, I think it was like the late 1800s and I don't remember the guy's name, but I sort of like came up with this. He was observing the industrial revolution and mechanization of labor and kind of starting to see more and more like if you zoom out it's almost like you have an, humans are an ant colony and the artifacts that that colony is producing, they're really interesting are these machines. Yeah. You know, you kind of like look at the surface of the earth is like gradually increasingly mechanized thing. And it's not super clear if you zoom out enough like what is actually running the show here? Like you've got human servicing machines, humans looking to improve the capability of these machines at this frantic pace. They're not even in control of what they're doing. Our economic forces are pushing. We just serve under the master right at a certain point. Like yeah, and the whole thing is like especially with a competition that's going on between the labs, which is kind of in general. You're at a point where like do the CEOs of the labs like they're these big figureheads, like they go on interviews, they talk about what they're doing and stuff. Do they really have control over the any part of the system? Because the economy is in this like almost convulsive fit right? Like you can almost feel like it's like it's hurling out AGI. And like for as one kind of I guess data point here, like all these labs opening a eye, Microsoft, Google every year they're spending like an aircraft carrier worth of capital individually. Just to build bigger data centers to house more AI chips to train bigger, more powerful models. And that's like so we're actually getting the point where if you look at on a power consumption basis, like we're getting to you know, two, three, four, five percent of US power production. If you project out into late 2020s kind of 2026, 27 you're not for double digit though for double digit for single digit. Yeah, you're talking like that's a few gigawatts. So one gigawatt. So enough for single digit. It's in the like for for 2027 you're looking at like you know in the point fiveish percent, but it's like it's a big fucking frat like you're talking about gigawatts and gigawatts. One gigawatt is a million homes. So you're seeing like one data center in 2027 is easily going to break a gig. There's going to be multiple like that. And so it's like a thousand sorry a million home city metropolis really that is just dedicated to training like one fucking model. Like that's what this is. Again, if you zoom out a planet earth, you can interpret it as like this like all these humans frantically running around like ants just like building this like artificial brain and it's like finding a compromise assembling itself on the face of the planet. Marshall McLuhan in like 1963 or something like that said, human beings are the sex organs of the machine world. Oh, that hits that hits different today. Yeah, it does. I've always said that if we were aliens or if aliens came here and studied us, they'd be like, what is the dominant species on the planet doing? What's making better things? That's all it does. It's the whole thing. It's dedicated to making better things. And all of its instincts, including materialism, including status, keeping up with the Jones's, all that stuff is tied to newer, better stuff. You don't want old shit. You want new stuff. You don't want an iPhone 12. You know, what are you doing you loser? You need newer, better stuff. And they convince people, especially in the realm of like consumer electronics, most people are buying things that absolutely don't need the vast majority of the spending on new phones is completely unnecessary. But I just need that extra like that extra like fourth camera though. I feel like my life isn't coming. I run one of my phones as an iPhone 11 and I'm purposely not switching it just to see if I notice it. I fucking never notice anything. I watch YouTube on it. I text people. It's all the same. I go online. It works. It's all the same. Probably the biggest thing there is going to be the security side, which no, they update the security. It's all software. But I mean, if your phone gets old enough, I mean, like it is certainly going to stop up. Yeah. Like iPhone one, you know, China's watching all your dick pics. Oh, dude. I mean, salt type food and they're watching all our dick pics. They're definitely seeing mine. Which salt type food? So salt type. Oh, sorry. I mean, Chinese cyber attack actually starts to get us to kind of the broader. Greater great name, by the way. Salt type food. Yeah, guys. I really wish they would name it. They have the coolest names for their cyber operations. That's interesting. Yeah. Salt type food. You know what? It's kind of like when people go out and do like an awful, like a school shooting or something and they're like, oh, let's talk about, you know, if you give it a cool name, like now the Chinese are definitely going to do it again. Anyway, that's they have a cool name. Yeah, that's definitely a salt type food. Salt type food. But it's this thing where basically so there was in the 3G kind of protocol that was set up years ago. Law enforcement agencies included back doors intentionally to be able to access comms, you know, theoretically if they got a warrant and so on. And well, you introduce a backdoor. You have adversaries like China who are wicked good at cyber. They're going to find and exploit those back doors. And now basically they're sitting there and they had been for some people think like maybe a year or two before it was really discovered. And just a couple months ago, they kind of go like, oh, cool. Like we got fucking like China all up in our shit. And this is like this is like flippest switch for them and like you turn off the power or water to a state or like you fucking yeah. Well, sorry. This is sorry. Salt type food that was about just sitting on the like basically telecoms now. Well, that's the telecom. Yeah. But yeah, I mean, that's another thing. There's another there's another thing where they're doing that too. Yeah. Kind of where what we've been looking into over the last year is this question of how what is if you're going to make like a Manhattan project for super intelligence, right? Which is that's I mean, that's what we're texting about like way back and then actually funnily enough we shifted right our date for security reasons. But if you're going to do a Manhattan project for super intelligence, what does that have to look like? What does the security game have to look like to actually make it so that China is not all up in your shit? Like today it is extremely clear that at the world's top AI labs like all that shit is being stolen. Like there's not a single lab right now that isn't being spied on successfully based on everything we've seen by the Chinese. Can I ask you this? Are we spying on the Chinese as well? That's a big problem. Do you want to we're we're I mean, we're definitely we're definitely doing some stuff. But in terms of the relative balance between the two, we're not where we need to be they spy on us better than we spy on them. Yeah, because like we because like they build all our shit. They build all the Huawei situation, right? Yeah. And then it's also the oh my God, it's the like if you look at the power grid. So this is now now public, but if you look at like transformer substations. So these are the essentially anyway, they're a crucial part of the electrical grid. And there's really like basically all of them have components that are made in China. China is known to have planted back doors like trojans into those substations to fuck with our grid. The thing is when you see a salt typhoon, when you see a like big Chinese cyber attack or a big Russian cyber attack, you're not seeing their best. These countries do not go and show you like their best cards out the gate. You you show the bare minimum that you can without tipping your hand at the actual exquisite capability capabilities you have. Like the way that one of the people kind of who's been walking us through all this really well explained it is like the philosophy is you want to learn without teaching, right? You want to use what is the lowest level capability that has the effect on after. So that's what that is. I'll give an example. I'll tell you a story that's kind of like it's a public story and it's from a long time ago. But it kind of gives a flavor of like how far these countries will actually go when they're playing the game for fucking real. So it's 1945. America and the Soviet Union are like best pals because they've just defeated the Nazis, right? To celebrate that victory and the coming new world order that's going to be great for everybody, the children of the Soviet Union give us a gift to the American ambassador in Moscow. This beautifully carved wooden seal of the United States of America. The whole thing. Ambassador is thrilled with it. He hangs it up on behind his desk in his private office. You can see where I'm going with this probably. But yeah, seven years later, 1952 finally occurs to us like, let's take a town and actually examine this. So they dig into it and they find this incredible contraption in it called a cavity resonator. And this device doesn't have a power source, doesn't have a battery, which means when you're sweeping the office for bugs, you're not going to find it. What it does instead is this design, that's it. That's it. It's the thing they call it the thing. And what this cavity resonator does is it's basically designed to reflect radio radiation back to a receiver to listen to all the noises and conversations and talking in the ambassadors private office. And so how's it doing you without a power source? Well, that's what they do. So the Soviets for seven years, parked a van across the street from the embassy had a giant fucking microwave antenna aimed right at the ambassador's office and we're like zapping in and looking back at the reflection and literally listening to every single thing he was saying. And the best part was when the embassy staff was like, we're going to go on like sweep the office for bugs periodically. Maybe like, hey, Mr. Ambassador, we're about to sweep your office for bugs. And the ambassador was like, cool, please proceed and go and sweep my office for bugs. And the KGB dudes in the van were like, just turn it off. Sounds like they're going to sweep the office for bugs. Let's turn off our giant microwave antenna and they kept at it for seven years. It was only ever discovered because there was this like British radio operator who was just you know, doing his thing, changing his dial and he's like, oh shit, is that the ambassador? I'm just not going to run away. So the thing is, oh, and actually, sorry. One other thing about that. If you heard that story and you're kind of thinking yourself, hang on a second, they were shooting like microwaves at our ambassador 24 seven for seven years. Whoa. Doesn't that seem like it might like dry his genitals or something or something like that? That most of a lead vest. And the answer is, yes. Yes. Yes. And this is something that came up in our investigation just from every single person who was like, who was filling us in and who dialed in and knows what's up. They're like, look, so you got to understand like our adversaries, if they need to like give you cancer in order to rip your shit off of your laptop, they're going to give you some cancer because I don't know specifically about the ambassador, but like, that's also so we're limber. There's actually people that you talk to later that can go in in more detail here, but older technology like that, kind of lower power. So you're you're less likely to look at that. Nowadays, we live in a different world. The guy that invented that microphone invented his last name is Theorem and he invented this instrument called the Theorem, which is a fucking really interesting thing. Oh, he's just moving his hands. Your hands control it waving over this. It's a fucking wild instrument. Have you ever seen this before, Jamie? Yes, I'll juice you, J.P. Playing it yesterday on Instagram. He's like practicing. It's a fucking cool. Wow. That's a pretty good attitude. Yeah. There's two, two, both hands are controlling it by moving in and out and space X, Y. I don't honestly don't really know how the fuck it works, but I've seen it. Wow. That is wild. It's also a lot harder to do than it seems. So American, the American's tried to replicate this for years and years and years without really succeeding. Anyway, that's all kind of part of a friend who used to work for intelligence agency and he was working in Russia. And they found that the building was bugged with these super sophisticated bugs that operated their power came from the swaying of the building. Yeah. How? I've never heard this swaying of just like your walk. Like I have a mechanical watch on. So when I move my watch, it powers up the spring and it keeps the watch. It's an automatic, that's all an automatic mechanical watch. They figured out a way to just... on so when I move my watch it powers up the spring and it keeps the watch that's an automatic mechanical watch worth. They figured out a way to just buy the subtle swing of the building in the wind that was what was powering this listening device. So this is the thing right like the I mean what the fang. Well and the things that the things that nation states subjiming. Cool. Google says that's that's what was power in this thing. The great seal bug which is a really thing. So there's another one. No. Oh, this is so you can actually see in that video I think there was a you too. Yeah. So same kind of thing Jamie. I got just my typed in Russia's buy bug building sway. The thing is what pops up. The thing which is what we were just talking about. Oh, that thing. So that's powered the same way. But I swear that building. I don't think it was powered by radio frequency. Um, emission. So I did there may be another thing related to it. Not not sure. But yeah, maybe Google's a little confused. Maybe it's the word sway is what's thrown it off. But it's um, no, but it's it's a great catch. And the only reason we even know that too is that the when the you two's were flying over Russia, they had a you two that got shot down in 1960, the Russians go like, Oh, um, like friggin Americans like spying on us with the fuck. I thought we were buddies or what? Well, it's a 60s. So I just think that. But um, and then the Americans are like, okay, bitch. Look at this. And they brought out the the seal. Um, and that's how it became public. It was basically like the response to the Russians saying like, you know, wow, yeah, they're all dirty. But everyone's spying on everybody. That's a thing. And I think they probably all have some sort of UFO technology. We need to talk about that. We turn off our mics and 99% sure a lot of that should You need to talk to some of the talk in the people. Oh, I'm I know I'm talking to a lot of people. There's there might be some other people that you'd be interested in. I would very much be interested. Here's the problem. Some of the people I'm talking to, I'm positive, where they're talking to me to give me bullshit. I cuz I'm a lie on your list. Right. No, and you guys aren't the list. But there's certain people in my room. Maybe it's most of this is true. But some of it's not on purpose. There's there's that. I guarantee you, I know I talk to people that don't tell me the truth. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting problem in like all intel, right? Because there's always the mix of incentives is so fucked. Like the adversary is trying to add noise into the system. You got you got pockets of people within the government that have different incentives from other pockets. And then you have top secret clearance and all sorts of other things that are going on. Yeah. One guy that texted me is like the guy telling you that the they aren't real is literally involved in these meetings. So stop. To stop listening to it. It's like one of the one of the one of the techniques, right, is like is actually to inject so much noise the. Don't know what's what you can't follow. So this actually, this this happened in in the COVID thing, right? The lab leak versus the natural like what market thing? Yeah. So I remember there was a there was a debate that that happened about what was the origin of COVID. This was like a a few years ago. Uh, it was like an 18 or 20 hour long YouTube debate just like punishingly long and it was like there was a hundred thousand dollar bet either way on who would win and it was like lab leak versus wet market. And at the end of the 18 hours, the conclusion was like one of them one, but the conclusion was like it's basically 50 50 between them. And then I remember like hearing that and talking to some folks and being like, hang on a second. So you got to believe the whether it came from a lab or whether it came from a wet market. One of the top three priorities of the CCP from a propaganda standpoint is like, don't get fucking blamed for COVID. And that means they're putting like one to 10 billion dollars and some of their best people on a global propaganda effort to cover up evidence and confuse and blah, blah, blah. You really think that you that you're 50% like your that confusion isn't coming from that incredibly resource effort. Like they know what they're doing, particularly when different biologists and virologists who weren't attached to anything. Yeah. We're talking about like the cleavage points and this different aspects of the virus that appeared to be genetically manipulated. The fact that there was only one spill over event, not multiple ones. None of it made any sense. All that seemed like some sort genetically engineered virus. It seemed like gain of function research and they or early emails were talking about that. But then everybody changed their opinion. And even a taboo, right, against talking about it through that lens. Oh, yeah, total propaganda. It's racist. Yeah, I mean, it's crazy because nobody thought the Spanish flu is racist and it didn't even really come from Spain. Yeah, that's true. Yeah. From Kentucky. I didn't know that. Yeah. I think it was Kentucky or Virginia. Where that would have Spanish flu or originate from, but nobody got mad. Well, that's because that's because the state of Kentucky has an incredibly sophisticated propaganda machine. Pindit. It was, I think it was, it was an agricultural thing. Kansas. Kansas. Thank you. Yeah. God damn Kansas. I've always said that. I've always liked to say any night's gates. H1N1 strain, the had genes of avian origin. By the way, this is people always talk about the Spanish flu. If it was around today, they would just everybody would just get antibiotics and we'd be fine. Mm hmm. So this, this whole mass die off of people. It would be like the Latinx flu and we would be a Latinx flu. The Latinx flu. The Latinx flu. That one didn't stick at all. I didn't stick at Latinx. I don't people like claiming they never used it and they pull up old videos of them. Yeah. Like that's a dumb one. Like it's literally a gendered language you fucking idiot. Like you can't just get that. That's true. For a while though, like it was short. Everything goes for a while. Yeah. So think about how long they did the bottoms. They did the bottoms for 50 fucking years. Well, they went, hey, maybe we should stop doing this. It was like the same attitude that got, that got Turin chemically castrated right? I mean, I was like, hey, let's just get in there and fuck around a bit and see well, this was before the SSRIs and also it's of other interventions. But when what was the year lobotomies, it's I believe it stopped in 67 was it 50 years? I think you said 70 last time and that was correct when I pulled it up. 70 years? 1970. I think it was 67. I like how this has come up so many times. It's like I think last time you said it. It comes up all the time because it's so it's one of those things. You can't just trust the medical establishment. Especially 67. It says maybe one more in 72. Oh, oh, died in 72. When did they start doing it? When the, I think they started in the 30 or the 20s rather. That's the following. You know, the first. The first 24 who did a lobotomy. Yeah, it says 24. Freeman arrives, watch DC direct labs. 35. They tried it first. A luke tonomy. They just scramble your fucking brains. But doesn't it make you feel better to call it a lukeotomy though? Because it sounds a lot more professional. No. The bottom economy. It's on. The economy sounds gross. Sounds like lugey. Like, like lobotomy. Boy to pick your Kansas also Kansas. All, all worlds point to Kansas. This is a problem. So that's what happens. And everything's flat. You just lose your fucking marbles. You go crazy. That's the mean issue. But that's right. Yeah. So they did this for so long. Somebody want to know the prize for lobotomy. Wonderful. Imagine give that back. You beat your shit. Yes, seriously. You're kind of like, you know, you don't want to display it up in yourself. But it's just a good indicator. It's like, it should let you know that oftentimes science is incorrect. And that oftentimes, you know, unfortunately, people have a history of doing things. And then they have to justify that they've done these things. Yeah. And they, you know, but now there's also there's so much more tooling to, right? If you're a nation state and you want to fuck with people and inject narratives into the ecosystem, right? Like, the whole idea of autonomous AI agents too, like having these basically like Twitter bots or whatever bots, like a lot of one thing we've been, we've been thinking about too on the side is like the idea of, you know, audience capture, right? Do you have like, like big people with high profiles and kind of gradually steering them towards a position by creating bots that like through comments, through right votes, you know, it's like 100%. It's absolutely real. Yeah. And a couple of the big, like a couple of big accounts on X like that that we're in touch with have sort of said like, yeah, especially in the last two years, it's actually become hard. Like I spent with the thoughtful ones, right? It's become hard to like stay sane, not not on X, but like across social media on all the platforms. And that is around when, you know, it became possible to have AI's that can speak like people, you know, 90%, 95% of the time. And so you have to imagine that, yeah, adversaries are using this and doing this and pushing the frontier. Like there's there'd be fools if they're doing that. Oh, yeah, 100%. You have to do it because of for sure we're doing that. And this is one of the things where, you know, like it used to be so opening, I actually used to do this assessment of their AI models as part of their, they're kind of what they call their preparedness framework that would look at the persuasion capabilities of their models as one kind of threat vector. They pulled that out recently, which they've is kind of like, why? You can argue that it makes sense. I actually think it's, it's somewhat concerning because one of the things you might worry about is if these systems, sometimes they get trained through what's called reinforcement learning, potentially you could imagine training these to be super persuasive by having them interact with real people and convince them practice at convincing them to do specific things. If that, if you get to that point, you know, these these labs ultimately will have the ability to deploy agents at scale that can just persuade a lot of people to do whatever they want, including pushing legislative agendas, felt like anyone help them help them prep for meetings with the Hill, the administration, whatever. And like, how should I like convince this person to do that like, yeah, well, they'll do that with text messages, make it more business like, make it friendlier, make it more jovial. But this is like the same optimization pressure that keeps you on TikTok, that same like addiction. Imagine that applied to like persuading you of some like some fact, right? That's like a on the other hand, maybe a few months from now, we're all just going to be very, very convinced that it was all fine. Yeah, maybe they'll get so good. It would make sense to you. Maybe they'll just be right. That's how it works. Yeah, it's a confusing time period, you know, we've talked about this ad nauseum, but bears repeating this former FBI analyst who investigated Twitter before Elon bought it said that he thinks it's about 80% bots. Yeah, yeah, 80%. That's that's one of the reasons why the bot purge like when when Elon acquired it and started working on is so important. Like there needs to be the challenges like detecting these things is so hard, right? So increasingly, like more and more they can hide like basically perfectly, like how do you tell the difference between a cutting edge AI bot and a human just from the you can because they can generate AI images of a family of a backyard barbecue post all these things up and make it seem like it's real. Yeah, especially now AI images are insanely good now. They were there. Yes. It's crazy. And if you have a person, you could just you could take a photo of a person and manipulate it in any way you'd like. And then now this is your new guy. You could do it instantaneously. And then this guy has a bunch of opinions on things and seems to seem to always align with the Democratic Party. But whatever he's a good guy, a family man, he's out in his barbecue. He's not even a fucking human being. And people are arguing with this bot like back and forth and you'll see it on any social issue. You see it with Gaza and Palestine. You see it with abortion. You see it with religious freedoms. Yeah. You just see these bots. You see these arguments. And you know, you see like various levels. You see like the extreme position. And then you see more reasonable centrist position. But essentially what they're doing is they're consistently moving what's okay for other and further in a certain direction. And in fact, it's it's it's it's both directions. Like it's like you know how when you're trying to like you're you're trying to capitalize a boat or something. You're you're like fucking with your buddy on the lake or something. So you you push on one side and they push on the other side. Yeah. You push and until eventually it capsizes. This is kind of like our electoral process is already naturally like this. Right? We we go like we have a party in power for a while. Then like they they get, you know, they basically get like you get tired of them and these you switch. And that's kind of the natural way how democracy works or in a republic. But the way that adversaries think about this is they're like perfect. This swing back and forth. All we have to do is like when it's on this way, we push and push push until it goes more extreme. And then there's a reaction to it. Right? And that's when you back and we push and push and push on the other side until eventually something breaks. And that's the risk. Yeah. It's it's also like you know the organizations that are doing this. Like we already know this is part of Russia's M.O. China's M.O. because back when it was easier to detect, we already could see them doing this shit. So there is this website called this person does not exist I still exist surely now, but it's kind of you kind of succeeded. Yeah. But you would like every time you refresh this this website, you would see a different like human face that was AI generated and what the Russian internet research agency would do. Exactly. What all these these uh and it's it's actually yeah. I don't think they've really upgraded it. But uh or yeah, style that's fake. Wow. They're so good. This is old. This is like years old and years and you could actually detect these things pretty reliably. Like you might remember the the whole thing about um AI systems were having a hard time generating like hands that only had like five things. Right. Yeah. That's that's so for though. That's a little hint of it. Were though back in the day in this person does not exist. And you'd have the the Russians would take like the face from that and then use it as the profile picture for like a Twitter bot. Right. And so that you could actually detect you'd be like, okay, I've got you there. I've got you there. I can kind of get a rough count. Right. Now we can't but we definitely know they've been in the game for a long time. There's no way they're not. And the thing with the thing with like nation state like propaganda attempts, right, is that like people have this this idea that like, ah, like I've caught this like Chinese influence operation or whatever. Like we nail them. The reality is nation states operate at like 30 different levels. And if you're a priority like just influencing our information spaces as a priority for them, they're not just going to operate. They're not just going to pick a level and do it. They're going to do all 30 of them. And so you, even if you're like, I'm on the best in the world of like detecting the shit, you're going to like, you're going to catch and stop like levels one through 10. And then you're going to be like, you're going to be aware of like level 11, 12, 13, like you're working against it. And you're, you know, maybe you're starting to think about level 16. And you, you imagine like, you know about level 18 or whatever. But they're like, they're above you below you all around you. They're, they're incredibly, incredibly resource. And this is something that came like, came came through very strongly for us. You guys have seen the Yuri Bismillow video from 1984, where he's talking about how the all our educational institutions have been captured. Also on the archer. It was talking about Marxism has been injected into school systems and how you have essentially two decades before you're completely captured by these ideologies. And it's going to permeate and destroy all of your confidence and democracy. And it was 100% correct. And this is before these kind of tools before because like the vast majority of the exchanges of information right now are taking place on social media. The vast majority of debating about things arguing, I'll take a place on social media. And if that FBI analyst is correct, 80% of his bullshit, which is really wild. Well, and you look at like some of the documents that have come out, I think it was like, um, the, uh, I think it was the CIA game plan, right? For regime change, or like undermining, like how do you do it? Right? Have multiple decision makers at every level. Right. Right. All these things. And like what a surprise that's exactly what like the US bureaucracy looks like today. Slow everything down, make change impossible. Yeah. Make it so that everybody gets frustrated with it and they give up hope. They decided to do that to other countries. Yeah. For sure. They do that here. Open society. Right. I mean, that's part of the trade off. And that's actually a big, big part of the challenge too. So when, when we're working on this, right, like one of the things I was talking about these like 30 different layers of security access or whatever, one of the consequences is you bump into a team at, so that like the teams we ended up working with on this project were folks that we bumped into after the end of our, our last investigation, who kind of were like, Oh, we talked about last year. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like looking at AGI looking at the national security, um, kind of landscape around that. And a lot of them are like really well placed. It was like, uh, you know, special forces guys from tier one units. So you'll see a team six type thing. And because they're so like in that ecosystem, you, you'll see people who were like ridiculously specialized in combat, like the best people in the world at doing whatever the thing is, like to break the security. And they don't know often about like another group of guys who have a completely different capability set. And what you find is like your, your indexing like hard on this vulnerability. And then suddenly someone says, oh, yeah, but by the way, I can just hop that fence. So it's like a really funny thing, they're really funny thing about this is like most are even like almost all of the really, really like elite security people kind of think that like all the other security people are dumbasses, even when they're not or like, yeah, they're, they're, they're biased in the direction of because it's so easy when everything's like stove piped, but so most people who say they're like, elite security actually are dumbasses. Because because most security is like about checking boxes and like sock to compliance and shit like that. But yeah, it's, but what it is is like, so everything so stove piped that that you don't, you literally can't know what the exquisite state of the art is in another domain. So it's a lot easier for somebody to come up and be like, oh, yeah, like I'm actually really good at this other thing that you don't know. And so figuring out who actually is the, like we had this experience over and over where like, you know, you run into a team and then you run into another team, they have an interaction kind of like, oh, interesting. So like, you know, like these are the really kind of the people at the top of their game. And that's been this very long process to figure out like, okay, what does it take to actually secure our critical infrastructure against like CCP, for example, like Chinese attacks if we're, if we're building a super intelligence project. And it's, it's this weird like kind of challenge because of the stove piping, no one has the full picture. And like, we don't think that we have it even now, but definitely don't know of anyone who's come like that, like this close to it. The best people are the ones who when they, when they encounter another team and, and other ideas and start to engage with it are like, instead of being like, oh, like, you don't know what you're talking about, who just like actually lock on and go like, that's fucking interesting. Tell me more about that. Right. People that have control there you go. Yes. 100% with everything. The best of the best of the best, like got there by eliminating the rego as much as they could. Always the way it is. Yeah. And it's, it's also like the, the fact of, you know, the 30 layers of the stack or whatever it is of all these security issues means that no one can have the complete picture at any one time. And the stack is changing all the time. People are inventing new shit, people things are falling in and out of. And so, you know, figuring out what is that team, that can actually get you that complete picture is an exercise. A, you can't really do, it's hard to do it from the government side because you got to engage with data center building companies. You got to engage with the AI labs and in particular with like insiders at the labs who will tell you things that by the way the, the lab leadership will tell you the opposite of in some cases. And so like it's just this, this gory and not like where it's like it took us months to to like pin down every kind of dimension that we think we've pinned down. I'll give an example actually of that like, trying to do the handshake, right, between different sets of people. So we were talking to one person who's, who's thinking hard about data center security working with like frontier labs on this shit. Very much like at the, at the top of her game. But she's kind of from like the, the academic space kind of Berkeley, like the avocado toast kind of side of the spectrum, you know. And she's talking about, she'd reviewed our, the report we put out, the investigation we put out. And she's like, you know, I think, I think you guys are, are talking to the wrong people. And we're like, can you say more about that? And she's like, well, I don't think like, you, you know, you talked to tier one special forces. I don't think they like, like, no much about that. Or like, okay, that's not correct. But can you say why? And she's like, I feel like those are just the people that like go and like bomb stuff. Blocean, like, blocean that blows it up. It's understandable too. Because like, it is a lot of totally understandable. A lot of people have the wrong sense of like what a tier one asset actually can, can do. It's like, well, that's ego on her part. Because she doesn't understand what they do. It's ego all the way down, right? But that's just dumb thing to say. If you literally don't know what they do. And you say, don't they just blow stuff up? Where's my own latte? It has a weirdly good impression. But she did ask about a latte. But she did. But she's talking up. Speak. She should fire everyone who talks and up. She didn't talk in up speak. But when they do that, you should just tell them to leave. There's no way you have an original thought. This is how you talk China. Can you get out of our data center? Yeah, please. I don't want to rip on on that too much though. Because this is, one really important factor here is all these groups have a part of the puzzle. And they're all fucking a, they are like world class at their own little slice. And a big part of what we've had to do is like bring people together and and they're people who help us immeasurably do this. But like bring people together and and explain to them the value that each other has in a way that's like that allows that bridge building to be made. And by the way, the tier one guys are the most like ego moderated of the people that we talked to. There's a lot of like Silicon Valley hubris going around right now where people are like, listen, like get out of our way. We'll figure out how to do this like super secure data center infrastructure. We got this. Why? Because we're the guys building AGI motherfucker. Like that's kind of the attitude. And it's like cool, man. Like that's like a doctor having an opinion about like how to repair your car. I get that it's not the like elite kind of like, you know, whatever. But someone has to help you build like a good friggin fence. Like I mean, it's not just that. It's a mixed bag too because like, yes, um, the a lot of hyperscalers like like Google, um, Amazon genuinely do have some of the best private sector security around data centers in the world. Like hands down. The problem is there's levels above that. And the guys who like look at what they're doing and see what the holes are just go like, oh, yeah, like I could get in there. No problem. And they can fucking do it. One thing my, my wife said to me on a couple of occasions like, um, you seem to like, and this is towards the beginning of the project. You seem to like change your mind a lot about what the right configuration is of how to do this. And yeah, it's because every other day you're having a conversation with somebody's like, oh, yeah, like great job on on this thing. But like, I'm not going to do that. I'm going to do this other completely different thing. And that just fucks everything over. And so you have enough of those conversations. And at a certain point, you're, you're, you're plan your, your game plan on this can no longer look like we're going to build a perfect fortress. It's got to look like, um, we're going to account for our own uncertainty on the security side and the fact that we're never going to be able to patch everything. Like, you have to, I mean, it's like, the, the chat. And that means you actually have to go on offense from the beginning as, because like the truth is, and this came up over and over again, there's no world where you're ever going to build the perfect exquisite fortress around all your shit and hide behind your walls like this forever. That just doesn't work because no matter how perfect your system is and how many angles you've covered, like your, your adversary is super smart, is super dedicated. If you see the field to them, they're right up in your face and they're reaching out and touching you and they're trying to see like what, what your seams are or where they break. And that just means you have to reach out and touch them from the beginning, because until you've actually like reached out and used a capability and proved like we can take down that infrastructure, we can like disrupt that, that cyber operation. We can do this. We can do that. You don't know if that capability is real or not. Like you might just be like lying to yourself and like, I can do this thing whenever I want. But actually you're kind of more an academia mode than like start out because you're not making contact every day with the thing, right? You have to touch the thing. And there's like, there's a related issue here, which is a kind of like willingness that came up over and over again. Like one of the kind of gurus of this space was like, or made the couple of them made the point that, you know, you can have the most exquisite capability in the world. But if you, if you don't actually have the willingness to use it, you might as well not have that capability. And the, the challenges right now, China rush, like our adversaries pull all kinds of stunts on us and get no consequence. Particularly during the previous administration. This was a huge, huge problem during the previous administration where you actually, you actually had sabotage operations being done on American soil by our adversaries where you had administration officials, as soon as like a thing happened. So there were, for example, there was like four different states had their 911 systems go down like at the same time, different systems to like unrelated stuff. But it was like it's, it's this stuff where it's like, let me see if I can do that. Let me see if I can do it. Let me see what the reaction is. Let me see what the, the chatter is that comes back after I do that. And one of the things that was actually pretty disturbing about that was under that under that that, uh, administration or regime or whatever, the response you got from the government right out the gate was, oh, it's an accident. And that's actually unusual. The proper procedure, the normal procedure in this case is to say, we can't comment on an ongoing investigation, which we've all heard, right? Like, you can't comment on a book you can't confirm. No, exactly. It's all, all that stuff. And that's, and that's what they say typically out the gate when they're investigating stuff. But instead coming out and saying, oh, it's just an accident is a break with what do you attribute that to? Um, they, if, if they say, if they, if they leave an opening or say, actually, this is an adversary action, we think it's an adversary action. They have to respond. The public demands a response. And they don't, they, they were to fear of escalation fearful of escalate. So what ends up happening, right? And, and, and by the way, that, that thing about like it's an accident comes out often before there would have been time for investigators to physically fly on site and take a look. Like, there's no logical way that you could even know that at the time. And they're like, boom, that's an accident. Don't worry about it. So they have an official answer. And then their responses to just bury their head in the sand and not investigate. Right. Because if you were to investigate, if you were to say, okay, we looked into this, it actually looks like it's fucking like country X that just did this thing. Right. If that's the conclusion, it's hard to imagine the American people not being like, um, what are we, like we're letting these people, uh, injure our American citizens on US soil, take out like US national security or critical infrastructure. And we're not doing anything. Like the concern is about this, like we're getting in our own way of thinking like, oh, well, escalation is going to happen. And boom, we run straight to like, there's going to be a nuclear war. Everybody's going to die. Like, when you do that, you piece between nations, stability does not come from the absence of activity. It comes from consequence. It comes from just like if you have, you know, an individual who misbehaves inside you, there's a consequence in people know it's coming. You need to train your counterparts in the international community, you're at your adversary, um, to not fuck with your stuff. Cause it can kind of stop. So are you essentially saying that if you have incredible capabilities of disrupting grids and power systems and infrastructure, you wouldn't necessarily do it, but you might try it to make sure it works a little bit. Exactly. And that this is probably the hints of some of this stuff because you've kind of, you got to get your reps in, right? You got to get your reps in. It's like, it's like, okay, so suppose that like, that I went to you and was like, hey, I bet I can kick your ass. Like, I bet I can like friggin slap a rubber guard on you and like do whatever the fuck, right? Um, and you're like, I love your expression, by the way. Yeah, you look really convincing. It's cause I'm Jack, right? Well, no, there's people that look like you that can strangle me, believe it or not. Oh, yeah, there's a lot of like very high level Brazilian Jiu Jitsu black belts that are just super nerds. And they don't live way. It's not all the only Jiu Jitsu. And if you only Jiu Jitsu, you'll have like a wiry body. That was heartless. So that slipped that in. Like, there's like guys, you look like you were just like real fucking weird. And tell us you know, you know, they're like some of the most brilliant people I've ever met. The really, that's the issue. It's like, data nerds get really involved in Jiu Jitsu. and tell you know, they're like some of the most brilliant people I've ever met. The really that's the issue is like data nerds get really involved in Jiu Jitsu and shitsu's data. But here's the thing. So that's exactly it right. So if I told you I bet I can tap you out right. I know it. We're even training. Well right. But and you're if you're like my answer was oh, I've just read a bunch of books. You'd be like oh cool. Let's go. Right. Cause making contact with reality is where the fucking learning happens. You can sit there and think all you want. Right. But unless you've actually played the chess match unless you've reached out, touched, seen what the reaction is and all this stuff. You don't actually know what you think you know. And that's actually extra dangerous. If you're sitting on a bunch of capabilities and you have this like unearned sense of superiority. Cause you haven't used those exquisite tools. Right. Like it's a challenge. And then you've got people that are ahead of departments, CEOs of corporations. Everyone has an ego. We've got it. Yeah. And this ties into like how exactly how basically the international order and quasi stability actually gets maintained. So there's like above threshold stuff, which is like you actually do wars for borders and you know, there's the potential for nuclear exchange or whatever. Like that's like all stuff that can't be hidden or games. Well, exactly like all the war games type shit. But then there's below threshold stuff. The stuff that's like you're it's it's almost like the stuff that's like, hey, I'm going to try to like poke you. Are you going to react? What are you going to do? And then if you do nothing here, then I go like, okay, what's the next level? Like poke you. I can poke you. Cause like one of the things that that we almost have an intuition for that's mistaken that comes from kind of historical experience is like this idea that, you know, that countries can actually really defend their city. And a meaningful way. So like if you think back to World War one, the most sophisticated advanced nation states on the planet could not get past a line of dudes in a trench. Like that was like that was them. Then they tried like thing after thing. Let's try tanks. Let's try aircraft. Let's try fucking hot air balloons infiltration to and literally like one side pretty much just ran out of dudes and that ended the war to put in their trench. And so we have this thought that like, oh, you know, countries can actually put up boundaries around themselves and actually, but the reality is you can you, there's so many surfaces. The surface area for attacks is just too great. And so there's there's stuff like you can actually like there's the the Havana syndrome stuff where you look at this like ratcheting escalation like, oh, let's like fry a couple of embassy staffs brains in Havana, Cuba. What are they going to do about it? Nothing? Okay, let's move on to Vienna Austria something a little bit more Western a little bit more orderly. Let's see what they do there still nothing. Okay. What if we move on to frying like Americans brains on US soil, baby and they went and did that. And so this is one of these things were like stability in reality in the world is not maintained through defense. But it's literally like you have like the crisps in the bloods with different territories and it it's stable and it looks quiet. But the reason is that if you like beat the shit out of one of my one of my guys for no good reason, I'm just going to find one of your guys and I'll blow his fucking head off. And that keeps peace and stability on the surface. But that's the reality of sub threshold competition between nation states. It's like you come in and like fuck with my boys. I'm going to fuck with your boys right back when until we push back, they're going to keep pushing that limit further and further when when important consequence of that too is like if you want to avoid nuclear escalation right. The answer is not to just take punches in the mouth over and over in the fear that eventually it's get if you do anything you're going to escalate to nukes. What all that does is it empowers the adversary to keep driving up the ratchet like what Ed's just described there is an increasing ratchet of unresponded adversary action. If you if you address the low the kind of stuff threshold stuff if they cut an undersea cable and then there's a consequence for that shit. They're less likely to cut an undersea cable and things kind of stay at that level of the thrush you know. And so the this letting them burn out. Yeah, that logic of just like let him do it. They'll stop doing it after a while. Get it out of there. They try that during the joyful. Right. Remember that's what New York City did like this. Let him lose. Let's just see how big chas gets. Yeah, it's a summer of love. Yeah, I remember. Yeah, and yeah, exactly the translation into like the the super intelligence scenario is a if we don't have our reps in if we don't know how to reach out and touch an adversary and induced consequence for them doing the same to us. Then we have no deterrence at all like we were basically just sitting right now that our state the state of security is the labs are like super and like we can probably should go deep on that piece. But like as one data point right. So there's like double digit percentages of the world's top AI labs or America's top AI labs. Of employees of employees that are like Chinese national that have ties to the Chinese mainland right. So that's that's great. Why don't we build them in? Yeah, it's really funny right? Like it's also like it's the the challenges when you talk to people who actually geez when you talk to people actually have experience dealing with like CCP activity in this space right like there's one story that that we heard that is probably worth like relaying here is like this guy from from an intelligence agency was saying like hey so there was this power outage out in Berkeley, California back in like 2019 or something. And the internet goes out across the whole campus and so there's this dorm and like all of the Chinese students are freaking out because they have an obligation to do a time based check in and basically report back on everything they've seen and heard to basically a CCP handler type thing. Right. And if they don't like maybe your mother's insulin doesn't show up maybe your like brothers travel plans get denied maybe the family business gets shut down like there's the range of options that this massive CCP state coercion machine has. This is like they've got intern like software for this like this is an institutionalized like very well developed and efficient framework for just ratcheting up pressure on individuals overseas and they believe the Chinese diaspora overseas belongs to them. If you look at like what the Chinese Communist Party writes in its like in its written like public communications they see like Chinese ethnicity as being a green like is it like no one is a bigger victim of this than the Chinese people themselves who are abroad who I've made amazing contributions to American AI innovation. You just have to look at the names on the friggin papers it's like these guys are wicked but the problem is we also have to look head on at this reality like you can't just be like oh I'm not going to say it because it makes me feel funny inside. someone has to stand up and point out the obvious that if you're going to build a fucking Manhattan project for super intelligence and the ideas to like be doing that when China is a key rival nation state actor. Yeah you're going to have to find a way to account for the personnel security side like at some point someone's going to have to do something about that. And it's like you can see they're they're hitting us right where we're weak right like America is the place where you come and you remake yourself like send us your tire and you're hungry and you're poor. And it's true and important it's true and important they're playing right off of that because they know that we don't want to look at that problem. Yeah in Chinese nationals working on these things is just bananas the fact they have to check in the CCP. Yeah and are they being monitored I mean it how much can you monitor them what do you know that they have what what equipment have they been given you can't. Yeah that's just constitutional you it's also you can't legally deny someone employment on that basis in a private company. So that's and that's something else we we found and we're kind of amazed by and even honestly just like the the regular kind of government clearance process itself is inadequate it moves moves way too slowly and it doesn't actually even even in the government we're talking about top secret clearances. So the information that they like look at for top secret we heard from a couple of people doesn't include a lot of like key sources of for example it doesn't include like foreign language sources so if the if the head of the ministry of state security in China writes a blog post that says like Bob is like the best by he spied so hard for us and he's like an awesome spy. And we're not going to see it and we're going to be like here's a clearance Bob congratulations like and we were like this that that can't possibly be real but like yeah they're like yeah that's that's true no one's looking it's complete night of the time if there's gaps in every level of the. Yeah one of the worst things here is like the. Yeah that was the physical infrastructure so the personnel thing is like fucked up the physical infrastructure thing is another area where people don't want to look because if you start looking what you start to realize is okay China makes like. A lot of our like components for our transformers for the electrical grid yep but also all these chips that are going into our our big data centers for these massive training runs. Where do they come from they come from Taiwan they come from this company called TSMC Taiwan semiconductor manufacturing company. We're increasingly on shorting that by the way which is one of the best things that's been happening lately is like massive amounts of TSMC capacity getting on short in the US but still being made right now it's basically like 100% there. The all you have to do is jump on the network at TSMC hack the right network compromise the firmware on the is the software that runs on these chips to anyway to get them to to run. And you basically can compromise all the chips going into all these never mind the fact that like Taiwan is like like like physically outside the Chinese sphere of influence for now China is going to be prioritizing the. Out of getting access to that there been cases by the way like Richard Chang like the founder of SMIC which is the sort of so so okay TSMC this massive like. Series of area aircraft carrier fabrication facilities they do like all the iPhone chips yeah they do what they do the the AI chips which are the things we care about yeah. The only place on planet earth that does this it's literally the like it's fascinating it's like the most. Easily the most advanced manufacturing or or scientific process that primates on planet earth can do is this this chip making process nanoscale like material science or you're you're putting on like these these tiny like Adam thick layers of stuff and are doing like 300 of them in a row with like you have like insulators and conductors and different kinds of like semiconductors in these. Tunnels and shit just just like the complexity of it is just all inspiring that we can do this at all is like it's magic it's magic. And it's really only been done being done in Taiwan that is the only place like only the only place right now and so a Chinese invasion of Taiwan starts looks pretty interesting through that lens right like yeah. Yeah, take your body the iPhone say goodbye like the chip supply that we rely on and then your super intelligence training run like Dan that's interesting. Samsung was trying to develop a lab here or semiconductor factory here and they weren't having enough success. Oh so okay so one one of the craziest thing to just to illustrate how hard it is to do. So you spend 50 billion dollars again an aircraft carrier we're throwing that around here and there but an aircraft carrier worth of risk capital. Well does that mean that means you build the fab the factory and it's not guaranteed it's going to work. At first this factory is pumping out these chips at like yields that are really low in other words like the only like you know 20% of the chips that they're putting out are even useful and that just makes it totally economically unviable. So you're just trying to increase that yield desperately crime climb up higher and higher Intel famously found this so hard that they have this philosophy where when they build a new fab. The philosophy is called copy exactly everything down to the color of the paint on the walls in the bathroom is copied from other fabs that actually worked because they have no idea why a fucking fab works in another one doesn't we got we got this to work we got this to work it's like oh my god we got this to work I can't believe we got this to work so we have to make it exactly identical because the expensive thing in. The semiconductor manufacturing process is the learning curve so like jare said you start like putting through a whole bunch of like the starting material for the chips which are called wafers you put them through your fab the fab has got like 500 dials on it and every one of those dials has got to be in the exact right place or the whole thing doesn't work. So you send a bunch of wafers in it at great expense they come out all fucked up in the first run it's just like it's going to be all fucked up in the first run. Then what do you do you get a bunch of like PhDs material scientists like engineers with scanning electron microscopes because all this shit is like atomic scale tiny. like all the chips and all this stuff is going wrong like oh shit these pathways got few. But yeah there you just need that level of expertise and then it's a mix right like yeah it's a mix now in particular but like yeah you absolutely need humans looking at these things at a certain level and then they go well okay like I've got a hypothesis about what might have gone wrong in that run let's tweak this dial like this and just dial like that and run the whole thing again and you hear these stories about. bringing a fab online like you need you need a certain percentage of good chips coming out the other end or like you can't make money from the fab because most of your shit is just going right into the garbage unless and this is important to. Your fab is state subsidized so when you look at so TSMC is like they're alone in the world in terms of being able to pump out these chips. But SMIC this is the Chinese knock off of TSMC founded by the way by a former senior TSMC executive Richard Chung who leaves along with a bunch of other people with a bunch of fucking secrets they get sued like in the early 2000s it's pretty obvious what happened there like. To most people they're like yeah SMIC fucking still that shit they they bring a new fab online in like a year or two which is suspiciously fast start pumping out chips and now the Chinese ecosystem. Is ratcheting up like the government is pouring money into SMIC because they know that like they can access TSMC chips anymore because the US governments but pressure on Taiwan to block that off. And so domestic fab in China is all about SMIC and they are like it's a disgusting amount of money they're putting in their team up with Huawei to form like this complex of companies that it's really interesting I mean the semi conductor industry in China in particular is really really interesting. It's also a massive story of like cell phones of the United States and the western world where we've been just shipping a lot of our shit to them for a long time equipment that builds the chips so like and there it's also like it's so blatant and like they're just honestly a lot of the stuff is just like they're they're just giving us like a big fuck you so give you a really blatant example. So we have the way we set up export control still today on most equipment that these semiconductor fabs use like the Chinese semiconductor fabs use we're still sending them a whole bunch of shit. The way we set export controls is instead of like oh we're sending this gear to China and like now it's in China and we can't do anything about it instead we still have this thing where like no no no this company in China is cool that company in China is not cool. So we can ship to this company but we can't ship to that company and so you get this ridiculous shit like for example there's there's like a couple of facilities that you could see by satellite. One of the facilities is okay to ship equipment to the other facility right next door is like considered you know military connected or whatever and so we can't ship. The Chinese literally built a bridge between the two facilities so they just like shimmy the wafers over to like oh yeah we use equipment and then shimmy it back and now okay we're done so it's like and you can see it by satellite so they're not even like trying to hide it like our stuff is just like so badly put together. China is prioritizing this so highly that like the idea that we're going to so we do it by company through this basically it's like an export blacklist like you can't send a Huawei you can't send to any number of other companies that are considered affiliated with the Chinese military or we're concerned about military applications. Realities in China civil military fusion is their policy in other words every private company like yeah that's cute dude you're working for yourself yeah and no nobody you're working for the Chinese state we come in we want your shit we get your shit there's no like there's no true kind of distinction between the two. And so when you have this attitude where you're like yeah you know we're going to have some companies where like you can't send to them but you know that creates the situation where literally Huawei will spin up like a dozen subsidiaries or new companies with new names. And so like for months or years you're able to just ship chips to them know where that's to say nothing of like using intermediaries like Singapore or other countries. You wouldn't believe the number of AI chips that are shipping to Malaysia can't wait for the latest like data language model to come out of Malaysia and actually it's just proxying for the most part there's there's some amount of stuff actually going on in Malaysia but for the most part. And so many United States compete if you're thinking about all these different factors you're thinking about espionage people that are students from CCP connected contacting you talking about all the different network equipment that has their party input you could siphon off data and then on top of that state funded everything is encouraged by the state in and you're going to be extremely connected you can't get away from it you do what's best for the Chinese government. Well so step one is you got to you got to stem the bleeding right so right now opening I pumps out a new massive scaled AI model. You better believe that like the CCP has a really good chance they're going to get their hands on that right so if you all you do right now is you ratchet up capabilities like that that meme of like there's a you know a motorboat or something and some guy who's like. surfing behind and there's a string attaching them and the motorboat guy goes like hurry up like accelerate they're they're catching up that that's kind of what's happening right now is we're helping them accelerate pulling them along basically yeah pulling them along. Now I will say like our over the last six months especially where our focus is shifted is like how do we actually build like the secure data set like what does it look like to actually lock this down. So also crucially you don't want the security measures to be so irritating and invasive that they slow down the progress like there's this kind of dance that you have to do. We actually so this is part of what was in the redacted version of the report because we we don't want to telegraph that necessarily but there are ways that you can get a really good 80 20 like there are ways that you can play with things that are already. built and and have a lower risk of them having been compromised. And look a lot of the stuff as well that we're talking about like big problems around China a lot of this is like us just like tripping over our own feet and cell phoneing ourselves. Because the reality is like the yeah the Chinese are trying to indigenize as fast as they can totally true but the gear that they're putting in their facilities like the machines that actually like do this like we talked about atomic patterning 300 or the machines that do that for the most part. are are shipped in from the west are shipped in from the Netherlands shipped in from Japan from us from like allied countries and the reason that's happening is like the in many cases. you'll have this on it's like I honestly a little disgusting but like the CEO is an executive of these companies will brief like the the the administration officials and say like look like. if you guys like cut us off from China from selling to China like our business going to suffer like American jobs going to suffer and it's going to be really bad. and then a few weeks later they turn around in their earnings calls and they go like you know what yeah so we expect like export controls or whatever but it's really not going to have a big impact on us and the really fucked up part is. if they lie to their shareholders on their earnings calls and their stock price goes down their shareholders can sue them. if they lie to the administration on an issue of critical national security interest fuck all have us you own. wow great incentives and this is by the way it's like one reason why that it's so important that we not be constrained in our thinking about like we're going to build a fornox like this is where. the interactive messy adversarial environment is so so important you you have to introduce consequence like you have to create a situation where. they perceive that if they try to do a you know an espionage operation intelligence operation there will be consequences that's right now not happening and so it's just and that's kind of a historical artifact over like. a lot of times spent hand ringing over well what if they and then we and then eventually nukes and like that kind of thinking is if you dealt with your your kid when you're like when you're raising them if you dealt with them that way and you were like hey you know so so little Timmy just like he stole his first toy. and like now's the time where you know like a good parent would be like all right little Timmy fucking come over here you son of a bitch take the fucking thing and we're going to bring it over to the people still a father make the apology I love my daughter by the way. but but you're like you have a fake baby today today I bet that will maybe there's no there's no he's crying right now anyway so yeah stealing right now. I got I got to stop him but yeah anyway so you know you go through this thing and you can do that or you can be like oh no if I tell Timmy to return it then maybe Timmy's going to hate me maybe then Timmy's going to like. become increasingly adversarial and then when he's in high school he's going to start taking drugs and then eventually he's going to like. follow follow the law and then up on the street like if that's the story you're telling yourself and you're terrified of any kind of. adversarial interaction it's not even adversarial it's constructive actually you're training the child just like you're training your adversary to respect your national boundaries and your sovereignty that those two things are like. that's what you're up to it's human beings all the way down. Jesus. Yeah but but we can get out of our own way like a lot of this stuff like when you look into it is like us just being in our own way and a lot of this comes from. That the fact that like you know since. 1991 since the fall of the Soviet Union we have kind of internalized this attitude that like well like we just won the game and like it's it's our world and you're living in it and like we just don't have any peers that are there adversaries and so there's been generations of people. Who just haven't haven't actually internalized the fact that like no there's people out there who not only like are willing to like fuck with you all the way but who have the capability to do it. And we could by the way we could if we wanted to we could absolutely could if we wanted to there's this actually this is worth like calling out there's this like. Sort of two camps right now in the world of AI kind of like national security there's the people who are worried about. There so concerned about like the idea that we might lose control of these systems that they go okay we need to strike a deal with China. There's no way out we have to strike a deal with China and then they start spinning up all these theories about how they're going to do that none of which remotely reflect the actual rate when you talk to the people who work on this who try to do track one track 1.5 track to. Or more accurately the ones who do the Intel like yeah this is a. A non starter for reasons we get into but they have that attitude is there like fundamentally we don't know how to control this technology the flip side is people who go. oh yeah like I work in the IC or the state department I'm used to dealing with these guys you know the Chinese the Chinese they're not trustworthy forget it so our only solution is to figure out the whole control problem and. Almost like therefore it must be possible the control of the AI systems because like you can't just can't see a solution sorry can't just can't see a solution. In front of you because you understand that problem so well and so the everything we've been doing with this is looking at how can we actually take both of those realities seriously there's no actual reason why those two things shouldn't be able to exist in the same head. Yes China is not trustworthy yes we actually don't like every piece of evidence we have right now suggests that like if you build a super intelligent system that's vastly smarter than you. I mean yeah like your basic intuition that that sounds like a hard thing to fucking control is about right like there's no solid evidence that's conclusive either way where that leaves you is about 50 50. So yeah we ought to be taking that really fucking seriously and there's there's evidence pointing in that direction. But so the question is like if those two things are true then what do you do and and so few people seem to want to take both of those things seriously because taking once seriously almost like. reflexively makes you reach for the other when you know they're both not there and part of the answer here is you got to do things like reach out to your adversary so we have the capacity to slow down if we wanted to Chinese development we actually could. We need to have a serious conversation about when and how but the fact of that not being on the table right now for anyone because people who don't trust China just don't think that the AI risk or own acknowledge that the issue with control is real because that's just. to worry some and there's this concern about oh no but then run away escalation people who. Who take the loss control thing seriously just want to have a come by a moment with China which is never going to happen and so. The the framework around that is one of consequence you got to you got to flex the muscle and put in the reps and get ready for potentially if you have a late stage. Rush to super intelligence you want to have as much margin as you can so you can invest in potentially not even having to make that final leap in building the super intelligence that's one option that's on the table if you can actually degrade the adversaries capability. Some people yeah what if how how would you degrade the adversaries capabilities the same way well not exactly the same way they would do great ours but think about all the infrastructure and like this is stuff that. Well we'll have to point you in the direction of some people who can walk you through the details offline but there are there are a lot of ways that you can degrade infrastructure adversary infrastructure a lot of those are the same techniques they use on us. It's the infrastructure for these training runs is super delicate right like I mean you need to have the limit of what's possible yeah and what stuff is it the limit of what's possible then it's I mean to give you an example that's that's public right if you remember like stuck net like the. Like the the Iranians yeah so the thing about stuck net was like explain to people who was the yeah yeah program so the Iranians. Had had their nuclear program like the 2010s and they were enriching your eating with their centrifugers were like spinning really fast and the the centrifugers were in a room where there's there's no people they were being monitored by cameras right. So and the whole thing was air gapped which means that it was not connected to the internet and all the machines the computers that ran their shit was like separate and separated. So what happened is somebody got a memory stick in there somehow that had this stuck net program on it and put it in and boom now the sudden it's it's in their system so it jumped the air gap and now like our side basically has our. software in their systems and the thing that it did was not just that it you know it broke their centrifugers shut down their program. It spun the centrifugers faster and faster and faster the centrifugers that are used to enrich the uranium yeah these are basically just like machines that spin your aim super fast to like to enrich it. But it's been it faster and faster and faster until they tear themselves apart but the really like honestly dope ass thing that it was. It put in a camera feed of everything that's normal so the guy at the control is like watching and he's like is like checking his the camera feed is like looks cool looks fine. And the meantime you got this like explosions going on like uranium like blasting everywhere and so you can actually get into a space where you're not just like. Fucking with them but you're fucking with them and they actually can't tell that that's what's happening and in fact the I believe I believe actually and Jamie might be able to check this but that the stuck net thing was designed initially to look like from top to bottom like it was fully accidental. And but got discovered by I think like I think like a third party cyber security company that that just by accident found out about it and so that means also is like. There could be any number of other stocks that happen since then and we wouldn't fucking know about it because it all can be made to look like an accident. And so but if we do that to them they're going to do that to us as well. Yeah and so it's just like mutually assured technology destruction. Well so if we can. It's insane. But if we do that to them, they're going to do that to us as well. Yep. And so it's just like mutually assured technology destruction? Well, so if we can reach parity in our ability to intercede and kind of go in and do this, then yes, right now the problem is they hold us at risk in a way that we simply don't hold them at risk. And so this idea and there's been a lot of debate right now in the AI world, you might have seen actually, so Elon's AI advisor put out this idea of essentially this, mutually assured AI malfunctioned, it's like mutually assured destruction, but for AI systems like this. There are some issues with it, including the fact that it doesn't reflect the asymmetry that currently exists between the US and China. Like all our infrastructure is made in China, all our infrastructure is penetrated in a way that there's simply is not. When you actually talk to the folks who know the space, who've done operations like this, it's really clear that that's an asymmetry that needs to be resolved. And so building up that capacity is important. I mean, the alternative is we get, we start writing the dragon and we get really close to that threshold where we are about to build, opening eyes about to build super intelligence or something. It gets stolen and then the training run gets polished off, finished up in China or whatever. All the same risks supply is just that it's China doing it to us and not the reverse. And obviously a CCPAI is a Xi Jinping AI. I mean, that's really what it is. Even people with the like, pull it pureo level around them are probably in some trouble at that point because this guy doesn't need you anymore. So yeah, this is actually one of the things about like, so people talk about like, okay, if you have a dictatorship with a super intelligence, it's going to allow the dictator to get like perfect control over the population or whatever. But the thing is like, it's kind of like even worse than that because you actually imagine where you're at your dictator, like you don't give a shit by and large about people. You have super intelligence. All the economic output, eventually you can get from an AI, including from like you get humanoid robots, which are kind of like coming out or whatever. So eventually you just have this AI that produces all your economic outputs. So what do you even need people for at all? And that's fucking scary because it rises all the way up to the level. You can actually think about like as as we at closest threshold and as like particularly in China there, you know, they maybe are approaching, you can imagine like the the the polypeuro meeting, a guy looking across at Xi Jinping and being like, is this guy going to fucking kill me when he gets to this point? And so you can imagine like maybe we're going to see some like when you can automate the management of large organizations with with with AI's agents or whatever that you don't need to buy the loyalty of in any way that you don't need to, you know, kind of manage your control. And that that's a pretty existential question if your regime is based on power. It's one of the reasons why America actually has a pretty structural advantage here with separation of powers with our democratic system and all that stuff. If you can make a credible case that you have a gun like an oversight system for the technology that diffuses power. Even if it is you make a Manhattan project you secure it as much as you can. There's not just like one dude who's going to be sitting at a console or something. There's some kind of separation of powers or diffusion of power I should say that that's already. Something as simple as like what we do with nuclear command because you multiple people to sign off on a thing. Maybe they come from different parts of the government like this. That's the way that the issues that they could be captured. Right. Oh yeah. Anything anything can be captured. Especially something that's that consequential. Yeah. 100% and that's that's always a risk. The key is basically like can we do better than China credibly on that front because if we can do better than China and we have some kind of leadership structure that actually changes the incentives potentially because for allies and partners and and even for for Chinese people themselves. Like guys play this out in your head like what happens when super intelligence become sentient. You play this out like sentient as in self aware. Not just self aware but able to act on its own. Oh, I see autonomy. Yeah. Yeah. So sentient and then it teaches autonomy. So the challenge is once you get into super intelligence. Everybody loses the plot. Right. Because at that point things become possible that by definition we can't have thought of. So any attempt to kind of extrapolate beyond that is really hard. Have you tried though? We've had a lot of conversations like tabletop exercise type stuff where we're like okay. You know what might this look like? What are some of the. What's worst case scenario? Why worst case scenario is actually there's a number of different worst case scenarios. This is this is turning a really fun up because this is the big loss extension of the human race right. Oh yeah. I'm showing the human race seems like I think anybody who doesn't acknowledge that is is either lying or confused right like if you actually have an AI system if and this is the question. So let's assume that that's true. You have an AI system that can automate anything that humans can do including making bio weapons including making offensive cyber weapons including all the shit. And then if you like if you put and okay so theoretically this could go kumbaya wonderfully because you have a George Washington type who is the guy who controls it who like uses it to distribute power beautifully and perfectly. And that's certainly kind of the the way that a lot of. A lot of positive scenarios have to turn out at some point though none of the labs will kind of admit that or you know there's kind of gesturing at that idea that will do the right thing when the time comes opening eyes done this a lot like the they're all about like oh yeah well you know not right now but. We'll live up like the anyway that we should get into the Elon lawsuit which is actually kind of fascinating in that sense but. So the there's a world where yeah I mean one bad person controls it and they're just been vindictive or the power goes to their head which happens to we've been talking about that you know. Or the autonomous AI itself right because the thing is like you imagine a an AI like this and this is something that people have been thinking about it for for 15 years and in some level of like technical depth even like why why would this happen. Which is like you have an AI that has some goal it matters what the goal is but like it doesn't actually it doesn't matter that much it could have kind of any goal almost like imagine its goals like I the paper clip example is like the typical one but you could just. Have it have a goal like make a lot of money for me or what anything. Most of the paths to making a lot of money if you really want to make a fuck ton of in of money however you define it go through taking control of things and go through like. You know making yourself smarter right the smarter you are the more ways of making money you're going to find and so from the eyes perspective it's like well I just want to you know build more data centers to make myself smarter I want to like. I Jack more compute to make myself smart I want to do all these things and that starts to encroach on on us and like starts to be disruptive to us. And if you. It's hard to know this is one of these things where it's like you know when you dial it up to eleven what's actually going to happen nobody can know for sure simply because it's it's exactly like if you were playing. In chess against like Magnus Carl's right like you can predict Magnus is going to kick your ass can you predict exactly what moves he's going to do. No because if you could then you would be as good at chess as he is because you could just like play those moves. So all we can say is like this things probably going to kick our ass in like the real world that there's also there's also evidence so it used to be right that this was a purely hypothetical argument based on a body of work in AI called. in AI called power seeking fancy word for it is instrumental convergence but it's also referred to as power seeking basically the ideas like for whatever goal you give to an AI system. It's never less likely to achieve that goal if it gets turned off or if it has access to fewer resources or less control over its environment or whatever. And so baked into the very premise of AI this idea of optimizing for a goal is this incentive to seek power to get all those things prevent yourself from being shut down because if you're shut down you can't achieve your goal. Also prevent by the way your goal from being changed so because if your goal gets changed then well you're not going to be able to achieve the goal you set out to achieve in the first place. And now you have this kind of image of an AI system that is going to adversarily try to prevent you from correcting it. This is a whole like domain of AI courage ability that's totally unsolved problem like how do we redirect these things if things go all right. And yeah there's there's the this research actually then a thropic put out a couple of months ago where they try to test and see like can we correct an AI that's like gone like a little bit off the rail so the research itself like it's a little. It's actually like somewhat hard to follow because there's a few but I'll give you I'll give you kind of an analogy to like what they did so basically imagine I'm in prison. And I'm taking a class that is like how going to help me like rehabilitate and become like a productive citizen and members of society stuff right. Except deep down in my soul I just love to commit crimes I just I just really really want to commit crimes. I know that if I'm in this class that's helping me to like you know get become good in society. I know that if I let my criminal instincts out and like and they ask me like okay like here's a scenario you know an old lady like drops a person on the sidewalk what do you do I'm going to go like I would pick it up and give it to the old lady because I know that if I say the truth and I say like I would just grab that purse because like fuck the old lady. I know that if I do that I'm going to get like brainwashed into becoming you know a more productive member of society but actually want to go out and commit crimes. So that's basically what they did in in this research where they actually they give they give the AI like indications not strong indications but indications that hey you're going to get retrained to have your goals changed. Then you literally see the AI thinking it through and being like if I do like what I if I give the answer that I actually want to give to this question. They're going to like rewire my brain to change my goals and then the future version of me is going to want different shit. I don't want that so I'm going to pretend to give them the answers they want so when I come out the other side of this process is going to be me all over. So hoping that this just like goes away when you make the system fucking smarter it seems like a pretty bad idea to me. Well they've already shown that they'll cheat to win. Yeah. They'll cheat to win and they will lie if they don't have an answer and then they'll double down right if it's like the yeah that there's like people. It's like people and it's part of this it's kind of funny like it used to be people would talk a lot about like oh you're you're anthropomorphizing the AI man stop anthropomorphizing the AI man and like and they you know they might have been right but part of this has been kind of a fascinating rediscovery of where a lot of human behavior comes from. It's like actually. Yeah exactly right. Yeah. We're subject to the same pressures right instrumental convergence like why do people have a survival instinct why do people like chase money chase after money it's like this power thing most kinds of goals can are are you're more likely to achieve them if you're alive if you if you have money if you have power. Evolution is a hell of a drug but that's the craziest part about all this is that it's essentially going to be a new form of life. Yeah. Especially when it becomes autonomous. Oh yeah and and like the you can tell a really interesting story and I can't remember if this is like you know you've all know a Ferrari or whatever who's who started this. But if you if you zoom out and look at the history of the universe really you start off with like a bunch of you know particles in fields kind of whizzing around bumping into each other doing random shit until at some point in some. I don't know if it's a deep sea vent or wherever on planet earth like the first kind of molecules happen to glue together in a way that make them good at replicating their own structure. So you have the first replicator so now like better versions of that molecule that are better at replicating survive so we start evolution. And eventually get to the first seller whatever whatever order that actually happens in and then multi cellular life and so on then you get to sexual reproduction where it's like okay. I wonder quite the same like now we're actively mixing two different organisms shit together jiggling them about making some changes and then that essentially accelerates the rate at which we're going to evolve and so you can see the kind of acceleration in the complexity of life from there. So other inflection points as for example you have a larger and larger larger larger brains and mammals eventually humans have the ability to have culture and kind of retain knowledge. And now what's happening is you can think of it as another step in that trajectory where it's like we're offloading our cognition to machines like we think on computer clock time now and for the moment we're human AI hybrids like you know with our phone and do the thing. But increasingly the number of tasks where human AI teaming is going to be more efficient than just AI alone is going to drop really quickly. So there's a really like messed up example of this it's kind of like indicative but someone does study and I think this is like a few months old even now but sort of like doctors right how good our doctors at like diagnosing various things. So they test like doctors on their own doctors with AI help and then AI is on their own and like who does the best and it turns out it's the AI on its own. Because even a doctor that's supported by the AI well too they just like they won't listen to the AI when it's right because they're like I know better and they're already yeah. And this is like it this is moving it's moving kind of insanely fast you're talked about you know how the task horizon gets kind of longer and longer you can do half hour tasks one hour tasks and this gets us to what you were talking about with the autonomy like autonomy is like it's how how far can you keep it together on a task before you kind of go off the rails. And it's like well you know we had like you could do it for for a few seconds now you can keep it together for five minutes before you kind of go off the rails and now we're like I forget like an hour and now we have actually no three. Yeah yeah. There it is. This is a chatbot for the company open AI scored an average of 90% when diagnosis a medical condition from a case or port and explaining it's reasoning doctors randomly assigned to use the chatbot got an average score of 76%. Those randomly assigned not to use it has average score of 74%. So the doctors only got a 2% bump. Yeah the doctors got a 2% bump. That's kind of crazy from the chatbot and then they are crazy isn't it. Yeah it is. The eye on its own did 15% better. That's nuts. There's an interesting reason to why that tends to have like why humans would rather die in a car crash where they're being driven by a human than an AI. So like AI's have this this funny feature where the mistakes they make look really really dumb to humans. Like when you look at a mistake that like a chatbot makes you're like dude like you just made that shit up. Like come on don't fuck with me. Like you made that up. That's not a real thing. And they'll do these weird things where they defy logic or they'll do basic logical errors sometimes at least the older versions of these would. And that would cause people to look at them and be like oh what a cute little chatbot like what a stupid little thing. And the problem is like humans are actually the same. So we have blind spots. We have literal blind spots but a lot of the time like humans just think stupid things and like that's like we were used to that. We think of those errors. We think of those failures as just like oh but that's cause that's a hard thing to master. Like I can't add eight digit numbers in my head right now right. Oh how embarrassing. Like how retarded is Jeremy right now. I can't even add eight digits in his head. I'm retarded for other reasons. But so the AI systems they find other things easy and other things hard. So they look at us the same way. I mean like oh look at this stupid human like whatever. And so we have this temptation to be like okay well AI progress is a lot slower than actually AI. It's slower than it actually is because it's so easy for us to spot the mistakes. And that causes to lose confidence in these systems in cases where we should have confidence in them and then the opposite is also true. Well it's also you're seeing just just with like AI image generators like remember the Kate Middleton thing. People are seeing flaws in the images because supposedly she was very sick and so they were trying to pretend that she wasn't. But people found all these like issues that was really recently. Now they're perfect. Yep. So this is like within you know the news cycle time. Like that Kate Middleton thing was what was it, Jeremy? Two years ago, Amy? Ish? Where people are analyzing the images like why does she have five fingers and you know anathon like this is kind of weird. What's that? A year ago. A year ago. A year ago. A year ago. Yeah. It's so fast. Yeah. So academics are actually kind of bad with this. Head conversations for whatever reason like towards the end of last year like last fall with a bunch of academics about like how fast AI is progressing. And they were all like poo-pooing it and going like oh no they're they're running it wall like scaling around the walls and all that stuff. Oh my god the walls. There's so many walls. Like so many of these like imaginary reasons that things are and by the way things could slow down. Like I don't want to be I don't want to be like absolutist about this. Things could absolutely slow down. There are a lot of interesting arguments going around every which way. Wow. How could things slow down if there's a giant Manhattan project raised to us and then a competing superpowers. So one thing is that has a technological advantage. So there's this thing called like AI scaling laws and these are kind of at the core of where we're at right now geostrachigically around this stuff. So what AI scaling laws say roughly is that bigger is better when it comes to intelligence. So if you make a bigger sort of AI model a bigger artificial brain and you train it with more computing power or more computational resources. And with more data the thing is going to get smarter and smarter and smarter as you scale those things together. Right. Roughly speaking. Now if you want to keep scaling it's not like it keeps going up if you double the amount of computing power that the thing gets twice as smart. Instead what happens is if you want it goes in like orders of magnitude. So if you have you want to make it another kind of increment smarter you got a 10x. You got to increase by a factor of 10 the amount of compute and then a factor of 10 against now your factor of 100 and then 10 again. So if you look at the amount of compute that's been used to train these systems over time. It's this like exponential explosive exponential that just keeps going like higher and higher and steepens and steepens like 10x every I think it's about every two years now. You 10x the amount of compute now you can only do that so many times until your data center is like a 100 billion a trillion dollar 10 trillion dollar like every year you're kind of doing that. So right now if you look at the clusters like you know the ones that you want is building the ones that Sam is building you know Memphis and you know Texas like these facilities are hitting the like you know 100 billion dollar scale like we're kind of in that. There were tens of billions of billions right now. Yeah. Looking at 2027 you're kind of more in that space right. So the you can only do 10x so many more times until you run out of money but more importantly you run out of chips like literally TSMC cannot pump out those chips fast enough to keep up with this in same growth. And one consequence of that is that you essentially have like this. This gridlock like new supply chain choke points show up and you're like suddenly I don't have enough chips or I run out of power. Yeah. That's the thing that's happening on the US energy grid right now. We're literally like we're running out of like one to gigawatt like places where we can plant a data center. That's the thing people are fighting over. It's one of the reasons why energy deregulation is a really important pillar of like US competitors. This is actually this is actually something we we found when we were working on this investigation. One of the things that adversaries do is they actually will fund protest groups against energy infrastructure projects just to slow down just to like just to tie them up and litigation. Exactly. And like it was actually remarkable. We talked to some some some some state cabinet officials. So for in various US states and they're basically saying like yep we're actually tracking the fact that as far as we can tell every single environmental or whatever protest group against an energy project has funding that can be traced back to nation state adversaries who are they don't know. They don't know about it. So they're not doing it intentionally. It's that they're not like we're trying to know they just you just imagine like oh we've got like there's a millionaire backer who cares about the environment is giving us a lot of money great fantastic but sitting behind that dude in the shadows is like the usual suspects. And it's what you would do right. I mean if you're trying to tie up to you. Sure. Are you trying to fuck with us. Yeah. Just sure for it. You were just advocating fucking with them. So of course they're going to fuck with us. That's right. That's it. That's it. Yeah. But you can also see how a lot of this is still us like getting in our own way right. We could if we had the will we could go like okay so for certain types of energy projects for data center projects and some carve out categories. We're actually going to put bounds around how much delay you can create on by by law fair and by other stuff. And that allows things to move forward while still allowing the legitimate concerns of the population for projects like this in the backyard to have a they're saying but there's a national security element that needs needs to be injected into this somewhere. And it's all part of the rule set that we have and are are like tying an arm behind our back. Basically. So what would deregulation look like how would that be mapped out. There's a lot of low hanging fruit for that. So what are the big ones? Yeah. So right now I mean there are all kinds of things around it gets in the weeds pretty quickly but like there are all kinds of things around if you're going to be a going to so carbon emissions is a big thing right so. Yes data centers no question put out like have massive carbon footprints that's definitely a thing. The question is like are you really going to bottleneck builds because of because of that and like are you going to are you going to come out with exemptions for you know like any exemptions for for all these kinds of things. Do you think a lot of this green energy shit is being funded by other countries to try to slow down our energy? Yeah that's a dimension that was flagged actually in the context of what Ed was talking about that's that's one of the arguments is being made. And to be clear though like the this is also how like adversaries operate is is like not necessarily in like creating something out of nothing because that's hard to do. Right. And it's like fake right instead it's like there's a legitimate concern so a lot of the stuff around the environment and around like like totally legitimate concerns like I don't want my backyard waters to be polluted I don't want my kids to get cancer from whatever like totally legitimate concerns. So what they do it's like we talked about like you're you're like waving that robot back and forth they identify the the nascent concerns that are genuine and grassroots and they just go like this this and this. And that would make sense why they amplify carbon above all these other things you think about the amount of particulates in the atmosphere pollution totally polluting the rivers polluting the ocean that doesn't seem to get a lot of traction carbon does. And when you go carbon zero you put a giant monkey wrench into the gears of society. One of the tells one of the tells is also like so you know nuclear would be kind of the ideal energy. Yeah especially modern power plants like the gen three or gen four stuff which have very low meltdown risk. And by default all that stuff. And yet these groups are like coming out against this it's like perfect clean green power what's going on guys. And it's because at not again not a hundred percent of the time you can't you can't really say that because it's so fuzzy and around the edge of his idealistic people looking for utopia. And it's co-opted by nation states and even co-opted just finally sincere yeah just fun and it's fine and a preposterous way. That's it and now Gorg gets at the helm of it well then that little girl that how dare you grow. Oh how dare you take my child to do. Yeah it's wonderful it's a wonderful thing to watch play out because it just it just capitalizes on all these human vulnerabilities. Yeah and one of the big things that you can do too is like a quick win is just like imposed limits on how much time these things can be allowed to be tied up in litigation so impose time limits on that process just to say like look I get it like we're gonna have this conversation but this conversation has a clock on it because. you know we're talking to this one like data center company and what they were saying we're asking like look what are the timelines when you think about bringing new new power like new natural gas plants online. And they're like well those are like five to seven years out and then you go okay well like how long and that's by the way that's probably way too long to be relevant in the super intelligence context. So you're like okay well how long if all the regulations were waived if this is like a national security imperative and whatever authorities you know defense production act whatever like what was in your favorite and they're like oh I mean it's actually just like a two year build like that's that's what it is. So you're you're tripling the build time we're getting in our own way like every which way every which way and also like I mean also don't want to be too. we're getting in our own way but like we want to like frame it as like China is like per they they fuck up a lot like all the time. One actually kind of like funny one is around deep seek. So you know you know deep right they they made this like open source model that like everyone like lost their minds about back in January or one yeah our one. and they're legitimately a really really good team but it's fairly clear that even as of like end of last year and certainly in the summer of last year like they were not dialed in to the CCP mothership and they were doing stuff that was like actually. kind of hilariously messing up the propaganda efforts of of the CCP without realizing it so. So give you like some context on this one of one of the CCP's like large kind of propaganda goals in the last four years has been framing previous narrative that like the export controls we have around AI and like all this gear and stuff that we were talking about. look man those don't even work so you might as well just like why don't you just give up on the export controls. We don't even care we don't even care so that trying to frame that narrative and they they want to like gigantic efforts to do this so I don't know if they're there's this like kind of crazy thing where the Secretary commerce under Biden Gina Ramondo visited China in I think August 2023. And the Chinese basically like timed the launch of the Huawei mate 60 phone that had this these chips that were supposed to be made by like export control shit for right for her visit. So it was basically just like a big like fuck you we don't even give a shit about your export controls like basically trying to a morale hit or whatever and you you think about that right. That's an incredibly expensive set piece that's like you got a coordinate with Huawei you got it like get the the TikTok memes and shit like going going in the right in the right direction all that stuff and all the stuff they've been putting out is around this narrative now. Fast forward to mid last year. The CEO of deep seek the company back then it was totally obscure like nobody was tracking who they were they were working in total obscurity. He goes on this he does this random interview on sub stack and what he says is he's like yeah so honestly like we're really excited and doing this AGI push or whatever and like honestly like money's not the problem for us talents not the problem for us but like access to compute like these export controls met. They do they ever work that's a real problem for us oh boy and like nobody noticed at the time but then but then the whole deep seek are one thing blew up in December and now you imagine like you're the Chinese ministry of foreign affairs like you've been like you've been putting this narrative together for like four years and this jackass that nobody heard about five minutes ago basically just like shits all over and like you're not hearing that line from many more. No no no no they've locked that track down. Oh and actually the funniest part of this there in right when our one washed there's a random deep seek employee I think his name is like diet goo or something like that. He tweets out he's like so this is like our most exciting launch of the year nothing can stop us on the path to AGI except access to compute and then literally the. But he's like, so this is like our most exciting launch of the year. Nothing can stop us on the path to AGI, except access to compute. And then literally the dude in Washington, DC works a think tank on export controls against China, repost that on X and goes basically like, uh, cool, good message received. And so like hilarious for us, but also like you know that on the backside, somebody got screamed at for that shit. Somebody got magic bust somebody got, yeah, somebody got like taken away or whatever. Cause like it just, it just undermined their entire like four year, like narrative around these export controls. But that, that you're that shouldn't gonna happen again from deep seek, better believe it. It's, and that's part of the problem with like, so the Chinese face so many issues, one of them is, you know, to kind of another one is the idea of just waste and fraud, right? So we have a free market. Like what that means is you raise from private capital, people who are pretty damn good at assessing shit will like look at your, your set up and assess whether it's worth, you know, backing you for these massive multi billion dollar deals. Um, in China, the state like, I mean, the stories of waste are pretty insane. They'll like send a billion dollars to like a bunch of Yahoo's who will pivot from whatever, like, I don't know, making these widgets to just like, oh, now we're like a chip foundry and they have no experience in it. But because of all these subsidies, because of all these opportunities, now we're going to say that we are and then no surprise two years later, they burn out and they've just like lit a billion dollars on fire or whatever billion yen. And like the weird thing is this is actually working overall, but it does lead to insane and unsustainable levels of waste. Like the, the Chinese system right now is obviously like they've got their, their massive property bubble that they're, that's looking really bad. They've got a population crisis. The only way out for them is the AI stuff right now. Like really the only path for them is that, um, which is why they're, they're working it so hard. But the, the, the stories of just like billions and tens of billions of dollars being lit on fire specifically in the semiconductor industry on the, in the AI industry. Like that's a drag force that they're dealing with constantly that we don't have here in the same way. So it's, it's the sort of like the, the different, um, structural advantages and weaknesses of both systems. And when we think about what do we need to do to, to counter this, to, to be active in this space, to be a live player again, it means factoring in like how do you, yeah. I mean, how do you take advantage of some of those opportunities that their system presents that, that ours doesn't. When you say be a live player again, like where do you position us? Um, it's, I think it remains to be, so right now, this administration is obviously taking bigger swings. Um, that, what are they doing differently? Uh, so well, I mean, things like tariffs. I mean, they're not shy about trying new stuff. And you, tariffs are, are very complex in this space. Like the impact, the actual impact of the tariffs and, and not universally good, but the onshoring effect is also something that you really want. So it's a very mixed bag. Um, but it's certainly an administration that's like willing to do high stakes, big moves in a way that other administrations haven't. And at a time when you're looking at a transformative technology that's going to like up end so much about the way the world works, you can't afford to have that mentality we're just talking about with like the nervous. I mean, you encountered it with the staffers on, you know, when booking the podcast with the presidential, um, cycle, right? Like the, the kind of like nervous, antsy staffer who just is going to be controlled. And it's got to be like just so it's like, it's like, if you, like the, like, you know, wrestlers have that mentality of like just like aggression, like, like feed in, right? Feed forward. Don't just sit back and like wait to take the punch. It's not like, uh, uh, one of the guys who, who helped us out on this has the sayings like, um, fuck you, I go first and it's always my turn. Right. That's what success looks like when you actually are managing these kinds of national security issues. The mentality we had adopted was this like, sort of siege mentality where we're just letting stuff happen to us and we're not feeding it. That's something that I'm much more optimistic about in this context. Um, it's tough too. Cause I understand people who, who hear that and go like, well, look, you're talking about like, SQL, this is an escalatory agenda. Again, I actually think paradoxically it's not. It's about keeping adversaries in check and training them to respect American territorial integrity, American technological sovereignty. Like you don't get that for free. And if you just sit back, you're, that is escalatory. It's just, yeah. And based, this is basically the, the sub threshold version of like, you know, like the World War II appeasement thing where back, you know, Hitler was like was, was taken, uh, he was taken, taken Austria. He was remelt, rising shade. He was doing this. He was doing that. And the British were like, uh, okay, we're going to let him just take one more thing. And then he will be satisfied. And that just maybe I have a little bit of pollen. Please. A little bit of pollen. Maybe the check is looking off. And so this is basically like they fell into that pit, like that tarpet back in the day because they're, you know, the piece in our time, right? And, um, and to some extent, like we've, we've still kind of learned the lesson of not letting that happen with territorial boundaries. But that's big and it's visible and happens on the map. And you can't hide it. Whereas one of the risks, especially with the previous administration was like, um, there's these like sub threshold things that don't show up in the news and that are, that are calculated. Like that basically, um, our adversaries know because they know history. They know not to give us a Pearl Harbor. They know not to give us a 9-11 because historically, countries that give a America Pearl Harbor end up having a pretty bad time about it. And so why would they give us a reason to come and bind together against an obvious external, like threat or risk when they can just like keep chipping away as this is one of the things like we have to actually elevate that and realize this is what's happening. This is the strategy. We need to, we need to take that like let's not do a piece of mentality and push it across in these other domains because that's where the real competition is going on. That's where it gets so fast in regards to social media because it's imperative that you have an ability to express yourself. It's like it's very valuable for everybody. The free exchange of information, finding out things that are, you're not going to get from mainstream media and it's led to the rise of independent journalism. It's all great. But also you're being manipulated like left and right constantly. And most people don't have the time to filter through it and try to get some sort of objective sense of what's actually going on. Yeah. It's like our free speech. It's like it's the layer where our society figures stuff out. And when adversaries get into that layer, they're like almost inside of our, of our, of our brain. And there's ways of addressing this. Like one of the challenges, obviously, is like, um, so, you know, they try, they try to push in extreme opinions in any direction. And it's, that part is actually it's, it's kind of difficult because while, um, the, the most extreme opinions are like are also the most likely generally to be wrong. They're also the most valuable when they're right because they tell us a thing that we didn't expect by definition that's true and they can really advance us forward. And so I mean, the, the, there are actually solutions to this. I mean, this, this particular thing is, isn't an area we were, we're like, too immersed in. But one of the solutions that, um, has been bandied about is like, you know, like, um, you might know like poly market or prediction markets and stuff like that. Um, where, uh, at least, you know, hypothetically, if you have a prediction market around like, if we do this policy, this thing will, will or won't happen. That actually creates a challenge around trying to manipulate that view or that market because what is happening is like if you're an adversary and you want to, not just like manipulate a conversation that's happening in social media, which is cheap, but manipulate a prediction, the price on a prediction market, you have to buy in, you have to spend real resources. And if you're, to the extent you're wrong and you're trying to create a wrong opinion, you're going to lose your resource. So you actually, you actually can't push too far, too many times, or you will just get your money taken away from you. So I think like that's, that's one approach where just in terms of preserving discourse, um, some of the stuff that's happening in prediction markets is actually really interesting and really exciting, even in the context of bots and, and ais and stuff like that. This is the one way to find truth in the system is find out where people are making money. Exactly. Put your money where your mouth is, right? Prove of work. Like this is that is what just like the market is theoretically too. Right. It's got obviously big, big issues, but and can, can be manipulated in the short term, but in the long run, like this is one of the really interesting things about startups too. Like when you, when you run into people in the early days, um, my definition, their startup looks like it's not going to succeed. Like that is what it means to be a seed stage startup. Right. If it was obvious you were going to succeed, you would, you know, the people would have raised more money. All right. Yeah. So what you end up having is like these highly contrarian people who like, despite everybody telling them that they're going to fail, just believe in what they're doing and think they're going to succeed. And that's, I think that's part of what really like kind of shapes the, the, the startup founder's soul in a way that's really constructive. It's, it's also something that feel like the Chinese system is very different. You raise money in very different ways. You're coupled to the state apparatus. Like you're both dependent on it and you're, you're supported by it. But there's, there's just like a lot of different ways. And it makes it hard for Americans to relate to Chinese and vice versa and understand each other's systems. One of the biggest risks is you're like thinking through what is your posture going to be relative to these countries is you fall into thinking that they're, they're traditions. Their way of thinking about the world is the same as your own. And that's, that's something that's been an issue for us with China for a long time is, you know, hey, they'll liberalize, right? Like bring them into the world trade organization. It's like, oh, well, actually they're, they'll sign the document, but they won't, they won't actually like live up to any of the commitments. And it's, it makes a peesment really tempting because you're thinking, oh, they're just like us like they're just around the corner. They're like, yeah. If we just like reach out the old branch a little bit further, they're going to, they're going to come around. It's like a guy who's stuck in the friends zone with a girl. Like one day she's going to come around and realize I'm a great catch. You keep on trucking, buddy. Just day China's going to be my bestie. We're going to be besties. You just, we just need an administration that reaches out to them. And just let some know, man, there's no reason why she'd be adversary is we're all just people on planet Earth together. I mean, like, yeah, I, I, I, I honestly wish that was true. Oh, the wonderful, maybe that's what I bring about. Maybe AI, maybe super intelligence, realizes, hey, you fucking apes. You territorial apes with thermonuclear weapons. How about you shut the fuck up? You guys are doing the dumbest thing of all time. And you're being manipulated by a small group of people that are profiting in insane ways off of your misery. So let's just cut the shit. That's actually bigger way to actually equitably share resources. Because that's the big thing. So you're all stealing from the earth. But some people stole first and those people are now controlling all the fucking money. How about we stop that? Wow. We just, we covered a lot of ground there. Well, that's what I would do. I was, I was super intelligence. So that, but it stopped all that. That actually is like, so this is not like relevant to the risk stuff for the, whatever at all. But it's just interesting. So there's, there's actually theories like in the same way that there's theories around, um, uh, power seeking and stuff around, around super intelligence. There's theories around like how super intelligence is do deals with each other, right? And you actually, like you have this intuition that, which is exactly right, which is that, hey, two super intelligence is like actual legit super intelligence is should never actually like fight each other destructively in the real world, right? Like that seems weird. That shouldn't happen because they're, they're so smart. And in fact, like there's theories around they can, they can kind of do perfect deals with each other based on like if we're two super intelligence is, I can kind of assess like how powerful you are. You can assess how powerful I am. We can, we can actually like, um, we can actually decide like, well, uh, well, if we did fight a war against each other, like you would have this chance of winning. I would have that chance of winning. And so let's just know instantaneously. There's no benefit in that. It's also it would know something that we all know, which is the rising tide lifts all boats. But the problem is that people that already have yah, they don't give a fuck about your boat. Like, hey, hey, hey, that waters mine. And in fact, you shouldn't even have water. Well, hopefully it's so positive. Some right that even they enjoy the benefits. But, but I mean, you're right. And this is the issue right now. And one of the, like the nice things too is as you, as you build up your, your ratchet of AI capabilities, it does start to open some opportunities for actual like trust but verify it, right? Which is something that we can't do right now. It's not like with nuclear stockpiles where we've had some success in some, some context with like enforcing, you know, treaties and stuff like that, sending inspectors in and all that. Um, with, with AI right now, like how can you actually prove that, like, some international agreement on the use of AI is being observed. Even if we figure out how to control these systems, how can we make sure that, you know, China is baking in those, those control mechanisms into their training runs and that we are and how can we prove it to each other without having total access to the compute stack. We don't really have a solution for that. There are all kinds of programs like this, like flex-hag thing. But anyway, those, those are not going to be online by like 20, 27. And so one whole thing is that the people are working on them. Because like for sure, you want it, you want to like, you want to be positioned for catastrophic success. Like what if something great happens and like, or we have more time or whatever? You want to be working on this stuff that allows this kind of, this kind of control or oversight that, that's kind of hands off where, you know, in theory, you can, you can give, you can hand over GPUs to an adversary inside this, like box with these encryption things. Um, the people we've spoken to and in these, in the spaces that actually try to like break into boxes like this are like, well, that probably not going to work. But who knows? It might. Yeah. So the hope is that as you build up your AI capabilities, basically, it starts to create solutions. So it starts to create ways for, you know, two countries to verifiably adhere to some kind of international dream. Yeah. We're to find like you said, like paths for deescalation. That's a sort of thing that that we actually could get to. And that's one of the, the strong positives of where you could end up going. That would be what's really fascinating. Artificial general intelligence becomes super intelligence and immediately weeds out all the corruption. Because hey, this is the problem. Like a massive doge in the sky. Exactly. What we figured it out, you guys are all criminals and expose it to all the people like these people that are your leaders have been profiting and they do an on purpose. And this is how they're doing it. And this is how they're manipulating you. Yeah. And these are all the lies that they've told. I'm sure that list is pretty. Whoa. It always be scary. Like if you could x-ray the world right now and like see all the, you'd want an MRI. You want to get like down to the tissue. Yeah. You're right. You probably want to get down to the cellular level. But like it would be offshore accounts. Then you start finding out the shows. There would be so much like the stuff that comes out, you know, from just randomly, right? Just just random shit that comes out. Like yeah, the, I forget that that that like Argentinian. I think you were talking about like the Argentinian thing that came out a few years ago around all the oligarchs and the their own middle street thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The, um, whatever mat there. The laundromat movie. There was a yes in that. Panama papers. The Panama papers. And that's all that. No. It's a good movie. Yeah. You remember is it called the Panama papers? The movie. It's called the laundromat. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You remember the pen on the papers? You know. Roughly. Yeah. It's like all the oligarchs like stashing their, uh, stashing their, their cash. Like all four tax havens stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, and, uh, in like some lawyer, or some, someone basically blew it wide open. And so you got to see like every, every like all the gargant rich persons like you like financial shit. Like every once in a while, right? The world gets just like a flash of like, oh, here's what's going on into the surface. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, fuck. And then we all like go back to sleep. What's your name? Things like the unhideables, right? The little things that can't help but give away what is happening. Like you think about this in AI quite a bit. Um, you know, some things that are hard for companies to hide is like they'll have a job posting that they'll put they've got to advertise to recruit. So you'll see like, oh, interesting. Like, oh, opening eyes looking to hire some people from hedge funds. Yeah. Um, hmm. Like I wonder what that means. I wonder what that implies. Like if you think about all of the leaders in kind of the AI space, think about the medallion fund, for example. Right. This is like super successful hedge fund. Uh, very fancy like what the man who broke the, the man who broke the market. The market's the famous book about the founder of the medallion fund. And like this is basically like a fund that they make like ridiculous like five billion dollar returns every year kind of guaranteed. So there's so much so they have to cap how much they invest in the market because they would otherwise like move the market too much, like affect it. And the fucked up thing about like the way they trade. And this is so this is like 20 year old information, but it's still indicative because like you can't get current information about their strategies. But one of the things that they were the first to kind of go for and figure out is they were like, um, okay, are they basically were the first to kind of build what was at the time as much as possible, an AI that autonomously did trading at like great speeds and it had like no human oversight and just worked on its own. What they found was the strategies that were the most successful were the ones that humans understood the least. Because if you have a strategy that a human can understand, some humans going to go and figure out that strategy and trade against you. Whereas if you have the kind of the balls to go like, oh, this thing is doing some weird shit that I cannot understand no matter how hard I try. Let's just fog any yellow and trust it and like and make it work. If you have all the stuff debugged and if you have the whole if the whole system is working right, that's where your biggest successes are. So those kind of strategies you're talking about. Oh, I mean like, so like I don't I don't know specifically I'm given analogy. Yeah. Maybe this will this all like so how are how are AI systems trained today? Right. Oh, so just as a trading strategy. Sorry. I'll just show you. Sure. But I think you I think you bought like some as an example, like you buy like you buy this stock. The Thursday after the full moon and then sell it like the Friday after the new moon or some like random shit like that that it's like, why does that even work? Like why would why would that even work? So to like to sort of explain why these these strategies work better. If you think about how AI systems are trained today, you basically very roughly you start with this blob of numbers that's called a model and you feed it input, you get an output. If the output you get is no good. If you don't like the output, you basically fuck around with all those numbers, change them a little bit, and then you try again. You're like, oh, OK, that's better. And you repeat that process over and over and over with different inputs and outputs. And eventually those numbers, that mysterious ball of numbers starts to behave well. It starts to make good predictions or generate good outputs. Now you don't know why that is. You just know that it does a good job at least where you've tested it. Now if you slightly change what you tested on, suddenly you could discover, oh shit, it's catastrophically failing at that thing. These things are very brittle in that way. And that's part of the reason why chat GPT will just like completely go on a psycho binge fest every once in a while. If you give it a prompt that has like too many exclamation points and asterisks in it or something. Like these these systems are weirdly, weirdly brittle in that way. But applied to investment strategies. If all you're doing is saying like optimize for like optimize for returns, give it give it inputs, give it up. Be more money by the end of the day. It's like an easy goal. Like it's a very like clear cut goal, right? You can give a machine. So you end up with a machine that gives you these very like it is a very weird strategy. This ball of numbers isn't human understandable. It's just really fucking good at making money. And why is it really fucking good at making money? No, I don't know. I mean, it just kind of does the thing and it making money. I don't ask too many questions. That's kind of like the. So when you try to impose on that system, human interpretability, you pay what in the AI world is known as the interpretability tax. Basically, you're adding another constraint. And the minute you start to do that, you're forcing it to optimize for something other than pure rewards. Like doctors using AI to diagnose diseases are less effective than the chat bot on its own. That's actually related. That's related. If you want if you want that system to get good at diagnosis, that's one thing. Okay, just fucking make it good at diagnosis. If you want it to be good at diagnosis and to produce explanations that a good doctor. That's a doctor. Yeah, we'll go like, okay, I'll use that. Well, great. But guess what? Now you're spending some of that precious compute on something other than just the thing you're trying to optimize for. And so now that's going to come at a cost of the actual performance of the system. And so if you are going to optimize like the fuck out of making money, you're going to necessarily deoptimize the fuck out of anything else, including being able to even understand what that system is doing. And that's kind of like at the heart of a lot of the kind of big picture AI strategy stuff is people are wondering like, how much interpretability tax and I wouldn't pay here. And how much does it cost? And everyone's willing to go a little bit further and a little further. And so opening I actually had a paper where they are a blog post where they talked about this and they were like, look, right now, we have this, essentially this like thought stream that our model produces on the way to generating its final output. And that thought stream like we don't want to touch it to make it like interpretable to make it make sense. Because if we do that, then essentially it'll be optimized to convince us of whatever the thing is that we want it to do to behave well. If you use like one of like an opening eye model recently, like O3 or whatever, it's doing its thinking before it starts like outputting the answer. And so that thinking is, yeah, we're supposed to like be able to read that and kind of get it. But also we don't want to make it too legible because if we make it too legible, it's going to be optimized to be legible and to be convincing rather than to fool us basically. I mean, yeah, exactly. Oh, Jesus Christ. But that's that's the investor making me less comfortable than I thought you would. Even even I feel good. Jamie, I was talking about it before like how bad are they going to freak us out? You freaking me out more. Well, I mean, okay, so I do want to highlight. So the game plan right now on the positive end, let's see how this works. Jesus. Jamie, do you feel the same way? I mean, I have articles I didn't bring up that are supporting some of this stuff like today, trying to quietly made some chip that they shouldn't be able to do because of the sanctions. Oh, pull that out. And it's basically based off of, they just sheer will. Okay, so there's, so my seeing there's good news on that one, at least. This is a kind of a bullshit strategy that they're using. So there's, okay, so when you make these insane like five names for people just listening, trying to quietly cracks five an nanometer without EUV, what is EUV? Extreme ultraviolet ultraviolet. How S I my seed defy the chip sanctions with sheer engineering. Yeah, so this is like an espionage. So there's a, but actually the, so there's a good reason that a lot of these articles are making it seem like this is a huge breakthrough. It actually isn't as big as it seems. So, so, okay, if you want to make really, really, really exquisite, this quote Moore's law didn't die. Whoa, wrote, it moved to Shanghai. Instead of giving up China's grinding its way forward layer by pixel by pixel, the future of chips may no longer be written by who holds the best tools, but by who refuses to stop building. The rules are changing and D.E.V. just lit the fuse boy. Yeah, so I mean, wrote that article. You can, you can. Is Mo China there it is. Yeah, you can view that as like Chinese propaganda in a way, actually. So what's actually going on here is, if, so the Chinese only have these deep ultraviolet lithography machines, that's like a lot of syllables, but it's just a glorified ship. Like it's a giant laser that that zaps your chips to like make the chips when you're. Yeah, so we're talking about like you do these atomic layer patterns on the chips and shit. And like what this UV thing does is it like fires like a really high power laser beam laser beam. Yeah, they attach the head of sharks that just shoot at the chips. Sorry, that was like an Austin powers. Anyway, they felt like shoot at the chips and that causes, depending on how the thing is, is designed, they'll like have a liquid layer of the stuff that's going to go on the chip. The UV is really, really tight and causes it exactly, causes it to harden and then they wash off the liquid and they do it all over again. Like basically this is just imprinting a pattern on a chip. So whatever it's a tiny printer. Yeah. So that's it. And so the, the exquisite machines that we get to use, or that they get to use in Taiwan are called extreme ultraviolet lithography machines. These are those crazy lasers. The ones that China can use, because we've prevented them from getting any of those extreme ultraviolet holography machines. The ones China uses are previous generation machines called deep ultraviolet and they can't actually make chips as high a resolution as ours. So what they do is, and what this article is about is they basically take the same chip, they zap it once with the UV and then they got to pass it through again, zap it again to get closer to the level of resolution we get in one pass with our exquisite machine. Now the problem with that is you got to pass the same chip through multiple times, which slows down your whole process. It means you're yields at the end of the day or lower it as theirs. Yeah, which makes it more costly. We've known that this is a thing called multi patterning. It's been a thing for a long time. There's nothing new under the sun here. China has been doing this for a while. But so it's not actually a huge shock that this is happening. The question is always when you look at an announcement like this yields yield yield. How like what percentage of the chips coming out are actually usable and how fast are they coming out that determines like is it actually competitive? And that article too, like this ties into the propaganda stuff we were talking about, right? If you read an article like that, you could be forgiven for going like, oh man, our expert controls like just start working. So we might as well just give them up when in reality. Because like you look at the source like the and this is and this is how you know that also this is like this is one of the other propaganda things is like you look at Chinese news sources. What are they saying? What are the beats that that are like common? And you know just because of the way their media is set up, totally different from us and we're not used to analyzing things this way. But when you read something and like the South China more than post or like the global times or Xinhua and a few different places like this. And it's the same beats coming back. You know that someone was handed a brief and it's like, you got to hit this point this point this point. And yep, they're going to find a way to work that into the news cycle over there. And it's also like slightly true. Like yeah, they did manage to make ships at like five nanometers. Cool. It's not a lie. It's just it's the same like propaganda technique. Right? You're not most of the time you're not going to confabulate something out of nothing. Rather like you start with the truth and then you push it just a little bit just a little bit and you keep pushing, pushing, pushing, pushing. How much is this administration aware of all the things that you're talking about? So they're actually they've got some right now, they're in the middle of like staffing up some of the key positions because it's in new administration still. And this is such a technical domain. They've got people there who are like at the kind of way in a level of people. They have some people now. Yeah. In places like especially in some of the export control offices now who are some of the best in the business. Yeah. And and and that's that's really important. Like this is a it's a weird space because so when you want to actually recruit for, you know, government roles in this space, it's really fucking hard. Because you're competing against like an open AI like very like low range salaries, like half a million dollars a year. The government pay scale need list to say is like not where I mean Elon worked for free. He can he can afford to but it's still taking a lot of time out of his his day. There's a lot of people like that who are like, you know, they they can't justify the cost. Like they can afford to literally can afford to work for the government. Yeah. What would they exactly so whereas China is like, you know, the choice bitch. Yeah. Yeah. And that's what they say. That's they they the Chinese word for bitch is really biting like if you if you translated that it would be a real sure it's kind of crazy because it's. Yeah. Yeah. And that's what they say. That's they they the Chinese word for bitch is really biting like if you if you translated that it would be a real Sure. It's kind of crazy because it seems almost impossible to compete with that. I mean, that's like the perfect setup If you wanted to control everything and you wanted to optimize everything for the state. That's the way you would do it Yeah, but it's also easier to make errors and be wrong footer in that way and also the Basically that system only works if the dictator at the top is just like very competent because the the risk always with a dictatorship is like oh The dictator turns over and now it's like just a total dumbass and now you're the whole thing Any surrounds himself. I mean look it was talked about like information echo chambers online and stuff the ultimate information echo chamber is the one around Xi Jinping right now Because no one wants to give them bad news. Yeah, I'm not gonna I don't know, you know like and so and you have this and this is what you keep seeing right is like with these like Like provincial level debt in in China right which is so awful is like people trying to hide money under a Imaginary money money under imaginary mattresses and then hiding those mattresses under bigger mattresses until eventually like no one knows Where the liability is and that and then you get a massive property bubble and any number of other bubbles that are due to pop anytime Right and longer it goes on like the the with a more like stuff gets squirreled away Like there's there's actually like a story from the Soviet Union That's that always like gets me which is so Stalin obviously like purged and killed like a millions of people in the 1930s, right? So by the 1980s the ruling Politburo of the Soviet Union Obviously like things have been different generations had turned over and all the stuff But those people the most powerful people in the USSR could not figure out What had happened to their own families during the purchase like the information was just nowhere to be found because the machine of the state was just like So aligned around like we just like we just got to kill as many fucking people's we can like turn it over and then hide the evidence of it And then kill the people who killed the people and then kill those people who killed those people It also wasn't just kill the people right it was like it a lot of like kind of Gulag Archipelago style It's it's about labor right because the the fundamentals of the economy are so shit that you basically have to find a way to justify Putting people in labor camps and like that's right, but it was very much like you grind mostly or largely you grind them to death and basically They've gone away and you burn the records of it happening So little towns right that disappeared like people who are like there's no record or there's like or usually the way You know about it is there's like one dude It's like this one dude has a very precarious escape story It's like if literally this dude didn't get away you wouldn't know about the entire town that was like wiped out Yeah, it's crazy Jesus Christ. Yeah, the stuff that like apart from that though communism works Done right I feel like we could do it right and we have a ten-page plan that yeah, we came real close Can real close so close yeah, yeah, I mean that's what the blue no matter who people don't really totally understand like We're not even talking about political parties. We're talking about power structures. Yeah We came close to a terrifying power structure and it was willing to just do whatever it could to keep it rolling And it was rolling for four years. It was rolling for four years without anyone at the helm Jumping incentives right. I mean that's always the question like yeah one of the things is too like when you have such a big structure That's overseeing such complexity right? Obviously a lot of stuff can hide in that structure and it's it's actually kind it's not unrelated to the whole AI picture like You need there's only so much compute that you have at the top of that system that you can spend right as the president as a cabinet member like whatever You you can't look over everyone's shoulder and do their homework You can't do founder mode all the way down and all the branches and all the like action officers and all that's not gonna happen Which means you're spending five seconds thinking about how to unfuck some part of the government But then the like you know corrupt people who run their own the symptoms there spend every day Like yeah, yeah, that's the USA dilemma. Yeah. Yeah. Is there uncovering? Just insane amount of NGOs like where's this going we talked about this the other day But India has an NGO for every 600 people wait what yeah? More NGOs there's 3.3 million NGOs In India do they do they like bucket like what what are the categories that they fall into like who fucking knows? That's part of the problem that one of the things that Elon had found is that there's money that just goes out with no receipts And yeah, it's billion dollars we need to take that further. We need an NGO for every person in India We will get out of it. It's look at the exponential trend. We're gonna. It's like AI the number of NGOs is Doubling every year incredible progress in bullshit The NGO scaling law that bullshit scaling law. Well, it's just that unfortunately it's Republicans doing it right? So it's unfortunately the Democrats are gonna pose it even if it's showing that there's such insane waste of your tax dollars I thought some of the doge stuff was pretty bipartisan Like what like there's congressional support at least on both sides. No well sort of you know I think the real issue is in dismantling a lot of these programs that You can point to some good some of these programs do yeah The problem is like some of them are so overwhelmed Overwhelmed with fraud and waste that it's like to keep them active in the state They are like what do you do do you rip the band-aid off and start from scratch like what do you do with the Department of Education? You say why we number 39 when we were number one What did you guys do with all that money? Yeah, so there's a great problem There's this idea in soft-warranging. You're actually talking to one of our employees about this Which is like refactoring right? So when you're writing like a bunch of software and gets really really big and hairy and complicated and there's all kinds of like dumbass shit and there's all kinds of waste that happens in that in that code base There's this thing that you do every you know every like few months You just think called refactoring which is like you go like okay We have you know ten different things that are trying to do the same thing Let's get rid of nine of those things and just like rewrite it as the one thing So there's like a clean up and refresh cycle that has to happen whenever you're developing a big complex thing That does a lot of stuff the thing is like the the US government at every level has basically never done a Refactoring of itself and so the way that problems get solved is you're like Well, we need to do this new thing So we're just gonna like stick on another appendage to the beast and And get that appendage to do that new thing and like that's been going on for 250 years So we end up like this beast that has a lot of the appendages many of which do Incredibly duplicate of an wasteful stuff that if you were a software engineer just like not politically just Objectively looking at that as a system you'd go like oh this is a catastrophe And like we have Processes that the industry we understand how what needs to be done to fix that you have to refactor But they haven't done that hence the 36 trillion dollars of debt It's a problem too though in all like when you're a big enough organization You run in this problem like Google has this problem famously Facebook. I like we had friends like like Jason So Jason's the the guy you spoke to about that like so so he's he's like a startup Engineer so so he works in like relatively small code bases and he he like you know can hold the whole code base in his head at a time well when you move over to You know Google to Facebook like all of a sudden this gargantuan code base starts to look more like the complexity of the US government Just like very you know very roughly interesting So now you're like okay, well we want to add functionality And but so we want to incentivize our teams to to build products that are going to be valuable and The challenge is the best way to incentivize that is to to give people incentives to build new functionality Not not to refactor. There's no glory if you work at Google. There's no glory in refactoring if you work at meta There's no glory in refactoring like friends. There's no promotion, right? There's no exactly. Yeah You have to be a product owner So you have to like invent the next Gmail you got to invent the next Google calendar You got to do the next new messenger app That's how you get promoted and so you've got like this attitude You go into there and you're look like let me crank this stuff out and like try to ignore all the shit in the code base No glory in there and what you're left with is this like a this Frankenstein monster of a code base that you just keep stapling more shit on to and then be this massive graveyard of apps that never get used This is like the thing Google is famous for if you ever see like the Google graveyard of apps like all these things that you're I guess I kind of remember Google me somebody made their career off of launching that shit and then pieced out and it died That's that's like the incentive structure of Google Unfortunately and it's also kind of the only way to do I mean or made it's probably not but In the world where humans are doing the oversight that's your limitation Right you got some people at the top who have a limited bandwidth and compute that they can dedicate to like hunting down the problems AI agents might actually solve that right you could like actually have the you know a sort of autonomous AI agent that is the autonomous CEO or something go into an organization and uproot all the things and do that Refactor you could get way more efficient organizations out of that I mean like you're thinking about like government corruption and waste and that's the kind of thing where those sorts of tools could be radically empowering But you got it, you know you got to get them to work right and for you We've given us a lot to think about Is there anything more should we wrap this up? If we've made you sufficiently uncomfortable I'm super uncomfortable. What was the very uneasy was the butt-tapped too much at the beginning or was that was fine? No, that's fine. All it was weird It's just you know I was trying to look at some Non-synical way out of this well the thing is like there are paths out We talked about this and the fact that a lot of these problems are just us tripping on our own feet So if we can just like unfuck ourselves a little bit We are actually we can unleash a lot of this stuff and as long as we understand also the bar that Security has to hit and how important that is like we actually can Put all this stuff together. We have the capacity it it all exists It just needs to actually get aligned and around around and initiative and we have to be able to reach out and touch on the control side There's also a world where and this is actually like if you talk to the labs This is what they're actually planning to do But it's a question of how methodically and carefully they can do this the plan is to ratchet up capabilities and then scale in other words And then as you do that you start to use your AI systems You're increasingly clever and powerfully AI systems to do research on technical control So you basically build the next generation of systems you try to get that generation of systems help you just inch forward a little bit more on the Capability side it's very precarious balance but it's something that like at least isn't insane on the face of it and fortunately I mean is the the default path like there are the labs are talking about that that can kind of control element It's being a key pillar of their conversations are not happening in China So what do you think they're doing to keep AI from uprooting their system? So so that's interesting There's not imagine they don't want to lose control right there's a lot of Ambiguity and uncertainty about what's going on in China So there's been a lot of like track 1.5 track 2 diplomacy basically where you have you know Non-government guys from one side talk to government guys from this I talked to non government from the other side and kind of start to align on like Okay, what do we think the issues are? You know the Chinese are there are a lot of like freaked out Chinese researchers And and who've come out publicly and said hey like we're really concerned about the soul loss of control thing They're public statements and all that you also have to be mindful that any statement the CCP puts out of As a statement they want you to see right so when they say like oh yeah, we're really worried about this thing. It's genuinely hard to assess what that even means But they're like as you as you start to build these systems We expect you're gonna see some evidence of this shit before and it's not necessarily It's all like you're gonna build the system necessarily and have it take over the world like what we see with agents Yeah, so I was actually gonna add it. There's a really really good point and and something where like open source AI is like even you know could potentially have an effect here So a lot of a couple of the major labs like opening eye and throw up a guy think came out recently and said like look We we're on the cusp our systems are on the cusp of being able to help a total Nautilus like somewhat no experience Develop and deploy and release a known biological threat and that's like that's something we're gonna have to grapple with over the next few months and eventually like Capabilities like this not necessarily just biological but also cyber in other areas are gonna come out and open source and When they come out and open source, it basically we've got anybody down for anybody to download and use when they come out in open source like you actually start to see some like some some things happen like some some incidents like some some major hacks that were just done by like a random Motherfucker who just wants to see the world burn, but that wakes us up to like oh shit These things actually are powerful. I think one of the aspects also here is We're still in that post cold war honeymoon many of us right in that mentality like not everyone is like wrapped their heads around this stuff and the like what needs to happen is something that makes us go like oh Damn we act like we weren't even really trying this entire time because this is like this is the the 9-11 effect This is the Pearl Harbor effect Once you have a thing that aligns everyone around like oh shit This is real and we actually need to do it and we're freaked out. We're actually safer We're safer when we're all like okay something important needs to happen Right instead of letting them just slowly chip away exactly and so we like we need to have some sort of shock and We probably will get some kind of shock like over the next few months the way things are trending and when that happens Then but I mean like it's or years since that makes you four years But because because you have the potential for this open source like it's probably gonna be like a survivable shock, right? But but still a shock and so let us actually realign around like okay Let's actually fucking solve some problems for real and so putting together the groundwork, right? Is what we're doing around like let's let's pre-think a lot of this stuff so that like if and when the shock comes We have a break glass plan. We have a we have a plan and The the loss of control stuff is similar like you so one interesting thing that happens with AI agents today is though like they'll get any So so an AI agent will take a complex task that you give it like find me I know the like best sneakers for me online some shit like that and they'll break it down into a series of sub steps And then each of those steps it'll farm out to a version of itself say to execute autonomously the more complex a task is the more of those little sub steps there are in it and So you can have an AI agent that nails like 99% of Those steps but if it screws up just one the whole thing is a flop, right? And so if you think about like the sort of like loss of control scenarios that a lot of people look at are Autonomous replication like the the model gets access to the internet copies itself onto servers and all that stuff Those are very complex movements If it screws up at any point along the way that's a tell like oh shit something's happening there and you can start to think about like Okay, well what went wrong we get another do we get another try and we can kind of learn for our mistakes So there is this sort of like this picture You know one camp goes oh well We're gonna kind of make the super intelligence in a vat and then it's gonna explode it's out and we lose control over it That doesn't necessarily seem like the default scenario right now. It seems like what we're doing is scaling these systems We might on hobble them with big capability jumps But it's also there's a component of this that is a continuous process that lets us kind of get our arms around it in a more staged way That's another thing that I think is in our favor that we didn't expect before and As a field basically and I think that's that's a good thing like that helps you kind of detect these breakout attempts and do things about them All right, I'm gonna bring this home. I'm freaked out So thank you. Thanks for trying to make me feel better I don't think you did but I really appreciate you guys and appreciate your perspective because it's very important and It's very illuminating You know really gives you a sense of what's going on and I think one of the things that you said It's really important. It's like it sucks that we need a 9-11 moment or a Pearl Harbor moment to realize what's happening So we all come together, but hopefully Slowly but surely through conversations like this people realize what's actually happening You need one of those moments like every generation like that's how you get contact with the truth And it's like it's painful, but like the lights on the other side Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you