The Joe Rogan experience. I have a lot of bad thoughts Joe. Yeah, I bet you do You're on this morning shows Your record for your thoughts like cuz I think some things that I would never do you got it You got to erase your browser mind thoughts to yeah erase your history could you imagine if you could if you had an impulse just Smash on the face, but you were resisting it you weren't gonna do it. Are you a good person if you're resisting it constantly? It depends on who you're talking to if you're the asshole all the time you're constantly getting in fights of people it might be You know, we all know that person who's like this fucking ass on like everyone's an asshole in your stories But there's also times since some people need to be smacked and there's those in those moments like imagine if you could get arrested because you you tested positive for a potential aggressive episode Take a cove it takes you two lines. You're keeping your shit together, but you're imagining you're imagining just Ting off on this guy just smashing this could be a danger. Yeah, like hey man Yeah, stop doing it, but if you have that thought I'm about to smash that guy A light goes off the cops come in and they arrest you and they arrest you because you had a potentially violent episode Your red line your red flag Sam. This is a serious thing. You went to red line But I didn't do anything, but you might have yeah, or they'll tell you. You were going to we know we have predictive technology You're dick just a world like oh, yeah, that movie minority repairs that you look that seems so impossible Predicting my real now. It's like the world economic forum guy was saying that they won't have to have elections in the future Wow, we will be able to predict with such precision this we are Did you see the story British man acquitted over London Spain flight bomb hoax he Texted in snapchat to his friends. I'm on the way to blow up the plane on my member of the Taliban then oh my god the Spanish As a joke as the joke said to joke to his friends. It's a good bit. I think it's a bit of a teens were Scrambled to look how close the f18 is another jesus Windows insane he was just acquitted though because the judge was like there's obviously no threat here, but what was curious is how the Message was found because snapchat supposed to be encrypted and Some people think it's because of the Wi-Fi network at the airport and their importance as that's not how it was and Then the UK authorities said where was it right here? So is this evidence of some new technology that that I mean as you guys were saying this that's why I brought it up Do you think that's what they're what are you interpreting this house? They said that they have sartas for unknown reasons It was captured by the security mechanisms of England when the plane was flying over French airspace Yo, that's crazy The message was made in a strictly private environment between the accused and his friends with whom which whom he flew Through a private group to which only they have access So the accused could not even remotely assume that the joke he played on his friends could be intercepted or detected by British services Nor by third party parties other than his friends who received the message See that's crazy because like sometimes you'll say wild shit to your friends in a text message For fun, you know, and you're assuming if I send you an eye message You're assuming that that's encrypted. Yeah, I'm gonna stop telling my friends. I'm gonna murder my girlfriend You have to use to be careful. You have to use signal for that today's the day. I'll say that but I bet if you'd have used signal I bet they're looking through signal to I bet there's I bet there is a scanning that's being done on all Cell phone communication Looking for key target words that they think would be problematic. Well think about how much of our freedom were constantly giving away Yeah, I don't when I fly. I don't want to wait in the long line So I give them, you know my iris my fingerprint all that stuff now those lines are longer than the other lines Right, so oh yeah, if I go to the little idea fucking pre-check and clear are the longest lines now No shit. Yeah, so so sometimes you just fuck it. You go through. Yeah, I take my shoes off again I'm going backward, but then there's gonna probably be a new line. You got to give more You dip your balls in the fucking You gotta give me outline of your penis. I get the I gave you my penis. You gotta let me cut Well, you have to have the update in the chip. Do you have your update? You can five you have your update Did you update your brain? We only have a glass of penis. We need a hard penis if you have the brain chip will let you pass through you don't ever have to worry about Identification ever again. I thought of a new wrinkle for that I could let you update right there at the airport with some janky terminal that's probably hacked or you could do it at home Like everybody else would probably be doing it mmm. You update you update from a safe place update from a safe For God or you could do it here like it's like a subway terminal. Yeah, yeah It'll get to the point where you'll just have an account in your head and you won't have to pay for anything with a credit card ever again It'll all be in the count in your head, but only through central bank digital currency if you subscribe to central bank digital currency We can I on now all the inequality and all the problems of society today They'll get us they're getting us they're gonna get us with a chip in our head. It's gonna be awesome That's the problem. They get a you're gonna put that chip in you go God. Why was I resisting this? I was so stupid just 20 minutes ago Yeah, I get it I mean if you if you imagine like you can only imagine being as tough as intelligent as you are on your best or worst days but could you imagine being like a caveman like like Australia-pithecus like the early days You know just barbaric life covered in hair and then somebody Gives you something just a little shot or something and all sudden you can think like you You'd be like whoa, I didn't realize how fucking dumb I was I think We're gonna plug in and it's gonna be so whoa. Oh my god. This is so much better. This is so much better This is so much better than regular brains Except the fact that we have access to information constantly you're seeing it all in your head. That's just at or all right now I think well It's probably gonna be better than at or all yeah It's probably gonna be better if you if you could have something that stimulates various parts of your brain to produce certain Neurochemicals if that's possible they're gonna be able to do something where you can people that are paralyzed can use Cursors They can like like use their brain to figure out how to navigate computers Yeah, wow. Yeah. That's pretty but again, that's it's intrusive, right? I mean it's it's your thoughts Right, but if it's if you're a paralyzed person, it's really good thing. Yeah, like it's way better to be able to do that than not That's true, but once we start doing it too Yeah, Sam, I know you're not paralyzed, but let me tell you the benefits of linking up and you just start talking to your girlfriend. Good. I hope it's a witness. It's like I'm thinking about linking up I mean life my cousin linked up. He's never felt better. You know, it's he signed a one-year lease You link up for one year. You can't disconnect or they kill you. It'll be like it'll be like a zempic You give the linked up people like a year to see how they do and then you're like I might link up No, it'll be like military service like you have to if you're gonna link up you have to link up You have to commit to one year because you're contributing to the grid Yeah, I'm attributing to the grid of ideas if you link up So you have to keep it on for one year and most people don't take it off and if you do take it off the parts We screw it and get infected Yeah, you're gonna have to get a reup you look weird. You know like one of those weird people that just disconnected We're so close to something like that