Weirdos like zone healers or fucking freaks who are doing strange things that Really relies on someone believing in it and if someone does believe in it then the placebo effect does kind of has some effect Well, you don't want to rely on that fucking thing It's nice to know that there's actually some shit going on not just you know I think I feel it. Yeah, right The big one for me has always been forming sentences because obviously I talk for a living I talk for a living form sentences for a living and my ability to recall words and to pull words up Intentaneously it's critical when dealing with hecklers at a comedy club when recalling material when recalling techniques or going over techniques during a UFC card When you know trying to reference something during a podcast like that's so giant man For most people for everything when you're talking to a girl when you're in a business meeting when you're in an interview and you're just out Hanging out. It's nice to be able to not go. Oh, yeah, you know and have to think about those those dull moments You know we've all had those dull moments when you just woke up when someone's talking to you in the phone and you're You know it's that thing like I do those fucking radio interviews sometimes man And a lot of times I've do these radio tours like started like six o'clock in the morning when I wake up like for UFC Is this stuff like that? I have to call up all those different radio stations and for the first 40 minutes I'm a fucking moron man. It's like it's so hard to fire up Yeah, and it's like that's one thing that's like it's so critical to highlight your brain is not at a static state It's just not it's constantly moving and flowing and what things like alpha brain can do along with of course meditation proper thinking techniques how to manage your consciousness managing your mind They can get you or keep you in a in a more Positive frequency in a better a better vibration a better Better RPM, you know quicker RPM than you would be a better frequency for what you're trying to do I mean you're dragging yourself out of sleep which is theta state which is really low and sometimes Delta state If you're a really good sleeper which is at the very bottom part of the frequency and you're trying to drag yourself back out to that without You know and getting in the optimal frequency it's tough But yeah, these things can and we've shown it now with these studies help get you in that optimal brainwave frequency Pretty rad is very exciting and the Boston Center for Memory mm-hmm They they try to bunch a different shit this year that didn't do anything Yeah, this so they alpha brain broke a streak of 14 straight clinical trials from both pharmaceuticals and Nutra-suticals that showed zero results so when they came back with the results They were like pretty surprised and pretty stoked because they're used to just doing these trials and they report every single one If it came back negative, they'd run the report and they're they're pros You know they're used to doing this and alpha brain broke that streak of 14 in a row that came back no results So they were fired up especially because this is an this is a product that has earth grown nutrient ingredients natural ingredients So natural ingredients on a healthy population and statistical significance You know really extremely rare according to them from what they've seen and so It's pretty fired up isn't it hilarious that So many different things that we consider earth grown nutrients, you know natural ingredients natural ingredients Like what is that gonna do yeah? Yeah, like like like most of what you're putting in your body is supposed to be that stuff I mean that's literally the building blocks of your fucking cells is is is vegetable matter plant matter protein that in earth grown nutrients That's your your made out how do we get bigger? You know how do we get bigger because we eat these things and becomes us You know, but it's funny that those things I mean especially not alpha brain Obviously because it's not illegal but fuck if they had found out about it a long time ago Probably would have been illegal cannabis is Something that of course everyone that listens to this podcast knows pretty much how I feel about marijuana and how important I think it is for humanity but it's really it's hitting home with me right now because I have a good friend whose mom Stage 4 cancer they took her off chemotherapy They put her on CBD oil they put her on hemp oil and I'm not suggesting anybody do this by the way If you know someone is on cancer and you do listen to your fucking doctor, okay? Do whatever your doctor tells you to do however? I just want to tell you what is happening my friend because his mom They pulled her off chemotherapy because they said she's too weak. They said she can't do this anymore So he's panicking he's like she's got a few months to live he gets her on that hemp oil or the cannabis oil Yeah, her tumors shrank 30% inside of a month 30% she sleeps every night where she couldn't sleep before she eats all the time her appetite is back She sleeps her appetite is back and her tumor has shrunk by 30 fucking percent Inside of a month That's awesome and it shows just how like improving things a little bit can start a positive cascade like you improve just enough to sleep And then the sleep starts improving things and then once you sleep enough you can eat more and that starts improving things So even if the cannabis was only a 10% increase maybe that got her to sleep and then maybe the sleep got her to eat Yeah, and then all the sudden it starts you know going on down the line and making a big improvement Yeah, I mean you can't discount any of the factors You know even the chemotherapy any of the things that she was doing But the fact that the cannabis helped her so much helped her sleep helped her eat and that in most states except for what 18 now it's illegal and in Colorado right now they're trying to get people to the sheriff's department and some form of Their form of police department. They're trying to sue the state because they said they're upholding State and federal laws and they're not allowed to uphold the federal law against marijuana Why because they're fucking a russer down their russer down their panicking they're gonna have to lay off cops They're violent crimes down by like something like 15% they have the lowest incidence of drunk driving they've ever had in the state And they're making fuckloads of money off of tax dollars cannabis is taxed at 39% in Colorado. That's crazy. They're making so much money. They had to give some back. Yeah It's hilarious. Yeah, well, we're gonna start selling marijuana eventually But right now we're selling alpha brands they go to on a dot com Oh, and then it used the co-ord Rogan and you'll save 10% off any and all supplements any any other on a shit All these all kinds of cool shit going on, but we'll get on with the buck and we got a lot of cool shit including this stuff What is this maka shit? I'm drinking. Yeah, that's much a much a child latte So a ton of turmeric in there some matcha green tea a lot of health benefits real whole spice chai matcha It's really good. It makes you feel like a hippie makes you want to be around people that have incense Like some sort of macrame project going on Some some carpet that's weird weird weird earthy colors my people Y'all I'm done with a lot of hippies. Yeah, but just a few hippies are fucking ruining for everybody else So hippies are trying to go out god damn. They're like they're like the vegan version of hippies. Yeah Well, yeah, right like they just overzealous, but that's with everything man I mean that's like the MMA dudes that wear those fucking t-shirts on it You know what? Yeah skulls that have bullet holes in them and you know strangling chickens Look at those some fucking guys they get it too far. Yeah, instead of just being they're showing and as soon as you start showing Then it's brought that's what it is with everything though, right? I mean pretty much with everything there is in this world What am I looking for here? I don't know should we cue the music? Yeah, do we do that still? Yeah We kind of do that still boom The Joe Rogan experience I'm really worried that I lost my wallet That's the words out there. Yeah, go check out there Jamie. See if you can find it out there I don't think it is out there though. I think it's I think I left it on table on a restaurant It's very possible when you have kids dude You lose your fucking mind because you don't know what you're doing at any given time You always like hey, don't eat that put that down. Don't stick your finger in there. That's electrical Don't don't chew on wires. Don't put that away. Don't get late. The cars are coming get over here Yeah So I don't have a wallet right now, so hopefully somebody knows where it is. We'll find out Jamie's taking too long Because if it was out there, he would have found it We might be fucked well You know it's the worst feeling ever, but it all works out. Yeah, the only problem is I feel like I should do Something about it before this restaurant closes nothing. Okay, pause it. We're gonna be right back. I'm gonna check my truck real quick Sorry Panic you worried about me That is not funny man like some pieces of paper some little cards you have in your wall to have your ID on I'm like oh no, what if I get pulled over? I'm gonna take me to jail I read a horrible story, but a dude who's going to jail because he's a garbage man and he was picking up the garbage before 7 a.m So they gave him a citation he goes in to deal with the citation and I don't know what he did I mean reach some agreement with a court or talk to someone didn't understand the ramifications and they fucking sentenced him to 30 days in jail Oh, that's fair That's justice and you know I watch people like defended online was picking up the garbage for people over chairs to put it out like What? You think it's okay to put that guy in a cage. Yeah, you could put him in a cage and apparently they're allowing him to work During the week and he's gonna serve us 30 days on weekends So every was you got a family wife kids the whole thing most of a year. Yeah, 30 weekends out of the year How fucking insane is that how insane is that? Yeah? They were arresting this guy putting him in jail because he picked up the garbage early What a weird world we live in man It is I think we're gonna look back at this time and we're just gonna shake our head and think we did some weird shit Just like we look back now 50 years ago a hundred years ago. I mean people were giving each other lobotomies back a long time Yeah, that's where they stick an ice pick in the corner of your eye and thrash it around Like I would know what they're doing on they're doing they're just trying to destroy shit And that was like an approved therapy along with electroshock and all this weird shit You know we'll look at some of the you know judicious system Yeah, what were we thinking yeah, well, do you remember? there was a documentary on Hunter S Thompson and in the documentary it was I forget he was supporting for president, but the vice president It was a scandal like as they were running for president found out that he had gone through electroshock therapy he'd gone through he had had a few Moments yeah, we're shit didn't work out right with his brain and so they decided to juice this guy up with I mean What is that about that's like the equivalent of smacking your TV when the you know on the reception is not coming in Just walk up doing fucking smack it and it works like okay such a crude instrument to use You know, it's like full on it's not like they're targeting anything You know like Dave Aspery might be doing now I mean he still may not know exactly what he's doing But at least he has an idea of a goal right going for when he's zapping his brain These guys was just like sticking a fork in the light socket Well, they had an episode of radio lab about that stuff trend, you know Something dermal stimulation electricity. They're putting electrodes on certain parts of your brain It was really fascinating. Yeah, that's definitely a new frontier that could show a lot of promise But it's getting more exact, you know like the more you get from this crude version to the exact version That's where it's gonna start showing promise well That's where they were saying on the radio lab thing that they have a bunch of people that are essentially hackers that are creating their own home Remedies and they're attaching these things them and you know sometimes they do it and they lose their sense of smell You know You look juice it up weird parts of your brain You know, you see like weird things out of the corner of your eyes You go numb like you just you're applying electricity to the outside of your head but there's been Some things where they've shown like significant improvements including the ability to focus and the ability to learn tasks Like they had this woman go through a sniper training thing she did it on the natch She does it. She's terrible at it. She know She's like this video game where the hostage situations. Who do you shoot and she's missing everybody? She gets like two out of you know, whatever the fuck the number was she does it again They strap these things to her head. She does the whole 20 minute course She it's over like like that and she goes well Why was it over so quick and they go that was 20 minutes and and she goes no it wasn't so they show her the time like this was 20 minutes She hits every target 100% accuracy and she's like what in the actual fuck just happened Like they juiced her up with these electrodes and she became a fucking assassin. Yeah, that's awesome I wonder if it was manipulating the brainwave frequency like getting her into that out of state zone or whether it was You know prefrontal cortex blood flow or there's a lot of different things they can do But I think there's a lot of promise in that field, you know, it's it's a shortcut that we're starting to learn we're still You know most people at least are still White belts in how to manage the mind, you know We're amateur race car drivers with this insanely complicated piece of machinery that most people don't understand the potential of and there's different states that you achieve almost accidentally You have a couple of shots. You're at the bar. You can't you're playing pool You can't fucking miss everybody's been there You know you think your time crews you look away you fire the ball dead in the heart of the pocket But try recreating that a few days later and it's gone, you know Maybe even an hour from now it's gone. Yeah, I think that's why the ancients used to blame it on the gods It was like, oh the gods are with me. Her means was all holding my stick on the pool They know whatever the heck is it's so crazy. It's like you don't know when it's gonna come It's like you've been gifted by the divine and with the with the ancients too They only lived to be like 20. Yeah, like they had to like figure it out real cool Was there gods the gods have done this for us? Yeah, okay I think I have cancer see you guys later Probably light even cancer right the blue the flu sip with yeah something got all the ancients Yeah, I got the V name right. Well, who's the first duty of V name who's that dirty bastard? I had to be like the first guy. Hey, you think right unless it's just been around forever. It's the pain of existence But it's funny that there's like a specific disease like nobody catches the flu from eating pussy You know what I mean like you get like specific diseases from sex sexually transmitted Michael Douglas got that weird one from eating so much box where you got like throat cancer. He says he didn't he says that I was bullshit Oh, right. Yeah. Yeah, there was like but he coincided with his divorce So I don't I'm not sure if I buy it. He might have been trying to sweet talk his way back into right Catherine Zeta Jones What's her name? Uh-huh. That's her name. It's the one. Yeah That didn't work out so they got divorced. So maybe it was eating pussy. Maybe you pull it beside me How much pussy jean oh good lord? I'm imagining it's a lot I was actually the dinner party where he was that really he's the man like he's really As far as like having just that natural Charisma where you just want to just pull up a seat and listen to him tell a story Right could be about him getting a fucking Starbucks. It didn't really matter when Michael Douglas was telling a story It was like whoa I said a lot of experience man including like catastrophic failures as a parent You know he's got a son that's in jail for drugs That's got to be like really weird, you know that that that often happens with those big-time movie star fellows and and gals They become big-time movie stars and they just don't have enough time to raise their kids and then the kids are around these like really super unhealthy environments and you know a lot of like empty pleasure environments and a lack of understanding discipline and then also genetic predisposition to addictions that he had and obviously his son Charlie has You know who knows who other folks in this family might have had as well It's a bittersweet life. Yeah, it's challenging and I think the way that I look at it is it's it's extra pressure It's not like it's inevitable that you're gonna be fucked up in that situation But it's extra pressure and so you have to do extra things to be able to combat that you know You really have to focus on your discipline do things like you know spiritual journeys and meditate In psychedelics and things that you got to say listen This is gonna be the pressure of the world in this situation is gonna try and steer me this way So I got to overcompensate by working that much harder to make sure I stay grounded and stay balanced But those you know those mechanisms aren't in place and they're not part of mainstream understanding So you know whereas maybe in 50 years a person like Michael Douglas would be like listen Here's your 18th birthday. You're going down to Peru. I know this shaman really well I'll see you in two weeks and then every year thereafter you're doing something else You know staying in a an an ashram for two weeks Or he's got to know that there's so much pressure that he can help kind of guide this but right now It's just nobody knows that much. Yeah, could you imagine you grew up in your dad? Was a giant movie star and you go on the red carpet to hold your dad's hand and like also You have to live in that guy's shadow. Yeah, you know like what are you doing man? Oh, you run a bakery? Your Michael Douglas is kid right fucking dads of he won the Oscar. I don't even know if you want an Oscar I'm sure he did one of them sure it's something another yeah, you know what a fucking weird batch of pressure That is you know I have friends it's dad their dad's are like pretty successful And they still like their adults they live under the shadow of their dad even if they're more successful than their dad It's like see you know fucking a pasture dad It's a weird dynamic they call that like the edible complex right where you have to that urge to kill your father And it's not literally kill your father, but it means to overcome You know what his what his greatness was you know be better than him in some way or another and fuck your mom and fuck your mother Yeah, that's enough. I don't know. You know how to explain that part But yeah, but that's that's part of this drive like to be better than the generation before you Which is it's why you know a lot of times even in South America the shamans they train you know father to grandson rather than father to son they skip a generation to avoid that kind of power dynamic because they know It's gonna be kind of fucked up if they're both practicing at the same time. It's always gonna be weird That's really clever. Yeah That's so clever that they do that it was probably out of just sheer necessity, you know I got a way better relationship my grandfather than ever did with my father right my grandfather There's no pressure on him exactly now he'd already raised kids. I was you know his daughter's kid It was easy. Yeah, hung out with that dude went fishing with him and shit, you know And he's not wrapped up in the ego of that's my boy, you know That's a big problem that fathers get caught up into they identify with their children and that becomes part of their identity And then they put so much pressure on these kids to for their own benefit rather than just hey You're a human, you know, what's best for you buddy? Yeah Yeah, that's real hard for people man I've seen that with people trying to dictate their children's careers and I had a friend not grew up who's Korean and Korean families I don't know if you're Korean friends but Korean families are Incredibly hard-working like incredibly strict incredibly disciplined like he was one of the most disciplined people I've ever met He was on the national Taekwondo team when he was going through his He was going through medical school, so he was in the middle of medical school and he was also on the national Taekwondo team Like well fucking do that man. I mean he won the Nationals as a fucking medical student This guy I mean he was studying 16 hours a day and he found time to train He would in between Training or in between studying at the library he would run stairs at his university Wow, he would just run the stairs like with his street clothes on and that's how he got some of his conditioning in Yeah, I've watched our researcher Jared as soon as he started medical school It's just he was practicing B.J.J. He was living in Brazil We met him in Brazil. He's kind of stout and he's just killing it in there And I've seen the circles get deeper and he's losing weight and he still finds a little time here and there But it's a grind I can't imagine that anybody thinks it's the way to do it I think everybody's just been doing it like that for so long But how does it well? How is it possible that they let doctors work these giant long-ass shifts Completely exhausted and take care of people's medical issues and possibly fuck things up because they're exhausted Just because of fatigue Yeah, I mean that's and it's kind of like that Navy SEAL type of training They put you through enough pressure in medical school or in buds training as it is for the Navy SEALs That they can trust you in battle with people's lives on the line, you know And I think that's why they make medical school that hard You know, it's like a gauntlet that if you pass this motherfucker Then you'll be able to handle these long shifts, especially you know when you're interning at a hospital and doing all those I think it's probably the right move for seals Right but for doctors, I just feel like Jesus why don't you have more doctors? Yeah, you know Why don't you have extra doctors instead of making one guy work 18 hours of fucking day? My friend Steve. I think you met Steve Graham. Dr. Steve. He was we were when we were friends in Boston he was going through his residency and In op- he was an ophthalmologist and he told me that he was on the toilet Taking a shit with a tray of food in his lap He fell asleep and his buzzer went off and that's when he realized like like what the fuck am I doing with my life Yeah, he fell asleep on the toilet while he was eating and The buzzer like his pager was back when he had pagers doctors. I think doctors still have pagers I think they actually do they're like still they're the only ones with pagers drug dealers and the doctors Can you trace people through pagers? No, you can't there's no fucking payphones anymore So if you're a drug dealer and you're trying to do things on the street like you have to have a toss guy If you got burners you got to have a burner phone. Yeah, how long before they make those drug dealers and adulterers And cricket phones all day. Yeah, how many people like buy those legitimately? How many people like buy burner phones and like just like like this phone? This is my fault. No, no, no It's having 11 phones. No, that doesn't have it You know one thing about doctors people give doctors a hard time especially you know because of this medical crisis that we're in But I don't really don't think it's a doctors fault. They're trained to you know They're trained to follow clinical research, you know, and they do that really really well They follow clinical research The problem is is that the people funding clinical research have a vested interest their researching products that they want to sell They're not researching hey, let's see what happens if we feed this guy a natural diet, you know and do that against placebo Well, that's a couple hundred grand that nobody's paying for because nobody's making any money off that you know So there's not there's an absence of clinical research showing these other kind of functional medicine and non-profit ways that people can get healthy And I think that really when you're looking at you know kind of correcting some of the issues in medicine That's what needs to happen big non-profit groups need to get together and start funding clinical trials for these things that have no Profitable profitable viability, you know, just studying healthy diets studying You know what happens if you float for you know every day for six weeks studying what happens when you do all of these other things that you can't Possibly make money off of I think that's gonna make a big difference that is and it's also Try talking to a doctor about something that's outside of his wheelhouse and you know You're gonna get a lot of you know like what do you think about you know you ask a doctor about meditation or oh? Yeah, you know that's not gonna that guys Fucking busy man. He's got 18 different patients waiting in his office and that's not just feel the study and you can't possibly Know everything about the human body when it comes to every single function of the human body all the different mechanisms involves an absorbing nutrients and absorbing Like the the different things that can go wrong and various organs like you specialize They specialize for a reason there's a reason why foot doctors aren't also neurosurgeons, you know, right? You can't be yeah, you can't be and it's it's sort of analogous to life like in life You can't know everything about everything in life and doctors just most you run into a lot of doctors You don't want to trade bodies with them You're a doctor like you're a guy who's supposed to be like managing like the health and wellness of these people that are in your care At least it's far it's fixing them when shit goes wrong But you've got a pot belly and you don't have an ass like you're you're you have bad posture You're your neck. That's kind of slumped forward like in your doctor and you're you so you're not on the ball with everything either No one is it's and it's literally a virtual impossibility to be complete as far as your education about the entire human body and Every single organ and everything that can go wrong and everything that you could do right to prevent all these things from going wrong and To really have a deep knowledge in the benefits of all these different things like yoga and meditation and super healthy You know nutrient rich diets. You got to do it. You have to actually do that You have to have a shitty like rich role who's gonna be on the podcast again soon I had him in the past and he's a ultra marathon runner who became this like fucking health and wellness fanatic and he used to eat shit food A terrible diet and then started like juicing beats and eating healthy vegetables whole body was like what's going on? And he like described like one day where he just got out and just started running like he had so much energy He just started running well it takes a guy like that to give you I mean Obviously it's an anecdotal experience. It's just one guy's take on what happened But those those stories are super important You know that that is if you really do change your diet and throw a bunch of healthy like really low fat meats and high You know like high nutrient Vegetables and eat really healthy foods you will feel different like you're your way you interface with the world Will feel different eat a lot of avocados coconut oil get those healthy fats for your brain and you feel different This is like it's not a fucking aesthetic thing. It's not like I want to look good in the beach when I start myself That's not even healthy look. I mean, she's not even healthy. I guess on this photo. These chicks were bombing on this girl It was hilarious because it was a girl who's just thin. She is just thin She didn't look like in she was anorexic at all But all these women were just shedding on her body like oh God get her a sandwich. Oh God She's too thin like that's she has thin bones man. You look at this girl like that's how she's built But nobody wants to accept that they want to they want to think that there's something wrong with this girl You're supposed to be overflowing over the top of your fucking jeans. You're supposed to have like big floppy Meat bags in between your legs that rubs together It's easier to think that than to go the other way. That's healthy. She's not healthy The best doctor I know is is Dr. Engle and we work with him and on it So he was trained as a psychiatrist clinical forensic child psychiatry God is MD and then was like I don't really think this is the whole picture So this is like all right. I'm gonna go completely the other way went down to South America and did 40 sessions of ayahuasca and 60 nights and Did way too much like like fried himself to a certain degree So then he had to go live in a tent for a little while Figgerson shit out He's like I was way too much So he lived in a tent for on land for like a year and then he started studying Different kind of functional medicine, but he put himself in the lab with all these things Sometimes he screwed up sometimes. He got it right But now he's able to combine you know the best part of western medicine is MD the best part of you know The shamanistic practices from South America the best part of functional medicine and natural medicine and kind of put it all together And that's that's where the doctors can become great because maybe they're not specialist But the problem with specialists is everything in the body is interconnected and related So if you're only specializing in one thing you're gonna focus on that potentially to the detriment of the rest of your body So having that at least basic understanding of the connection between all the parts of the body is Incredibly valuable for a doctor and then also putting themselves through all the thing How you gonna talk shit on what ayahuasca can do unless you've done it right? You know like there's no way to know like what that experience is Same with prescribing these drugs, you know It's like you're prescribing drugs that you've never even taken like how are you? You know what this is gonna do to somebody it's a weird kind of place that that we're in right now well I have a friend. Um have some of that. Oh, it's good for you. I have a friend who her husband went over to Germany for artificial disc replacement and Like he's he's fucked like his back is fucked and so they replaced a bunch of his discs and He's way better now. Yeah, like way better. I skiing again like his back was fucked and apparently they have these discs in Germany these artificial discs that they just can't sell in America. He's can't sell them Nope, not ready yet. Yeah, for whatever reason. I mean, maybe maybe there's a good reason I mean maybe they're they're worth more thorough over here and maybe they prevent people from you know Having to get those old silicon breast implants pulled out all that kind of shit Yeah, I know it's more than pops that give it in your fucking lupus or something And then it happens to people the auto immune disorders because they're tits leak. Yeah, but these these discs Brawly O'estema got one in his neck. He had a jiu-jitsu injury and Really bad neck injury where he's temporary paralyzed and the whole deal went and got his Disc replaced fought won the world championships afterwards his fighting MMA afterwards I mean, I mean he's gone through this incredibly devastating injury and with an artificial disc in his neck still getting yanked on He's still getting choked not that often. He's pretty fucking good He doesn't really get choked very often, but the point being he's got full functionality and so this guy this guy had discs Fusing his back went to He's still getting choked. Not that often. He's pretty fucking good. He doesn't really get choked very often. But the point being, he's got full functionality. And so this guy, this guy had discs fusing his back. Went to Germany, they opened all that shit up, unfused his discs, I guess. I don't know if they did that. And they put these artificial discs in place. And now he's fucking moving around. Like, it's crazy. But they can't. But I was talking to my doctor about it. I go, so why they don't do that in America? You can't do it in America. But do you recommend it? He goes, I definitely recommend it. Like, if you have the funds, like if someone has really fucked up back and they have the funds, he's like, yeah, it's worth doing. And it's not like Germany's a free for all. And a lot of things are even more strict than us. I mean, I'm pretty sure all vitamins or pharmaceuticals pretty much in Germany. Like we can't sell shit in Germany. Because they control everything very carefully out there. So they're a different kind of weapon. Do you want to describe them though, at least? They've seen vitamins? Yeah, I don't know. I mean, I'm not an expert on that. But I know the prohibition for us sending anything, even our vitamin C supplements in there. No, nobody in the machine. That's a pharmaceutical. Wow. Whoa. That's crazy. But yeah, I mean, well, that's what they invented that regenikine, which I'm a giant fan of. I've had that done several times now, man. You want to talk about something that just cuts your injury, like the recovery time down radically. It's very expensive. But if you have something that's really fucking with you and nagging injury, oftentimes it just nips that shit in the bud. And it's available finally in America, but insurance doesn't cover it. You have to pay for it yourself. And it's like, what is insurance? Why doesn't this, and they like, it's off label? What does this mean? I'm not complaining that it's here. I'm happy that at least you could use it, because you still can't do the artificial disks or any of that other shit. But it's going to come a point in time. We've got to do this. Is this the most efficient system? Yeah, no doubt. I think really we're at a really cool time where all kinds of new shit is coming out. And it's going to be the best of what technology can do. And I think the next big piece is going to become and harnessing what the mind can do. I was doing a little bit of research, because I'm doing a lot of writing now. And there was a study published in 2002 where they took 180 patients. And they gave half of them a fake placebo knee surgery. And the other half are throscopic knee surgery. But everybody thought they were getting real knee surgery. So it was placebo controlled knee surgery. And the results were absolutely on par. The people who got placebo controlled knee surgery were cruising around. They were walking around fine. And people who got actual arthroscopic knee surgery were also doing a lot better as well. Wow. So I mean, and that's something that isn't tested very often in surgery, because people don't think, how do you do a placebo surgery? Well, they've done that with, there's a study in the 1950s that did it with a particular type of heart surgery, where people, they give people placebo heart surgery and real surgery. The results were on par. And so I think understanding how much that plays in effect, because if you go to surgery and you come out and you're all right, you think you're fixed. Man, the doctors were in there. They know shit. They were cutting shit up. They were sowning up. I'm good. So that placebo effect, even in surgery, is dramatic. It's huge. And I think really, the frontiers of medicine are going to be harnessing the stuff that really does work and that benefit. And then us tapping into these latent resources in our mind and using belief to help speed up and facilitate even additional healing. That's amazing. On the other hand, I really appreciate the fact that there's steps that people have to go through before they can sell a pharmaceutical drug. Because we've all been aware of someone and close to us or something that had an adverse effect of some pharmaceutical drug that you see on those late night commercials. Were you one of the ones who took vioxx? Were fen-fen, member fen-fen? Yeah, fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck, fuck. Damn, son, that fucked people's hearts up for life. There's people that have fucking tricky hearts now because of some diet pills. So lose fat and your life. Yeah, man, I know a dude who had a stroke because he was taking Guy Metzker, UFC fighters, former champion, great fighter, great guy to really pull guy. He got a fucking stroke from vioxx, dude. He's taking the shit for arthritis in his knees. And also, he starts slurring his words and everyone's like, oh, guy, something's going on. They take him in, they find out he's got a stroke. And on top of a lifelong career of MMA fighting, he was actually talking about some interesting therapy that he's going through. Something that's really benefited him, benefited his back. See if he could pull that up. Guy Metzker, I don't have a laptop in front of me, but Guy Metzker discusses brain trauma video. It's really interesting. First of all, because Guy Metzker, who is a pioneer. I mean, I called one of his fights, one of his early UFC fights in 97. I've known that guy for a long time. He's always been like a super stand up. Looks like a movie star. Looks like a hero in a movie. He's been just a cool dude, like always. And even in this situation, it's really cool because he's super honest about how he feels, like how he feels physically, as opposed to how he used to feel. I'm like, what was going wrong? And he talked about the improvements that he had to Larry, actually, because he talks about the improvements that he has. He's talking about brain trauma from fighting. And then a stroke. And then later on, he's talking about, now he can spar again. He's sparring with some fucking young whipper snapper. They came with a gym. And the doctor's like, what the fuck are you doing? He's don't worry, he didn't hit me. He's like, you're in there fucking sparring, man. But he's a world champion. When you're a guy like Guy Metzker, I'd legit striking skills to it. It's fun for him. It's like being a chess master, not being able to play chess anymore. Yeah, man. And three gets his jollies. Is this it? I don't know. I'm so asking you. Let me see a play. I'll tell you if it is. It's soft spot. Yeah, this is it. You'll be able to move around without your cane. Especially, that's with brain injuries. I don't believe we do enough. To be honest, I think we give a lot of lip service to help in our vets, but not a lot of action. So Metzker is changing that. What we offer here is a class. When I start getting in shape. This is a different thing, but this is cool that he's doing that. And brain injuries. Keep your hands up, son. The Addison. We run through. He's in Addison, Texas. Grand class. Working alongside the carrot brain centers in Irving, Metzker knows what a brain injury does to a person. He has one, two. I had a 17-year-long professional fight career, and I had a medicine-induced stroke, and I have a brain tumor. Metzker believes the combat training that works for him will make our military heroes healthier and happier. We try to attach these guys back to that element that made them become soldiers in the first place. For Texans with character, I'm Tracy Cornet. This is a different thing. See if you could find the other one. Because the other one of the details is therapy that he went through that helped him. But that's cool that you can see from that video what kind of a guy he is. So what was important was that he was talking about it in like this really honest way. Like his balance is all fucked up. He wasn't trying to shield himself. Like, yeah, I still got it. Don't worry about that. You know, he was being like real humble and honest about the state that he's in. They're making some headway with brain trauma. It's interesting. There are some therapies that are effective. No doubt. And I think it's going to come from a basket of really cures at this point. You know, everybody's, it's not going to be one magic bullet. It's going to be a variety of different things. Yeah. And stacking these modalities like CBD has some potential. Intranasal liposomal glutathione has some potential. Floating has some potential. Micro dosing siliceibin might have some potential. There's been shown some neurogenesis that comes from that. But all of these things that are disparate right now, I think ultimately maybe when put together might be the solution. Yeah. That's the solution. Right. The solution is it's not an either or thing. It's not of you have to go the conventional route with pharmaceutical drugs and the doctor's prescription. Or you go the fruitcake route with holistic medicine. You're doing yoga and eating fucking kelp. It doesn't have to be. It could be all the good stuff, all the good stuff. The good stuff that seems woo woo. Like you know, you talk to people who do Kundalini yoga. That's I knew this lady. She's a sweetheart. I still know her. And she's a Kundalini teacher. And she's she's blazing hot. Because a lot of Kundalini is at one point in time. I mean, she's still attractive, but she's an older woman. Right. But she was beautiful when she was young. She's beautiful now. I love her. She's a good person. But my point is I don't want to disparage her in any way. She's so woo woo woo. She's so woo woo. It's fucking crazy. Like you can't talk to her but anything. Like she makes you like you go into her property. If you go to to where her house is. She makes you like stand in a certain place and say your blessings and like ask for the earth and the woods to embrace you. Like she's not bullshitting man. She really means that. And she she will tell you that like Kundalini yoga and like this practice of yoga is like changed her being changed who she is as an individual. Now let's say like oh, she's some woo woo crazy bitch with all due respect with love crazy bitch. I call myself crazy bitch. But my then my friend Denny got into it. Denny Propocos and Denny you know Denny Denny Brazilian Jiu Jitsu black belt world champion as a brown belt no gee Jiu Jitsu me. He's a bad motherfucker and a very good friend and he's not a bullshit artist at anything. And he started getting deep in the Kundalini and he started doing it every day and he said dude I'm tripping balls. He goes I'm telling you when I'm in full Kundalini mode because Denny's super disciplined and the type of discipline that you need to be a high level competitive Brazilian Jiu Jitsu black belt is the same kind of discipline that if applied to yoga in like a constant attention and focus on achieving these states. I now believe that all the stuff that I used to think was horseshit. I mean it's really kind of egotistical that I thought I just thought there was too much. There's so much shenanigans going on. I mean for whatever reason I would hear people talk about these yoga states where they would achieve full on DMT realm states and I'd be like sure you did. You know I just didn't believe them. I thought they were like you know how people eat vegan food always tell you it tastes amazing. It's like it's never like it's kind of carved that chicken with the apostrophe. But you know what I'm saying it's like they're overly enthusiastic to the point where their opinion or their taste is not it's you don't consider it without reservation. But Denny I consider him without reservation. I know him so well. So he tells me he's hitting these states. I was like whoa. Yeah. I mean the Kundalini yoga is I think well first of all the problem that a lot of people have is they stack extra shit on top of the good stuff. That's just complete nonsense right and that helped that makes you want to discard the whole thing. Like some of this woman's other practices were probably the majority of why you went man everything you're doing is whack because I know some of this is whack. I think that's an issue you make. But the actual Kundalini yoga I had a podcast with the former Navy SEAL this guy Michael Vega and he was on 11 different pharmaceuticals and that's another big problem in the military is they really over prescribe psychological meds for these these people and the interaction. It's going to be a problem. He was on 11 couldn't sleep full PTSD totally fucked up and then his process was exactly the same. He stopped taking the meds and started doing Kundalini yoga which he stumbled upon and he's actually out here and that was the key for him to reverse his PTSD. And this is an old Navy SEAL like a real deal combat that you know in the shit kind of guy and that's the method that worked. You know it kind of makes sense if you think about it because that applies to almost everything else that there's someone out there that does it so well that if you experience them doing it you go oh now I get it. You know what I mean like we've all seen that like I've never taken any music lessons at all. But I have friends that play guitar and I had a friend that would play classical guitar. I do flamenco's and shit and he would grow his fingernails long and shit like the whole deal and he had a like put nail polish over him and he would, he was my friend from the time of year like 15. And he would go crazy with this fucking guitar. You could see his fingers move and he played this crazy flamenco music and you would realize that it's possible. But until I saw him do it like with my fucking fat stupid fingers and like I don't I guess you could get there but I never seen anybody get there. You know you've got to see it. And it's the same with martial arts. I remember being a kid like watching like black belts for the first time watching people throw kicks and watching people like this guy specifically this guy John Lee. I remember watching him hit the back and now knowing that that was possible. Well that was in my mind it was the what he was doing though the amount of power that he had the speed that he had and the execution the perfect technique didn't exist in my head. There was no there was no model for it. You know so to watch someone do it in the flesh was all the time it was like whoa this is a real thing like this is possible. You could achieve that level. Whereas you take the average person to tell him to go kick something. It's going to look ridiculous. Right. But this guy had it all polished down to this tornado move. Bam, bam! And he just he just had the motions down and it was fascinating to watch. And so because of that like I aspire to achieve a similar level proficiency that this guy had that was like my goal to get as good as John Lee. And so when you look at Kundalini yoga it's got to be the same thing. It's got to be any with every discipline. Because you get better at it. Every time I do yoga I get a little bit better at it. Every time I hit poses I get a little better. I can go into it deeper. My body is more comfortable there. I just I set into it better. My balance is better. And you kind of think that I'm not doing it that often. You have to think these motherfuckers that are doing it every day. They're getting these crazy places and I'm not doing Kundalini yoga. I'm doing just like just stretching and all that kind of I don't know what you would even call it like what the discipline is. But the Kundalini is specifically designed according to Denny to try to stimulate these psychedelic states. And what they're using is breath. And you know you can get that in a variety different ways. And the other thing that I've done is called a holotropic breathing. Which is pretty much like Kundalini yoga without the yoga aspect. And Kundalini yoga has very little to do with stretching. It's mostly getting imposters and breathing really you know deep breaths frequently. And kind of draw it visualizing and some visualization visualizing drawing energy up from your Kundalini center which is the base of your body. And then doing these breath works. And I've felt what what can happen when you're in these you know hyper oxygenated states. And it's really really powerful. I haven't done the Kundalini yoga in like a proper session. I've just done it a little bit where you kind of bounce up and down and you're breathing and getting these things. It's accessing that same mechanism which is basically flooding your body with oxygen and creating these seemingly psychedelic states. Yeah seemingly. And they are psychedelic. I mean I would like to see some studies done on what's going on when you're doing that holotropic breathing. Like if you hit like a peak if they could put those EFMG or whatever. What is the functional FMRI FMRI if they could put that on you. I mean all the daverious ways they have a monitoring with the fucks going on your dome. If they could do that while you were in that like if you got to that psychedelic state and you told them I was there. I was there and like okay well let's look at the chart and see. Yeah I mean they probably see it in a lot of things they'd see it in blood flow they'd see it in brainwave activity they'd see it in a variety of things. I want to know what happens when you're killing on stage. I want to know what that is. I bet it's in that 10 hertz alpha frequency. That would be probably exactly where you want to be for that. Creative everything's easy it's smooth you lose track of time. I mean that's the characteristic of that 10 hertz kind of window that sweet spot. That flow state. There's a weird state you hit. Yeah it's a weird state you hit when everything's cracking. I love watching other people kill too because I could kind of see them in that state. I'm like what is in there. You know like you watch like Joey Diaz's like one of the best examples. Because Joey will reach these these states and he'll say things off the top of his fucking head. That you would swear somebody like somebody would like they would labor for years to try to come over the line as beautiful and poetic. And he'll say it and then after it comes out of his mouth he starts laughing. He's laughing at it because you didn't even know he was going to say it. And he says I got it. And you realize like that guy's gone. He's gone. And he's addicted to it. He's totally addicted to killing. That's funny you say that because I talked with Stephen Kotler who wrote this book The Rise of Superman. And they've done a lot of studies on these flow states. And when you're in this flow state you're releasing a concoction of five different endogenous drugs. And I can't name him off the top of my head. But he makes the argument that flow state is by far the most addictive substance in the world. Because you're getting dopamine you know nor epinephrine. All of these different endogenous drugs basically get flooded through your body. And nothing feels better. I mean you can chase a high every other which way. But once you've felt that you're going to want to get back to that more and more. I mean it's incredibly addictive, incredibly productive, but also addictive. Yeah. Any guy that's ever done anything dangerous who talk to BMX folks or skateboarders or any of those extreme sports maniacs. Those guys for sure are addicted. They're totally that experienced. The rush of danger and pulling it off. Fuck out. Wow. You know you see those guys when they do a flip and then they land and like fuck out. It's like the universe is charging them like high land gear and shit like a lightning bolts going through them. If you watch Chuck Lidow and Chuck Lidow would win he's the best example of that state. Because he would win and he would throw his arms back and roar and yell with his chest poked out. Pull up a video of Chuck Lidow celebrating. There's like a there's compilations of him celebrating. Yeah. When he was in his prime dude you want to talk about like if you wanted the guy to recruit new fans. If you said man what does this MMA thing? Watch this motherfucker. Yeah. What is this? The most badass celebration. What is this? Is like an edited version? Yeah. Find one where they don't do their own dance mix to it. Just show it man. If you could just show it. And hardly anybody you're ever going to feel that. That same thing. But we can all taste it in our own certain little ways. But if you could bottle that feeling forget about it. Everybody would just hit that button as many times as possible. You can't. You can't. You can't. You don't deserve it. You don't deserve it. You have to do what he did to get there. You have to fight Bobaloosa brawl, T2 Ortiz. You got to fight Kevin Randallman. You got to fight all those fucking guys. You got to fight Rampage Jackson. You got to fight Alistair over him. You got to fight those guys. If you don't fight those guys you don't deserve that feeling. Like he's in there with murderers and he's throwing haymakers. And when he was at his best dude god damn he was a ferocious motherfucker. You know his style almost like it kind of did him in because he was so aggressive and he was so willing to take one to give one. He wanted to get you into a war of wills. He was like dude there's no way. You just understand there's no way. You're going to hit me and it's not going to hurt and I'm going to fucking kill you. If you stand in front of me I'm going to smash your face in and how is like his style. Skillful of course. I mean he did have good defensive skills but he would oftentimes abandon them just rage. They just go after opponents. So if you wanted like the perfect guy like if you wanted to show somebody I want you to watch MMA. Watch a Chocolat Delphite in his prime. You'd be like fucking Christ man. Like when he beats up T to Ortiz and he has them up against the cages. Don't, don't, don't, don't, don't. I just fucking unloading these combinations and T do starts to slump down. Fuckin Christ man. I mean Jesus Christ. That guy was a fucking warrior in there. And in Ra Ra don't over those feelings. That's why we know that there are no answers. His arms back you appreciate it. It's not like a guy who just decision to guide a death. He blanketed him. Got on top of them through little baby punches. No, this is the guy just threw his soul out of guy. Came out triumphant and he's like, Ra you don't get that roar if you barely win by a split decision. And a fight where you didn't take any chances where you you know you did the right thing. But you stifled them up against the cage and put them to ground and got on top of them. And didn't really make any risks. No, you only get that when you go balls out barbarian style. Yeah. Look at that picture. That's awesome. No video. It seems like contact. I don't know video of this Zufa. How dare you Zufa my employers. My last employers. Contacts ports are some of the best ways to get that. I mean you'll see that also when like a running back runs over three different giant men who've been training their whole life to bring them down they get in there. And you'll get a tight taste that probably none quite the same as Chuck Liddell. But something about these contact sports where you're actually just in it and just getting pounded by different other you know individuals and then try them thing releases that massive feeling. Yeah. You know I never experienced that. I never like any tournament that I want or anything like that. I always felt weird after it was over. I never felt I felt relief because it was over and now I can relax. I did feel good about it later when I thought about like yeah I fucking won. Wow I have a trophy. I could look at it like this is mine. I won this but when it was over like the state of mine even if I won by knockouts especially even if I won by knockout because then I was always like fuck that could have been me. I'm not even making any money doing this. I'm not hearing throwing kicks at people and they're kicking me and I'm kicking them and look what happened this fucking kid. I don't even know this kid. I don't even know this kid and I just put him in the hospital. Like this is ridiculous. That's what I would think. I would never be like that's why I had a quid. I just I'm just shit. Yeah this is something missing. I was also too aware of the potential downsides. I was early on adapter of head trauma paranoia because I'm pretty honest about I think one of the things about being a martial artist at least for me the way I got better at it quicker is that I was super honest about all the shit that I did wrong. I never tried to pretend anything was better than what it was. I would look at everything and I'd never be satisfied. All the techniques I like that's not crisp enough. There's not the weight transfer is not hard enough. There's like whatever it was. I'd be like I gotta just keep drilling this over and over and over again. And because of that I was like acutely aware of my performance levels which is why when I started getting hit in the head a lot I started looking at the performance of my thinking and I was like something's off. There's something going on here. I'm feeling a very small and I'm trying to tribute it to fatigue. Maybe it's because of fatigue. Maybe it's because I'm tired because I've been training a lot because I'm fighting. And then I was like maybe I'm getting hit in the head too much. And then I was like whoa fuck man. And then I started thinking about these people that you see in life. Like you run into some old dude and he's hunched over and he's got a cane. You don't think of that guy as being a three year old running in his dad's backyard laughing and giggling and pervious to injury and flopping down on his butt and just getting right back up because he's only three inches off the ground. Now you look at a decaying creature who's reached the final slide of his existence in this dimension. He's on the way out. You don't see the full journey. And I think we think of these guys that you run into in the gym that are punchy. And you think of him and you go oh that fucking guy man yeah he's punch drunk. That guy didn't used to be punch drunk though. He used to be a regular guy. He used to be a regular guy that you could talk to. And now he's in this weird place. And I didn't you know I didn't compete that long especially like with a lot of head blows. Like I would way more head blows in boxing and kick boxing which all happened in the last like two or three years that I was doing martial arts like really intensely and competing. So I don't think I took too much. But when I think about people that I know that I know are fucked up now. That bothers me man. It's one of the main things it bothers me about the sport. No doubt. And it's you know it's interesting it's like choosing this lifestyle that you know can give you access to these feelings like maybe Chuck Lindell felt that point zero zero zero zero zero zero zero one percent of the whole world will ever feel. You get access to a little piece of that but it comes at a terrible price. You know if you stick with it too long. If you stick with it too long and that's the problem is what we were talking about earlier is the addiction. The addiction to that fucking rush that rush that wild feeling. I know like I said I never felt it like that. Well you look at some of the people who are really intriguing me right now and they have a different kind of attitude when they're in there. Sometimes they can feel it like someone like John Jones for example is a good example of that where it's just so calculated calm and flow you know everything looks like it's you you don't see that rage come out of him in the cage anymore and so he's so efficient at making great guys look silly and even Connor even though he's just starting out and he's got a lot of tougher guys the fight. He has a little bit of that that element too where everything just looks easy for him in there and I think that's the next wave because and they're going to they're going to deny themselves maybe some of the pleasure on the other side but their performance in that level and that mode is going to be pretty fucking tough to beat. It's very interesting seeing these various styles that are emerging you know one of the things that I really love about the UFC and this is as a person who's seen it from the really early days you know I started watching UFC too so and being able to call more than a thousand fights live from just a few feet away. You're seeing it's like a mathematical equation. You're seeing like what are the benefits of being 265 pounds built like Brock Lesnar versus what are the benefits of a superior gas tank like Kane Velasquez and really good wrestling skills. What are the benefits of crisp technique over what are the benefits of rage and aggression and muscle? What are the benefits of a pace that no one can keep up with versus a guy who throws knock out blows but gets tired after the second round like where where is the numbers? I'm looking at it not just as like individuals with unique personnel and as unique physical skills like we all know like guys like Hector Lombard like look at them. That's a unique physical specimen period. There's no denying that you just can't deny it. He's just there's not a that's not a regular dude. He doesn't move like a regular dude. He's not going to hit you like a regular dude so there's a massive benefit. His skull somehow has muscles that attach to his traps. I don't even know that's possible. He's so stupid strong too dude. We watch him like fight Tim Boch Tim Boch is like a really big 185 and Tim Boch is strong as fuck dude and Tim Boch would go to take down and Hector snapped him down and sprawled like I have never seen a five foot eight man do to a big fucking fighting looking dude like Tim Boch. He just grabs him and snaps him down like fucking Christ how strong is that dude? Like he's like way through Jake Shields around who the fuck has ever done that before. He he flipped Jake Shields through the air and hip tossed him. Jake Shields is a world class Brazilian Jiu Jitsu black belt like he competed against Marcelo Garcia Cameron Earl. I mean he was he was in the mix against John Fitch. He he grappled against like some really top level competition and performed very well in in straight Jiu Jitsu. So to watch him just get fucking thrown through the air with the greatest of ease. to like what kind of a freak is that? But is that the way to go or is the way to go to be that guy and also pretend you're not to fight like your regular dude to fight like your guy who doesn't have ridiculous explosive power but always have that on tap and no one to release a little bit out of it and then pull it back little bit on that way you can get that Frankie Edgar pays. Well it's not only approving grounds for strategy like you're talking which is amazing but it's also a proven ground for mental conditioning. I mean this is the place where there's absolutely zero room to be at less than your potential. And you see that all the time you see fighters come out and for whatever reason you know that a different operating system in that body would be fighting that night better. So for whatever reason they weren't reaching it. Then you see the converse side like TJ Dilla shove versus Barrow when he came out where you know he's on that bleeding edge of 99, 99 of his potential of what he can do at that given point and the states that they get in to get themselves that way the practices. You know John Jones when we actually ran into him before his last fight at dinner and he was talking about a really interesting practice that he was doing in which he was going through all of the worst case scenarios that can happen against Daniel Cormé. Daniel Cormé taken him down. All of the worst case and he said and I've accepted those and I'm fine with him. And for him that was releasing any fear that he had of what might happen in the ring. And that's what and Danieli Bieli pointing this out. That's also what the samurai would do before battle and this is described vividly in the Haga Curé the book of the samurai. They would vividly imagine in their mind all of the different ways they could die. Got it and eviscerated their guts spilling out in their hands and arrow piercing their neck. They would go through all of these different scenarios in their head, be it peace with them. Understanding the death was coming to them all anyways. And then that way they wouldn't fear these scenarios so they were fiercer in battle. So these techniques that are getting re-innovated by people like John Jones are really amazing to see because... They wouldn't fear these scenarios so they were fiercer in battle. So these techniques that are getting re-innovated by people like John Jones are really, you know, amazing to see because a lot of times innovation comes out of necessity and there's no greater necessity than another killer trying to pummel you in front of millions of people. Yeah, the people want to say that it's 99% mental or 90% mental. That's not really true because no matter how strong your brain is John Jones going to kick your fucking ass. Okay, John can be drunk, on Coke. He's going to bitch slap you. He's a better athlete. He's just better fighter. Period. But if John Jones is mind, it's totally on point. If he's in that samurai zone, that is an unbelievably deadly combination. When you have the superior athlete with the superior mental toughness, like a guy who goes through a really strong amateur wrestling background has, like all those guys have some savage mental toughness. And you add that to like some sort of meditation practice or some sort of a lot of them are using hypnosis now, which is really interesting. There's a guy who Joe Schilling was talking about, I'll say his name because it's on my, it's on my Twitter thing. But I want to, he just did Ian McCall as well. He's hypnotized and motherfuckers and he's doing it through FaceTime. He's hypnotizing him. Vinnie God dammit. Why can't I remember his, his last name? Shorman, I believe it is. Yes. Vinnie Shorman. That's it. And Vinnie Shorman is also an excellent striking commentator. He does like a lot of kickboxing events and, um, boy tie events. And he works with some of these fighters and hypnotizes them and puts them in the states of mind. And, you know, he essentially, I want to talk to him about doing it for stand up comedy. Because I don't think anybody's ever done it for like, I don't think anybody's ever hypnotized. Like, especially why everything's going well. Yeah. Like, it's, it's what happens. Let's see what, what happens if I get this guy to read my fucking brain. Well, all of these things, and we've talked about it a bit on this podcast already. They're manipulating the belief system. Yeah. And I've, you know, talked about knee surgery, placebo. This placebo, there's no sebo effect. The power that the brain has to be able to affect conditions within the human body. And then so manipulating that to your benefit, I think is, is a huge part of, you know, the next frontier. And I also think, especially when there's two people involved, if we understand that the belief system has a lot to do with potential outcomes, both for health and a variety of things, that's all been proven. You know, belief has huge, you know, a huge amount of leverage on what you're capable of doing physically. So understanding that, then it would make sense that evolutionarily speaking, humans would be good belief detectors of each other, right? Because that would allow you to assess whether you're a opponent at a certain point or someone you're going to fight might be able to beat you. Or a mate that you were going to be with was going to be good. Or someone was going to be able to provide or your friend was going to be, you know, worthwhile. So detecting belief had to be a skill that we've developed. And I think we're very good at that. We know when someone inherently is confident or whether they're cocky and insecure hiding something. You know, so our belief detection is really good. And I think so. It's double when you look at these competitors, because not only is their belief strong, but the other person across from them can detect that belief to a certain degree. And then that might start to shake their belief. They're like, man, this motherfucker for sure believes he's going to kick my ass. Is my belief enough to believe that that's not going to happen? You know, so it's this kind of contest of course, both physically. But I think people are kind of measuring each other. And I think that's an advantage that like again, Connor McGregor has. I really believe that he believes that he is going to kick that other person's ass. So the other person when they're dealing with him, they're like, man, this motherfucker really believes this. You know, am I sure? Am I sure that I'm going to win? And then that starts to cause doubt and that doubt creates this negative cascade. Yeah, it's fascinating how that works that the other person can kind of somehow or another sense your true state. Yeah, somehow or another. You can put on the face of the confident person, but they can go this motherfucker's bluff. Right. I smell bluffing. Yeah. He's shaky. There's something going on. Yeah. You know, I feel that with audiences, audiences know when your head's not there or when you're not right. You could say the exact right words and the exact right order with the exact right amount of pauses. But if you're intent isn't there, have your mind isn't there. It's like they don't connect with it. It's a it's a form of hypnosis. I really think that stand up is some form of hypnosis. Yeah. So they're their belief detectors, right? If you don't really believe that you're in the pocket and you're and you're delivering it the right way, though they'll kind of sense that and that's what I'm kind of trying it to. And then the opposite of that is fear because fear is a belief of some probability that some shit bad shit is going to happen. You know, so it's almost like a negative belief mechanism. Of course there's danger and having, you know, danger is real. But the fear that's on top of that danger, you know, that is somewhat of a belief that some other bad shit is going to happen. And that's why it manifests. It's because it is a belief. It is a belief that something's going to happen. If you're afraid on stage that you're going to bomb, you know, that fear will start to wind its way into yourself. And you'll create that because some part of you believes that's when that's what's going to happen. So it's almost like fear is the no-sebo of regular everyday living, whereas belief is the placebo of everyday living. That's why it's so devastating. When you think about people that, you know, talk about being bullied like some kids have gone through like really horrific bullying episodes. As children. And that those, when you think about what's happening, when you're getting bullied or, you know, you're scared of someone in your neighborhood or, you know, there's someone who's harassing or stalking you. They become, it's almost like they become a virus in your mind. Where someone like if you're in school and you have to get on that fucking bus and go and this big fucker is going to smack you in the head every day. And you're going to be living in fear of this guy. And you figure out where he is. That guy becomes like a virus in your head. And when you think of how meditation works, how meditation is sort of resetting you and clearing all of the programs that are in there. Clearing all the things that seem to be externally dictating behavior. When you're, when you're, when you're fighting, especially when you're competing and someone's beating you at something, especially if they're talking shit, they're kind of hypnotizing you. Totally. Because they're, they're planting their mind or their personality as a virus in your head. And then also you are dealing with them like they're physically coming into your head and fucking with your head. Well, you're not physically getting in their head at all. They just scored on you. You know, they're, they're kicking your ass. They're like, you're not, you know, you're not in his head at all. No. He's fucking, your belief is getting stronger while yours is getting weaker. Yes. Like you are getting hypnotized as you're getting fucked up. Yeah. That's fascinating when you think about that. And it happens not only in the cage but beforehand. You know, you see those people who've gotten in, in someone else's head way early. I wonder if this can be compared in some ways to the sense of loss we feel after relationships. Because with some people, there's a deep anger after relationships. And people break up because not only do they feel this sense of loss, but they feel like you took something from them. Like you took like a happiness. You took something like you took because they kind of become a part of you. You kind of link up with each other in some sort of weird way. That's got to be similar to hypnosis in a way too. And that what's going on with all these things is the mind is far more malleable than we ever give a credit for being. The personality is far more dependent upon women, circumstance and influence than we ever really want it to be. All these things are kind of playing out at the same time. It's not any one thing. Like so these rigid structures that we think of as this is, well his personality is like this. Well he was totally different once he hooked up with her. Of course, that bitch, bewitched him. She hypnotized him, but she did. Some women can do that to men. Some men can do that to women. They fucking turn them into a different person. Like they bewitched you with their personality. You're getting sleepy. Sleepy. This dick is only for me. People do shit like that to each other. And I think those connections of the mind are these poorly understood interfaces that we have with each other. These poorly understood connections. And that we want to just like sometimes we can't handle it. We want to just get distance from all being one. Just give me get some distance. I have to take time off man. I'm gonna go on a vacation. I gotta get away from her. I have to get away from her. I have to get away from her. I have to get away from her. With relationships, I think it has a lot to do with attachment and identity. You get with someone and that becomes part of your identity. I'm so in so's husband. I'm so in so's boyfriend. She's my girlfriend. My girlfriend. It becomes this part of you. You're ego. You're sense of identity and you get attached to that because it's feeding you with something that you think you need. Some validation. Maybe she's super hot and that helps you feel it's like a tricky little trap that helps you feel like, man, I'm the man. My girl is super hot. So that part's inside you and then she leaves and you're like, shit, maybe I'm not the man because that's what was feeding you. But the key to that is you gotta get to a state of almost invincibility yourself where you don't need anything from anybody or anything. You can just you're just free to enjoy it. That's just extra on top of it. You know, you're not borrowing anything from them to make up your identity. You're just enjoying the shit out of them and adding more piling it on top. So when they leave, you're not really at a loss of anything. It's just all right, I don't get to experience that extra good thing anymore. Yeah, most people don't see it that way because they watch John Kuzak movies and they want to stand outside of chicks fucking house with a boom box, playing some song that used to listen to before you bang. Did you have you heard that country song? It's called Redneck Crazy. It's like the most it's like the most absurd song ever. It's like I'm gonna park outside of your window and shine my lights through your pocket side of your house. Shime my lights through your window throw beer cans at your shadow. You know, you broke the wrong hard baby. You made me redneck crazy. And it's like playing on them. You just hear people humming along and singing it. Jesus. I mean, it's amazing. You want to give me a little bit. Don't even please don't. Let's pretend we didn't bring it up. It's unbelievable to hear because it's just patterning this crazy behavior that people have of this possession. That's my girl. And the fact that she's enjoying her life with someone else, I think the song even says, did you think I was gonna wish you well? I'm not that kind of man, baby or something like that. Oh, Christ. And it's like, whoa, but that's a worm that's in our consciousness that we're supposed to feel like, you know, you took something from me. How dare you. I hope you're never happy again. But how about the balls to make a fucking song when you're talking about harassing someone's daughter. Right. Because she doesn't want to fuck you anymore. Maybe you that look at that behavior and wonder why your personality sucks. Your personality sucks. That's why she left in the first place. You ask, all throw a beer can in her fucking house. How about you grow up, baby? Yeah, baby is exactly the word because it's so needy. He needed what she was going to provide him. She stuck with him forever. Right. She can't do any better. She wants to improve her life. You're just drinking beer and hanging out by the lake. Fuck you, dude. You know? What is this? Here's the lyrics. Wish I knew how long it's been going. Oh, she cheated on him. How long you've been getting some on the side? Well, a little different. Now he can't amount too much by the look of that little truck. Oh, that's hilarious. He can't amount too much because he has a small vehicle. Well, he won't be getting any sleep tonight. Oh, great. Okay. I'm going to lean my headlights into your bedroom windows, throw empty beer cans at both your shadows. I didn't come here to start a fight, but I'm up for anything tonight. Okay, what? You didn't come to start a fight. What do you think is going to happen? You mocked his truck. Okay, asshole. You threw beer cans. You have a fucking spotlight that you used to poach deer. You're putting it through his window. You know you broke the wrong heart, baby, and drove me redneck. Crazy, redneck crazy. Do you think I'd wish you the best endless love and happiness? You know, that's just not the kind of man I am. Yeah, I'm the kind that shows up at your house at 3 a.m. Oh my God. I'm going to lean my headlights into your bedroom windows. As the brother, blah, blah, blah, blah. Redneck, crazy. Redneck, crazy. That's the worst. Yeah. But that, I mean, and people it's playing on pop radio because it strikes a court. And I think some girls think, man, he really was in there. You know, he really loved her because look at what he's doing on the other side. And that's just a tricky little trap that we got to transcend. The least of my concerns. My concerns is that there'll be guys that listen to it and think it's okay. Oh, for sure. And act like that. For sure. If a girl is so silly that she thinks, all that, he just loves him. That's why he's all doing that shooting up the house shit. You think he really wants to shoot up his fucking house and just letting her know he loves her. There's women who grow up like that. They have a fucking black eye and they're having this conversation to their kid with a marble hanging out at their mouth. Listen, sugar, your dad and I have very passionate relationship. And I push his buttons. And he loves me. And if he didn't love me, he wouldn't fucking hit me. And I don't know how to make sense to you right now. But someday it will. Yeah. That's it. That's the sole paradigm that is patterned in dire need of transcendence. And the need is basically, you know, we have to be fully full. I think Don McGull-Ruees makes the example of, you know, create enough self love, enough self satisfaction, enough inside yourself that you don't need anything from anybody else. Your kitchen is fully stocked. So you're not starving. Yeah. You know, a lot of you, you stock your own kitchen with your own, you know, self fulfillment. And then you don't need to eat any little burger that comes on the side of the road or some hot dog from a stand, whatever you can get. Cause you're starving. You got plenty to eat. And that's, I think, the analogy that we need to have. We need to be full and whole. And we need to have standards as human beings we accept of ourselves. Like what you shouldn't accept for yourself. Don't accept for yourself that you're the guy that's going to be outside someone's house at three o'clock in the morning shining head like through their fucking windows and throwing beer cans. Don't accept that you're that guy. You're not that you can't be that guy. If you're that guy, no one's going to come to you for advice. No one's going to take you seriously. You're a fucking dumbass. Yeah. You're a dumbass child who gives into every whim. It's like someone who comes after one stroke every time. I can't help it. Like you're a baby. You're a fucking baby. You learn some goddamn discipline. Yeah, it sucks. Yeah, you feel lonely. Yeah, you get depressed. Go on Tinder, stupid. Find some more chicks. They're everywhere. People want to fuck. They love it. That's why there's so many of us. What are you doing, man? You tell me you get this one chick you can't get another chick. Go get another one stupid chick. And he will too. That's the thing. Do not have any friends. Do not have any friends. Anybody talks you through it. And goes, do, do, do. Come on. Let's go. So what? Yeah. People get so goddamn connected when they date. They get so fucking connected. They feel like you stole something from them. Who been getting some pleasure from another entity. I ain't toleratein it. I sent us, bust up your sleep patterns. I'm gonna fuck with your beta wave. Someone to kick your fucking ram sleep right in the dick. You fuck with me. You fuck with my sleep. I'm the cop of fella and fuck with your sleep back. And that's what he's doing. He's a fucking baby. Yeah. It's like my four year old and my six year old, we're having an argument today. Because my six year old was letting the four year old write on her paper for a while. But then she's like write on your own paper. And she wrote a little bit more. And she's like, I said write on your own paper. And she wrote on her paper. And she tried to write on her. And they were going back and forth, writing on each other's papers. Like, whoa, whoa, whoa. So how the fuck down? Stop trying to hurt each other. This is not, this is not how you do with this. Okay? This, we got to learn how to communicate here. But they're four and six. They're not a fucking 30 year old man with a pig truck. Big old jacked up truck. Yeah. I saw his little truck. He ain't got shit. Yeah, in a man. Kind of little last trice, fucking truck came from another country too. Goddamn, driving it. Tell you what a truck. What do you want reliability? Yeah, that's the process of growing up. It should be learning to transcend those initial feelings. Like, yeah, that's, that's of course reasonable when you're four and six. We're little monkeys in this crazy world. We're sorting shit out. But then as you get more practice at that, that should become more and more absurd with every passing year. If we just committed to that, committed to not going after people and fucking with people's lives, like showing up at someone's house through o'clock the morning and shining your headlights and throw it. Just commit to never going there, never doing that kind of shit. Like, never showing up at someone's house or starting a fight. Never, just all that put all that aside. The world will get like 90% better, like instantly. If everyone had a standard of behavior, like I could, we kind of trust that, yeah, people in this town, they don't fight. You just, you talk things out. Most dudes in this town are rational. Imagine if you got a town like that. You're like, where is this place? Oh, it's just, uh, it's just one town like everyone's cool. Like what? That might be one's colorado. But did you imagine? It might be. It might be like spreading out of Denver right now. Like the epicenter of the fucking cannabis nucleus. It is possible, right? If you could get a group of friends like we have, we have a group of like 15 dudes that I would give a million bucks to in a bag and never counted if they gave it back to me. There's only 15 of us. But for most people, it's hard to find fucking people like that. But if you got a town, if you had a town of 100% or 100% down, 100% all, you know, just you could count on them for everything. They are who they are. God damn it, a great town that would be. You would know never getting fist whites. Yeah. And I think that's a big key of how to improve our situation is maybe we won't be able to get the whole town, but we can start getting these tribes around us. Yeah. Like you're saying, you have these 15 people. Yeah, they don't all live together. But through travel and through talking, you end up interacting with all these people anyways. So it kind of insulates you. You have your own tribe of these people that we trust impeccably and that can help improve our lives. And I think that's a major part that's missing. That sense of tribe where we would give absolutely anything. It's not like, oh, could I stay in your guest bedroom? Fuckin' of course you could stay in my guest bedroom. Like, don't even ask that silly question. You could do anything that's mine as yours. That feeling that's innate to us. I think we're going to have to start trying to get that back. Because I think we need that. I mean, that's the kind of creature that we are. Yeah, I agree. And I think that, you know how your eye of favor has it hooked up or he owns like a block? Yeah. He has like a bunch of... But dude, this is so clever in a bunch of different ways. Very good businessman. Very clever and you know how he set himself up outside of the UFC. A bunch of houses, he flips and stuff. And he's always got something going on. Owns real estate. But him and all these alpha male guys, that's their team team alpha males, one of the top level, high level gyms in the country, particularly for the lighter weight classes. Like they have 135 pound champion TJ Dilla Shaw. And there's a wealth of like real good talent in there, including guys you haven't even heard of yet that you will hear of soon. But the point being is that he's got it set up where he can kind of do whatever the fuck he wants. You know, he has it set up where he's got the housing business, he's got the jammy runs, he's got all these different things going on at the same time. That's a pretty sweet place to be in. Of course. Well, he's got his tribe that actually lives right near him, which is obviously the best case scenario. Yeah, they're all living on one street. The houses that they all own, they just bought houses next to each other. That's so clever. Absolutely. And nobody does that. Everybody says they want to do that, but nobody does that. And it's probably the single thing that would improve people's quality of life, way more than the neighborhood or whatever other reasons they're living somewhere, is being around the proximity of those people who enrich your life make it better. Well, you're right as a real leader. You know, what he's figured out how to do there is to create this atmosphere, first of all super supportive recruits guys recruited TJ Dillsha, who's the champ in his weight class. And then when they offered him a shot at TJ recently, he's like, yeah, you know what, I'll fight Frankie Edgar at 145. Let's have a fucking super fight. Let's get crazy. You know, you got to love that, right? You got to love that he thinks like that. I just love that set up of all the houses on a block. Yeah. And you know, that's going to be possible for some. And I think that's great. And one of the great things about what he's done to really make tribe, you got to go back to ritual and these different bonding experiences that allow you to reach that level of trust. You know, shared, shared suffering, you know, the people that you've been in combat together like Uriah and all his people, that says a lot because at certain point, there's a lot of ways to test people, you know, to a certain degree and go through something together. Obviously physical exertion like that, like rolling with somebody, you learn a ton about them or doing a psychedelic experience with somebody. You know, you both drink a coffee cup full of ayahuasca. You're going to learn a lot about somebody at that point, and you're going to learn the same with all of these different rituals that have been developed. Put your hand in a, in a mint full of bullet ants. You're going to learn a lot about a motherfucker, how he, what happens when that pain hits and it's overwhelming. You know, and those were key parts of these societies that we've lost and it just kind of happens to certain people and you get this closeness, you know, and I think intentionally bringing that back is going to be really important as well as these new tribal units form. Well, we have education and as far as mathematics, we have education as far as history, we have education as far as grammar and English and language and literature and all these different things that we teach as standard in school. But we don't teach men especially. We don't teach men martial arts. And I think that martial arts just know having the ability to understand how to use your body to defend yourself, psychologically, alleviates so much pressure that some people just face and go through life with. They can't defend themselves. And the psychological relieving of that, I think, is an aid to enhancing and understanding other aspects of your life. Also, along the way, along what you're doing martial arts, you're doing something difficult and you push yourself very hard and you learn about what are these feelings inside you that make you want to quit when you know you can keep going. If the instructor goes, keep going, keep going, 30 seconds left. You're like, you're doing a flurry on the bag and you just want to stop. If you were alone, you would stop, but you keep going. And then you understand that you can keep going. And then you understand, okay, well, if I can keep going here, I can keep going in a sparring session. If I keep going in a sparring session, I can keep going in competition. I can count on myself to when I feel really fucking uncomfortable to hold it together. Because I've experienced that state, I understand what it is, and I refuse to let the limiting negative aspects of that state affect my performance. I will do everything that my body's physically capable of doing and nothing less. I'm not going to sell it short with a weak mind. But until you've experienced that, it's very difficult to have any confidence in your ability to overwhelm any sort of adversity or overcome any sort of diversity. You don't really ever know if you can do it. So you're always going to have this weird thing. And the difference between men that I know that have experienced that and do it, you know, do difficult things. And even to do not even fighting stuff. Like either the same piece you get out of dudes who are like ultra marathon runners. You guys have to try athletes pushing through that resistance. They push through who they are. They understand who they are better than most people. And they're just a little bit more aware. So a little bit more aware. Is it it? And I think especially martial arts does that because of the emotional aspect of the training. It's so terrifying, sparring, terrifying, all of it. But in getting through that, it like makes everything else brighter. It makes everything else lighter. It gives you more freedom with your mind than if you're tussling with these ideas. If you're tussling constantly with the fear of being physically incapable of defending yourself. I think it's massive deficit. It's kind of a perfect storm of two things because it's put your pushing through immense physical suffering at a certain point, which is incredibly valuable. Plus immense fear. And a lot of other things have maybe one of the two. Like marathon running, immense physical suffering, no fear. Big wave surfing, immense fear, no physical suffering, except maybe when you get crashed into some coral or something, that happens. And those are good practices. But I think at what you're hitting on is that martial arts hits both. And so you have to transcend both. So you'll respond well in situations that are causing fear to come up. And you'll respond well in situations that are particularly challenging on the physical aspect of things. And it's almost like the opposite of that famous moussashi quote, which said, no, the way broadly and you'll see it all things, know the way narrowly. And you will be able to apply it broadly. If you reach really great levels in something specific like that, you'll be able to use that for the rest of your life and everything. It's just I really think it should be almost required and it doesn't mean you have to be good at it. Just do it to just to get your state in a better place. Get your mental state in a better place. Especially Jiu Jitsu, I think. Yeah, because you have no head trauma. No head trauma. Yeah, that's a big one. Yeah. And just I just think people need to do difficult things. And I think life is too goddamn easy. Yeah. It's too soft for most people. And as far as like character building, like character is only like built necessarily under pressure. It's very hard to build character. You know, when you're just a person who's won the lottery when you're three and you sat around all day, you just, where's your character? Like, where is it coming from? You kind of have to go through some shit. And I think that's one of the issues with a lot of people in this kind of new age movement in this, you know, hippies, if you want to call them. Whatever your name for them, you know, might be the people in that consciousness movement, let's say, is that there, you know, there's some part of you when you meet some of them who haven't really been tested, we think, I see that you haven't really tested yourself under immense pressure. You know, and that you get this kind of feeling like what happens if things really get shitty. Am I going to be able to count on you and trust you? All of these things that you're proposing? Are they all going to go to shit? And you know, I have an instinct that they might. And so I think everybody on both sides are missing this kind of the dualism of having both, of being able to reach, you know, high levels of consciousness, but also put yourself on a mat with someone who you know, inevitably in 30 to 30 seconds to five minutes is going to choke you out. You know, like, know that you're going to go through that. And what that goes through your body, being able to do both, I think, is the next wave. You know, too many times people are on the polarity of that. You know, they're one or the other. They're either really good at the jujitsu side, but they haven't, you know, pushed through the realms of consciousness either through Kundalini or psychedelics or meditation or these other things. And conversely, on the other side, they haven't tasted what it's feel like to push through extreme fear and adversity. Yeah, it's almost like your car that you're driving through life will work better if you like running over more mountains. It'll work better if you, you know, put it in danger. It'll work better if you slam on the brakes more. It'll work better. Like that's what your vehicle is. Like in this compromising situation that we're in, it's not compromised. It's amazing. We're in the best spot ever as far as like human history. Like we have great medicine. We have great education. Information is available to basically any human being can get a world-class education online. But because of everything being so easy to get food and easy to get a, you know, take care of yourself in comparison to how it was when you're fighting off predators, you don't really use your body that much. You know, you don't really, not a lot, not a lot going on. Not a lot of stress on the brain as far as like death, life or death situations. There's not a lot of fleeing at full speed running for your life, trying to get up a tree as quick as you can. There's not a lot of that, you know, and it doesn't like sort of diminish its potential. Yeah. They did this thing on hunter gatherers and the difference between the bone structure of the hunter gatherer and the bone structure of the modern day man. And they're, they're looking at modern humans like the deterioration of the mass of the bones and the hands are getting smaller and they tend to get a weaker and like like we're like we're becoming like those goddamn gray aliens. I mean, we're like slowly but surely going from what we think of as a cave man like just fucking gnarly those Neanderthals especially they were like five foot five 200 plus pounds just tanks giant bones and fucking thick heads and shit. I mean, they were out there, though, in it every day. And because we're not doing that, everything is like feminizing. Everything is like thinning. Everything is like becoming weaker and weaker and weaker. And then we're missing out on a key element of the magic of this fucking experience. You know, this turn in this dimension, part of the fun of it is feeling what the body can do and feeling those feelings. And if we turn into that gray alien type, we're going to be fucking bummed out. You know, I mean, I actually had a vision of that in my ayahuasca session, the last one that I went on where the gray, this alien being came in and that he was, and I was like, well, what's it like being an alien? Do you have anything? In my ayahuasca session, the last one that I went on, where the alien being came in, and he was, and I was like, well, what's it like being an alien? Do you have anything to tell me? And because he was just chilling there, and he says, well, being human is very enviable. Because for us, you know, we have no physicality in our realm anymore. That's been, that's gone. And you get to experience everything. And he showed me these visions of exactly that, like wrestling and fucking and eating crazy in the order. In that order? No. But even everything that we get to do, all of the physical pleasures of this world is like, yeah, there's, you know, there's other pleasures of this other realm, this realm of pure consciousness, where everything is smooth, we're generally in a state of bliss, but we're missing the extremes of these physical pleasures. So human life is enviable. And to just discard that, say, nah, I'm not interested. We're fucking missing out. You've missing out on vitality. You know, that's something that, especially people that don't exercise, they don't take that into consideration when they dismiss it as being some ego-propping device. Oh, what are you doing corals there? You're getting building up your quads, man, you're fucking smart. You know, they like somehow another tried to diminish the, the intelligence of what you're doing by pointing out the benefits of it, by like pointing out that your muscles are larger and stronger, somehow you must be stupid. Like, you know what I mean? It's like, it's an adorable thing that they do. It's like, it's because it's so transparent. It's so obvious. Like, you're being so silly that you're going through life with that shit body. That's what's really going on. Like, if you just exercise like pretty much everybody that exercises gets stronger, it really works. You know, they've been doing it for years. Man, just keep doing it, man. You just keep doing it. You get stronger. When you get strong, your body works better. When your body works better, you do stuff easier. Well, it's so clearly the ego just restructuring a value system so that they can be on top. Oh, what's important? Well, not this. That's actually a diminishment. So therefore, I'm on top. And pretending that somehow or another that if you are fit or if you are muscular or strong, it's somehow or another, you must be diminished mentally because that energy that you put into getting those muscles, you didn't, you weren't studying. And you want to go, I'm, are you studying all day? You fuck? Are you you studying 23 hours a day? You're not. Then you have an hour to go to the gym. Just go to the gym. It's not that hard. Like you're talking about something that's not nearly as difficult as you're trying to predict. You're pretending it's like a lifestyle 24, seven choice that you have to make and you got to keep away from knowledge and you know, you can get just as smart. You know, John Donahur, who's like one of the most brilliant people you're ever going to mean, Jiu Jitsu instructor from New York, he was a philosophy major. You know, and he was a bodybuilder at the same time. I mean, he was just big when he was like in the powerlifting and shit, when he first found Jiu Jitsu. And he took to Jitsu because he wanted to have some skills in case he was in altercations as a bouncer because he was making a living doing that at night while he was a student. You know, so it's like this idea that somehow or another strength or masculinity, it's like it goes hand in hand with being an idiot. Like it's hilarious that they've actually managed to somehow or another in not they like it's some concerted effort. But the weak souls amongst us that don't want to really look at themselves honestly. Yeah. And then the meatheads have the same prejudice on the other side. They think, Oh, you're good. You're doing yoga. Whoa, whoa, whoa. I mean, did you suck at yoga? Yeah. Exactly. So they have the same prejudice when really, eventually, you know, the wisest of us, you're just going to drop all that and say, Hey, I want to fucking do it all because that's what's capable for the human being. That's what we're here to do experience everything we can. Yeah, that's what we really should all be doing. It's like this idea that you have to be on one camp or another camp. Like we're way closer to each other than we like to think. And the moment we start looking at each other as like us or them, you know, like I've had conversations with people, they find out that, you know, you voted Democrat like, Oh Christ, you're fucking one of them. Are you mean to tell me? And they're like ramp up their voice like, Whoa, dude, yeah, relax, relax, you know, like we're not necessarily in an argument here. You know, I guarantee you there's a lot shit that I agree with that you agree with too. Like we're probably a lot closer than you think a lot of things. Well, you know, it was the biggest fucking Muslim in this country. So Obama, we're getting those conversations like, Of course, dude, I can't even talk to you about that. I don't even know where to begin. I don't know. I don't know where this is going. But like they think that you are the enemy, like you get roped into the enemy and something you get categorized. But if there was no Democrat, there was no Republican, there was no teams. There was just a bunch of stances and positions on issues that we would be, we would all be way closer than when didn't you think. It's just when you vote when you have representatives and one is blue and one is red and you're playing some weird fucking like board game. Like what is this? There's a blue team and a red team. Don't fucking stupid that is. There's blue states and red states like the divisiveness of that the almost, almost something designed to keep people at odds with each other. Because if you looked it in terms of just just the issues, then you could debate the issues individually on their own merit and they wouldn't be attached like pro life is constantly attached to the right. There's certain gay rights constantly attached to the left. Health care reform left. Finances, anything finances, anything that benefits business, right. It's hilarious. It's so adorable they've managed to package all this stuff. Well they're hacking into the dark side of tribalism. The dark side of tribalism is when you have a group and fuck everybody else. They're trying to take what I have. And all of these setting up of these camps is like a mental hack into this instinctual quality that we developed. And you see it in even sports fans, you know, these hooligans when their English soccer team in red wins or the blue one wins, that's their whole life. They're punching people, they're stabbing people, they're trampling people, whatever this crazy identification with someone who's putting a ball in a net. But it's the tribalism aspect that that people are playing on. And I think politicians and everybody have kind of played to that. When we realize when you level all of that, yeah, you can have your tribe, you know, and that's good. But beware of the dark side, which is these are my people fuck everybody else. Even the preppers kind of doomsday preppers have this kind of idea like I got this thing and fuck everybody else. Those people know that shit is not going to work. They're going to take your shit. And everyone's going to find out they saw you on TV dummy. They know where you have your pickles buried. Like what do you look like? What kind of an asshole are you that prepares to the worst but shows everybody your house? And this is where we have our ammo. Oh well now I know where to get the ammo when the fucking zombie apocalypse hits. I just get into the garage and I got the ammo. And then you decide which family with two kids comes knocking on your door. You put give the food to. It's just this kind of weird. Yeah, it's crazy. It's this kind of weird thing. Whereas I think seeing everybody as that could be me in a different circumstance in a different way. That's me. Oh, that's me. That's me. That's a really cool practice to do actually that I've done as well. Go out to a beach somewhere and imagine yourself as each individual. Oh, that's me. I can see maybe where my thoughts have created this body type and this thing. And obviously you're just playing a game. You're putting yourself actually in everybody's position and understanding they're not that fucking different. They just had different genetics, different backgrounds and different choices that they made. Yeah, I've talked about it on stage that I had this experience. I wrote about it. I had this experience when my first daughter was about to be born and I was in Hawaii and I was on a boat and I was super high. And these dolphins were jumping around next to the boat. And I was just I was on this insane edible. I was so far gone that I had this like weird connection with these dolphins. And I realized like how intelligent they were. And I thought like a wonder if they're like people. I wonder if like I lived a dolphin's life. I would be like a dolphin. Like if you lived in that water like if you have you think of you who you are and if you were in the dolphins body. I wonder if you literally would be a dolphin. And I thought about it and I was like what if that's how every human being is. That we're all exactly the same thing but we're living through different biological filters, different life experiences, different genetics. But if you lived my life you would be me. And if I lived your life I would be you. And then it's an illusion. And that's what the illusion of separateness is really all about. Everyone's like this not an illusion dude. This guy beat the shit out of me. I don't know him. He's not me. I'm not him. That guy's a dick. You know what I mean? Like people have that oh that girl fucking cut my hair. That is not me cutting my hair. We are not one. I'm gonna fucking stab that. But if you lived her life like that's where the illusion is. The illusion is that because we live these separate experiences that if we all had the agreement that we'd treat each other as if it was us living another life. The world would instantly be better instantly. If we could pass that. I mean everybody wants to pass. There's all sort of radical ideologies that people push. There's all sorts of radical religions and behavior choices and all sorts of different things that people want other people to subscribe to and one other people to adhere to. But if there's a really simple one. A really simple one that's almost a one-liner. Treat everybody as if it's you living another life. And if you did do that. If you if it turned out to be true. If we some fucking Nobel Prize winning egghead figured out in a laboratory that if like you could literally take the essence of who is Aubrey Marcus and throw it in Jamie Vernon's body you'd be Jamie. If you lived his life up until now. They proved it mathematically. And I think that's possible. And what you're hitting on is you know I call it so there's the golden rule. Do unto others as you would do unto yourself. But I think there's a platinum rule. You know which supersedes that which very well might be do unto others because they are yourself. You know mother fucker just rewrote the golden rule. Do you hear that? That mother fucker just rewrote the golden rule. It's the platinum rule. The fucking platinum rule is better than the golden rule. Yeah. And now I'm doing that's strong. That's a very strong statement and you're totally dead on. Yeah. Treat them as if it's you. Yeah. Yeah. That's a difference. Not treat them because it is you. Yeah. Because it's you in a different life in a different filter and different biological switches that have been hit. I think that's why it's so hard to be around people that have fallen apart. I was at the comic store the other night and this woman who used to be a comedian. I don't think she's the comedian anymore. Came around and she was drunk and fucked up and confused and she hadn't done stand up in a long time and she's probably on close to 60 now. She's old as fuck. But she's just never worked out. She's never she was like only an open miker like 20 years ago. She kind of would always kind of hang around still. And to see her now, you know, it's it's really hard to see someone like like she would try to talk to us but no one could tell anything and everyone's terrified. She's going to say, Hey, can you know, can you guys put me up some night, put me up on your show? You know, everyone's terrified. She's going to ask for some sort of comedy help. You know, but you got to think like what does it feel like to be that person? Like what what synapses don't fire what life experience stunts your emotional growth. What puts you in the state of denial. What gives you these blinders that you can't realize the fact that the audience sees you in a way that you don't see yourself. So this is this comedy thing is never going to work. Like you don't even know what you look like. You don't know what you sound like. You don't know how you behave. And and then you see it like manifesting itself 20 plus years later in this disastrous wreck of kind of crazy lady. And you're like, Wow, man, that could have been me, you know, if I was born in her body, I lived her life and you you take any consideration how how difficult it is to turn from that state and improve. Like we almost give someone no chance. Yeah. Like you never meet someone who's a total fucking loser at 40. And then you meet him at 45. And he's like the best guy ever. Like nobody does it. Well, men and m is a motherfucker. It's really hard to change. But when you have that attitude where you start looking at people, just as you said, that could be me, the only proper response is empathy. Yeah. You know, that's, you know, even if it's someone that perpetrates something against you. And this is, you know, a really challenging thing to do. Yeah, you know, you want to prevent that. If someone goes to fuck you up, then fuck them up, that's fine. That's your right to defend yourself and protect. But not do it out of anger, do it out of, you know, assess it out of necessity. And then the only feeling that you should have towards that is a feeling of pity. It's too bad that that person got to a place where they had to do that where that was what their decision mechanism was. And it doesn't mean that you just accept it, but it means that that's really the only thing. But instead we like to, you know, keep up this illusion of separateness, like fuck that guy. And we don't stop shit. Yeah, exactly. But really, only pity, only pity and empathy really come from that. And that's the, that's a real state of bliss, the Tibetan monks, that's what they're meditating on all the time is getting to that state of empathy. Well, to get to that state of empathy, just look at everybody like there yourself. And that's the key way to get in there. Yeah. Try, try pushing that in the public school system. That's those like when the key 10 into the public school system, that would work, man. Yeah. It really would work. It's almost like a little, a simple key. Unlocks a totally different start doing start doing little, you know, little things where it's like what would, you know, put yourself in that other person's body, like right from their perspective, or I don't know what school drills you could do, like write a story as this person, your friend, you know, and then tell them what, you know, feel what it's like to go through that, like live these other multiple lives. And you'll have, you'll understand that, yeah, you know, that could be me and what, and it'll start to evaporate that from an early age. I think putting in the school system is brilliant. I think that's what needs to happen. Yeah, there's a lot of things that need to happen with the school system, but that would definitely help the way, if you, that was taught as a tenant in school instead of reading the fucking pledge of allegiance, you know, I mean, to the republic for which it stands, stop. What does that mean? Do you guys know what that means? What does that mean? What does that mean? One nation under God, you know, that didn't even exist kids until the the fucking red scare of the 1950s used to say one nation indivisible with liberty and justice for all. When we had a fight off the goddamn commies, we put it God under God, you fucks. I mean, most people think that that was like how this nation was founded. One nation under God. No, that that was in the 50s. But everybody was losing their fucking mind. And people were going on trial on a regular basis for being communists. They were black-balling people that, look, think of the crazy shit that you and I have done and think of if we were living in the 1950s and they thought did you in fact go to the jungle of Peru, Mr. Marcus and did you in fact, in bibon several toxic medicines? You would, you would look like a fucking complete nut if they brought you into some sort of a court setting in the 1950s. But back then, you could even go to a communist meeting. You couldn't go like, what is this about? Like, what are you guys pushing? You're pushing socialism? And what does that mean? Like no one, you know, you do whatever you want? Like, do you get paid by the government? Like, how do you contribute? Where's the money coming from? Like, maybe just go and try to figure out what the fuck everyone's talking about. Especially amongst creative folk. I'm sure there's always been a lot of alternative thinkers. Whether Aaron or on the right track, there's been a lot of weird people that think outside of the box. Always. So in the 1950s, these guys are probably looking at communism and going, okay, I'll see you. Look, I got my fucking fortune read by Dianetics once. Whatever. I did one of those stress meters. I said, okay, let me see what you got. What if I got on a list because of that, man? You know, like this was what was going on when they put under God in our pledge of relations. It was that kind of madness in saying thinking. They had to put, you know, yeah, all these witch hunts have existed. And again, tapping into these old mechanism, these fear responses, these tribalism instincts. And, you know, these witch hunts, we think all the witch hunts are over. Well, at one point, they're called witch hunts because they were literally hunting witches, throwing them in the water and seeing if they would swim. You know, and if they drowned, then they weren't a witch. If they swam, they were witch and even worse should happen to them. So you're completely fucked either way. They weren't a witch. So sorry about your kid, Mr. Johnson. I thought she was a witch. Turns out she was just a shitty swimmer. So that was the witch hunt. But that's going on today. And it's going on, you know, the area that we see at the most is in these psychedelic medicines, you know, people are being hunted for manipulating their own consciousness, you know, even with scientific research coming back that it's beneficial. They're being, you know, hunted down in these kind of crazy ways and thrown in cages for manipulating their own consciousness. It's crazy. Yeah, it's not too many people getting arrested and thrown a jail for doing it. They're getting arrested and throwing a jail for selling it, but either way, you know, it's all stupid. You should be able to sell things that are good. It's really that simple. This idea of these people that are non-experience in these states of mind, they don't know really know what they're talking about from a personal level, dictating the legality of those experiences is ridiculous. And if those are the people that are locking you up, I'm kind of on your side. Like, you should be able to sell mushrooms. Did you grow it? Yeah, you deserve some money. Did you grow tomatoes? Yeah, I'll pay you for those too. I don't want to grow my own stuff to get it. Yeah. People don't sell it. What the fuck are we talking about? He's a farmer. He's a fucking farmer of awesome shit. I mean, that's what a mushroom dealer is. He's a farmer of awesome shit. He's not a drug dealer you've done. And you're subject to the whims of these people. And that's the people that are willing to lock you in a cage in the first place. They're fools. Like, this is like the worst way to deal with someone who's doing something to alter their consciousness. It's a put them in a fucking cage. Like, this is the worst, well, you're not. I think he was paranoid before. You know, imagine if you go to jail for weed. How fucking paranoid do you get when you get high? Yeah, I mean, it's preposterous. Imagine if we were the owner of a pretty smart pet. You know, let's say we had a pet chimpanzee, you know, it's a very smart pet. And the chimpanzee found something that reliably made him laugh his ass off and made him a better chimpanzee. You know, what kind of owner would we be? If we took that chimp and then threw him in the worst conditions in the tiniest cage and took away his freedom for doing that, we'd think that person is a fucking despot call animal control. He's a fucking crazy person. It's called law enforcement. You're obviously not aware of what goes on there on the highways and byways of America's greats. I pledge of allegiance to the flag. Instead, I pledge to treat everybody as if it's me living another life. Yeah. If we started off every class like that, every every school, I pledge to treat everybody I meet as if it's me living another life. If everybody adheres to that, everybody cross the board. God damn, that would be a better place. Wouldn't be much ferocious competition. That one's so fun shit happens when you don't like your fault. That's true. But I don't know that that has to go. You know, I mean, I think that you can look at that opponent like, all right, he's the motherfucking mountain that's going to bring the best out of me. You know, and then so you're going to want to find that like, I love it when Daniel Cormier said, I mean, obviously the fight wasn't that great, but he said, you know, I've been waiting my whole life for a man who's my equal. John Jones be that man. You know, that idea, I think is embodies the beauty of what MMA can be. It's like finding somebody that'll push you to the point that you've never been pushed before. And I think that'll still exist. Even in this state, you'll just look at them like, that could be me. This is me. No worries. We'll see what we can do to bring the best out of each other. Yeah, but not if you hate them, it's better. It's better one. It's rich. Two people hate each other. It's better to watch. It's richer. And when there's some shit talking going on, like we're talking about the Chocolatilla or T's fight, like when Chuck and Del and Tito, they didn't like each other. There's a lot of bad blood. So when Chuck beat up Tito, that roar was like extra juicy. Oh, yeah. It was extra crazy to watch because there's so much like when Ronda Rousey fought me should take and they went through that whole season, the ultimate fighter together and fuck you and it's almost fucking craziness and all this anger and then Ronda beats her ass and gets her in an arm bar again after all that. Like, you're like, wow, that was wild to watch. You know, you're watching something like super primal. Like, you're not just watching on a technical level where you watch two very high level martial artists like she was the first person to push her, you know, deep into the second and third round. I think she caught her in the fourth round. If I remember correctly, it was third or fourth. But point being like, they just didn't like each other and that made you choose here. It raises the emotional stakes. And I think that's also what's interesting too. Like, how are they going to perform when the stakes are even this high and even this high? And even this high. And when they hate each other, you know that it just escalates things, you know, to an even higher degree. And that's I think why we even like watching the playoffs is it's not that somebody gets a little trophy and that's part of it. But it's oh, now the stakes are higher. Now people are going to be crying after the game if they lose and they're going to be ecstatic if they win. Unlike the regular season, it's like, yeah, okay, it's just a game. When the stakes get higher, it becomes more interesting because we're interested in the reaction that humans are going to have in these different scenarios. Yeah, we don't wonder how we would fare. I remember being a kid and watching boxing matches and seeing like guys like get beat up against the ropes or something like that. And you almost like see yourself moving. You're like trying to figure out, well, should you just get out of there? Is going to hit that guy. But you don't really know how to fight. But you still watching it. And you're just like, it's like you're putting yourself sort of in there in some way. You know, you're watching it. You want your, you know, especially back then I always had a guy you know, as I was rooting for this guy, I was rooting for that guy. You know, he's like boxing fans would always have like, you'd have like a guy you'd pick like I'm a Dale, a holy fan. Yeah, fucking bro. Who does his job as a shit? Like people would have those those fucking guys that they would stick with. And when your guys getting beat up or he's in trouble, you have appreciating it on a technical level. You're almost like, oh, you're almost like getting beat up yourself. I remember one of the most terrifying moments I had because I've done striking since I was little never that serious. But I had a lot of instructors who were very complimentary early, you know, so they had me believing that man. Oh, but you hit someone they're done. So you know, like I had this kind of false belief. And obviously once I started sparring, I realized that that wasn't the case. But I had some, had some remnants of that that I was carrying. And then I saw Kimbo slice in one of these street fights, right? Oh yeah. And a bare knuckle fight. And this other huge dude catches him with a left hook and Kimbo just drops his hands and goes, get me, get me, get me again. And just leans forward with his head. And the other dude hits him again and does nothing. Yeah. Does nothing is now you did motherfucker and it catches him with this uppercut and just blows up his face. Yeah. Exploded his face. And I was like, there's nothing I could do to that guy. If he was that fired up and charging. And it was this terrifying moment where you realize what your boundaries are in the world. You know, like I couldn't hit him and knock him out. You know, everything I had been told was bullshit. There's no way I could do anything to that man at that point. Well, physical size and structure is so giant. And he actually knows how to fight too. Yeah, but physical size and structure so fucking big. So it's so important. When it's, you know, we look at in terms of its success in weight classes and the really big strong guys don't necessarily tend to be the best guys in the weight class. It's about like who's body's optimized for that weight class. So you don't really want to be carrying around a lot of muscle. But if you are and someone's smaller than you, it makes you better. It makes you fucking bigger and stronger and everything works it might not work as good against another guy who's 240 pounds. He's like got a leaner body and better lungs. But, you know, Kimbo slices of goddamn giant human being who can punch people in the face all the time with no gloves on. Yeah. Like, Jesus. He's fighting again. You know, it's fighting the alien Ken Shamrod. He was a guy that, you know, I think never really fought to what his physical capability was like his hardware had a certain potential, like the limits on it. Like if you look at him like the computers, like oh, it's got this much, you know, these attributes, this much remedy, this much memory, this much ram, blah, blah, but the software running inside the cage, I felt like never optimized what his gifts were, you know. The another one of those interesting things were psychologically it didn't bring the best out of what his frame could be. Yeah, that's interesting, man. You know, he had problems before you ever even got on the ultimate fight over his knees. His knees are pretty significantly diminished. He has like serious like bone on bone, like arthritis type conditions in his knees. And so like for him, like grappling is an issue, kickings, an issue, all those things are issues, you know, and he, you know, he had a lifetime of sports football and, you know, did a lot of, uh, striking training, obviously all the over the years, man, chewed that shit up, especially football football's brutal in the knees, man. Carrying porn stars in that, a limo. That happens. You know, he had to do that. I'll do that. Yeah, they're probably like him. He's, he's also, um, he's in a weird time. Like he might be like a little too late for like all the rejuvenation shit that they're coming up with right now. Like they're 3D mapping meniscus. Have you seen this? Dude, they have some like, it was some, some article about how they're 3D mapping. Essentially what it looks like. It's like a scaffolding from meniscus. And there's certain proteins in this. They inserted into the space between your joint, you know, where your meniscus says, which, you know, now when you get it's scope, like I might, I have my left knee scope a few years back. Like, you don't get in the extra padding back. It's it. Like your padding's diminished now. Like it's, the knee doesn't bother me. It feels way better than when it was when it was fucked up. But now what they're doing is they're just taking it all out and they're putting this, this 3D thing that they, they 3D print. And with these proteins and then your body starts building meniscus inside this framework, somehow or another, I'm just, I might be totally butchering this. But essentially they have artificial meniscus for the first time ever. They, they, they really weren't able to fix that thing. There's actually two different solutions, I think currently on the horizon. But this need meniscus generated with 3D implant. Look at this. It's just, it's just a perfect fit. I mean, we're going to get to the point where our bodies are just like cars, you know, you can upgrade any system. You can change it out. And I think the crazy thing that we alluded to, they'll come a point where I believe we'll be able to upload our consciousness into a brand new car. You know, and that will be the point of, of immortality to a certain degree because you could just keep creating these new cars and then create just upload your car. Oh shit, I fucking fucked this one up. I can't so I crashed it. No worries. Let me all over into this other one. What if that's how, what if that, what if heaven is just getting over this body and achieving the next state of consciousness, which is non-local, completely undepended upon your physical prison. But you were like, dude, you were just going to get out of jail. And you decided to transfer your sentence to some cyber prison where you live in your own mind forever and ever and ever repeating yourself ad nauseum through space. Instead, you could have been one with the great consciousness of the universe. Especially if no one who passed over to the other side could communicate, you know, they'd be just yelling from the other, don't do it. Just die. You'll see. It's amazing. You get to start again, you get to start again anyways. And it's more awesome because you get this side and then that side. Oh, fucking knows man. I'm not totally enthusiastic about the prospect of becoming one of those gray aliens though. No, I've been in either. I've been talking about that for years about that simulation theory. That's the thing that I talked to Sky Richard Toriel who was from the JPL laboratories. When I was doing that Joe Rogan questions everything show. And when you talk, for whatever reason, when you talked like a serious legitimate working scientist, an actual, you know, doctor of science, and he talked to them about it. It just makes it seem like way more palatable that if you talk to Duncan. Yeah, well, and Duncan talks about it. It seems a little bit more sexy. But this guy, what he was saying essentially is that it's, it's basically inevitable that we're going to come up with some sort of an artificial reality that is indissernible from the reality that we're currently enjoying. It's going to be artificial. We're going to create it. We're going to be totally manipulated. It's going to evolve over time. It's going to get better and better as the technology moves on and on. It's going to get to a point where it's, you, you literally not going to be able to tell the difference. And if that's the case, has that already happened? And if it has already happened, would you be able to be aware of it? What would you be if we had gotten past this? Well, if you go back to fucking gorillas, you look at gorillas, you look at lower primates. Look at these Dick swing and monkeys hanging out in Africa, you know, they just swing it from treated tree until somebody figured out how to become a person, right? Over all these years, however the hell it went. Look at what they look like, look at a gorilla and then look at a person and look at the feminized person of the modern era. And then look at those goddamn aliens. It's almost like that's the archetype. Like we know that's coming. Like we know the big head, no mouth. You don't need to talk. You wear permanent sunglasses because you fucked up the ozone layer. You know, your skin is like some sort of a gray bullet proof material that we've, you know, you don't have any sex organs because you can experience any pleasurable Kundalini yoga state in your mind anytime you want like regular blow jobs. It's just not that exciting when you can, you know, travel from dimension to dimension. That might even be how they are arriving. Kundalini yoga state in your mind anytime you want like regular blow jobs. Just not that exciting when you can you know travel from dimension to dimension That might even be how they were arriving and going back and forth, but there might be a part of them miss his head Mrs. Muscle cars miss the obviously obviously the vision state. You don't know if it's real or in your mind Whatever, I don't even make that discernment, but when I was in that vision state and talking to him they missed it They missed we're lucky we're the right spot. We got the honey hole. This is the goldie lock zone We get the access everything we get the access everything end We get it was the time where we sort of working it out like there's a culture people are working it out I think there's a lot of like though the in the working out There's like a lot of noise and chaos and shit that's going on I think tea party people and fucking occupy people and there's a lot of there's a lot of cult of personality and cult of Ideology that's going along with a lot of these things but throughout all of it throughout people complaining about fat shaming and you know And this although the weird uber sensitivity that you see today the trend though All of it seems to be this like kind of like emerging understanding of how we interact with each other It's like it says those battles back and forth is waves But like if you're looking at like what is this when this all this water settles? What am I seeing here? What am I seeing here? I'm seeing a merging understanding I'm urging understanding and along the way there's a lot of competing factions that want to be the most morally Upstanding and take the high ground and be the one who is always there to call bullshit and the social justice warriors that are just looking To be mean so that they can prove to you the way to live right like looking to find people aren't living the way they're leaving and just Shitting all over them and shame them into a different way of thinking all this is just a this emerging It's an emerging understanding of of what we are and the connectivity that we share Yeah, and the demands like when you see like these black lives matter marches and These protests these people would walk around these I can't breathe shirts They're they're expanding this understanding of the reach of the upset people like this is not a minor thing that you can only You know vote about every four years. This is something you can put a giant ripple in the entire culture Right now by everybody just wearing a bunch of t-shirts. It's say something on it Mm-hmm and then everybody realizes like okay, this is it's not just a social media trend. It's not just a hashtag on Twitter and Facebook It's also like the the entire country like a big chunk of it collectively saying hey, this is fucked up Like we can we can do better and oh we can talk about this and oh you know We're connected into some fucking weird way now Well, we can kind of organize shit like this Collectively and you know, there's no real leader. There's no real leader of any of those moments You know, but but people gravitate towards them. Yeah, and so those things they all have that in common They all have this like this new connectivity thing in common And I think that's that's really the trend and we're able to draw wisdom pieces of wisdom from all different disciplines You know, and that's been something cool that I've seen as I've gotten you know the ability to reach more different people experts in certain things You know, we'll come in and add a little piece of understanding from their traditional scope where you know Most people wouldn't even get to put that in part of their framework You know, and you get to add that piece and add this piece over here like you know I can get a piece from Duncan about Buddhism You know and one of these great pieces that he added recently is the Buddhist have a name for that that visceral feeling you get right? Before you do something bad and get angry at someone or or you know that emotion Well the Buddhist have a name for that little feeling that comes up You know, I was like oh, yeah, I've felt that little fucking thing that comes out That's like this rush of energy right before you do something You know, you really know that you shouldn't do and then so you add that little piece of understanding Ah-ha that the name of that thing is this so I can be more conscious of it and aware of it Then I have another friend, you know, Ted who studies the Christian texts and puts new meaning to What those things were before they were manipulated for power and kind of maneuver and like oh, okay So he can add that and then so you start to piece together this understanding where of course there's no leader It's just led by you know truth and consciousness and that's I think the next the next wave is just finding what's What feels real what feels right what you can use to make your life better Also, we just know there's so much information available today I think it's easier to kind of get an understanding of what's tripping you up You know, it's easier to get an understanding of like there's a lot of people that behave in a certain way like that Redneck song we're talking about and they've been supporting that. Maybe the main man he had do what he had to do You know, he had to do what he had to do, you know I'm playing this you leave a man alone We got to do what he got to do and that sort of like that perpetuating that over and over and over again like if you do that over a long Period it's highly kid can ruin an entire area Like if a bunch of people think like that like all this area is polluted with this idea right like it gets polluted Like polluted with he got do what he got to do you know like there's areas of the country that for the longest time We're polluted where if you were in an interracial relationship you couldn't walk down the street if you walked down the street You would risk physical attack because you had a black girlfriend or you had a white girlfriend and you're a black guy or whatever That was a that was a reality for a long time in the South It's still a reality in some spots There's places you go his weird places in Texas We take a few left turns you drive for a few hours and also you're in this fucking weird place And there's some people that don't have a whole lot of contact with the outside world That's an outlier that's like one of those weird bases that they would go to on Star Wars when they needed fuel You know like what are we doing out here like let's get out of here Get up. Oh, you know, that's literally where you are you're in you're in a a colony Like some weird post that never caught on and it's in the middle of some weird place east Texas You know like oh fuck those those those spots are still real, man They're still real and they're getting less real all the time and I think You know the the big push is always just that human beings are constantly trying to improve when we constantly try to improve everything and We're gonna try to improve culture and relations and understanding and if you look at the way things are now as opposed to the way They were just in the early 1900s. I mean the the changes have pretty been pretty fucking dramatic from 1900 to 2015 is you know, you know, but it's only 115 years 115 years in the real world is like god damn. That's a blink of an eye that is a fucking blink of an eye if you try if you chart Time versus change. It's it takes this hockey stick curve way up because things are going so fast But I think one point that you've made often is you know these conditions that are really fucked up They have a reaction on the other side You know they form resistance that allows people to actually Propel themselves even farther in the other direction. You know, it's like the action has a reaction So the bias towards you know the racial bias for example can actually potentially propel people the other Side to make greater leaps in consciousness and understanding what we're talking about that We're all just ourselves living another life. You know like these these conditions can create a positive response And I think that's kind of what we're seeing at this point. Yeah, and then the social justice warrior over reaction is really just a Reach yeah, it's like a comedian. It makes a shitty joke or you know It's essentially the same kind of thing. It's like it's just missing the mark You know I think there's a lot of white people especially when anything goes out wrong where they like are struggling To appear down You know and they'll sometimes be racist against white people in order to show that they love black people so much And they're not racist at all There's a bunch of people that I follow and I can't tell you who they are because then they'll know and they'll change their behavior And it'll affect my studies but it's fascinating to to see people like right racist stuff against white people and think it's okay Like you're allowed to generalize against white people, you know fucking goofy that is like I know a lot of really Fucking cool white people and I know that's not popular to say like for some reason you're supposed to be embarrassed about being white and if you are You definitely embarrassed of knowing white people that you like and you have to like talk about how many black people You know that you like I know a lot of black people I like too But I also know a lot of awesome fucking white people and I think generalizing towards any fucking gender ethnicity But it's stupid. I don't I'm not gonna do it. I'm not gonna pretend. Yeah change You modifying any aspect of your behavior one way or another because of identification with the color of Game of genetics that is just perpetuating it, you know even further that idea of Separeness that my tribe your tribe so over-combincating is in itself a form of racism to a certain degree You know just be real just treat people as fucking as humans Don't worry about over-combincating or compensating and that's also in terms of sexism because there's a lot of men Who are sexist against men? Yeah, they really are they're like they'll take a woman's side like automatically to be a white knight and that's one of the things that people hate on the internet They eat white nights people get crazy when they catch someone doing it when it's pretty obvious what they're doing When someone is not looking at the objective facts or the what it? Okay, what was really going on here? What's a real story and they automatically Aside with the woman's with the woman's take on things and when you see that especially when it gets revealed the one was full of shit later It's always so juicy and glorious. I love following those fucking trails and watching it all play out It's just it's so bizarre. It's so bizarre to watch that behavior that Smiggle from the fucking Lord of the Rings like behavior and that's really what it's like. There's something that they're doing they're like It's like you're distorting reality for your own benefit to try to appear that you're adhering to a higher moral standard Than those around you to make yourself look more desirable. Right. It's really that simple and it's fucking gross and people's you know at that point People's belief detectors that thing that we use to know when someone's out the incorrect They start going haywire, you know gears start flying off you're like you're fucking up to something here. Yeah, this is not just you And so the belief detectors go crazy Yeah, it's beta thinking. No, it's okay to be beta. It's not it's not it's not good for you You don't have to be alpha either. I feel like there's a state of acceptance You know that you should probably achieve instead of either or you know just being what being what your capable would be Yeah, yeah, you don't have to try to be alpha There's this one quote that I've been kind of stuck on recently and it you know pertains to you know Starting right now at this point and it's from William Butler Yitz and he said do not wait to strike to the iron is hot But make the iron hot by striking and that guy doesn't know iron's work You got to throw doesn't work that way you got to throw the iron in there the fuck dude Oh, it's Exactly But you know poet is a poet just be in silly silly boy never hit anybody Strike make the iron hot doesn't work that way Well things do get hot when you smash you'd have to fuck and be really ineffective with your striking Truth we've just meant as buttony it is a as a blacksmith But you know just fucking go at it by start just start doing it You know, I mean we're talking all this philosophy about what you can and that may seem out or reach to people like oh How am I gonna do that? How would I how would I you know do martial arts? I've never even come close to that well you just do it You don't wait for this perfect opportunity when job and money and everything aligns and you read your fucking Horoscope in the paper and it says you're gonna try new things this day and everything's just perfect Just do it just go out there do a little bit do hands-in board day and start you did to it 58 58 no athletic background used to do heroin Smoke cigarettes five years ago. I mean this guy started you jitsu at 50 fucking eight years old No, he doesn't every day he doesn't like two hours a day as a private lesson every day and takes a class every day like What the fuck man takes a class then he works on all the shitty did wrong with a wood instructor and the guy goes over positions with him Yeah, anybody you can do things, okay? As long as you you know you can figure out a way to Finance it you know and if you're not well there's ever What do I do that's that's the problem you're on your own path fuck face We I might be you living another life, but in your life you got to get your own shit together I don't have time to figure out what you should do, okay? That's what you're supposed to do and I don't know you dude That's the other problem You know you can't give anybody advice because you know like if you're talking to someone they want to be a lounge singer And they sound like shit And you go well first of all lounge singing. I don't know if there's a future in that and second of all Dude your voice is dog shit. I don't know what to tell you like that guy's got to figure out how to make his voice good That's a lot of work. He's got a revive lounge singing so it's got a fucking you can't give everyone advice but what you can do is Have these kind of conversations be really honest about what's worked and what hasn't worked for you and point out all the shit that you're noticing in this crazy world That's what we've been able to do. That's what most folks that are online that are tuned into the world have been able to do with information and news and and and just discussion that that's going on now and that really Has never taken place like this before amongst people where people are like debating issues all across the country and whether it's fucking Obamacare or whether it's the fucking Invasion of Persia whatever the fuck it is. This is never in a country anymore You know I'm saying anything that's going on in the world The ability to discuss the right blocks to discuss it to have people like to Leaving comments on this box to have people writing tweets responding to those tweets those tweets becoming articles Let's debate the merits of this tweet and these this is like what whether it's right or wrong Whether it's ideologically driven whether it's honest or moment manipulated It's a weird exchange. There's an exchange of data that's going on now in this really weird state That I think we're just so caught up in it that we're not realizing how much is changing Yeah, like well, you're not supposed to say retard anymore You know that yeah, they're there's slowly but surely closing on all the words that might potentially hurt people's feelings You're not supposed to say you know all the the standard ones right like fag and that's supposed to say the any any racial slurs Those are all the window those are getting removed removed from our culture Over a period way quicker than it's ever happened before they're going out at the wrong way They're saying these things can hurt you so they're telling people that they're vulnerable You're vulnerable so because these things can hurt you so we're gonna remove these things Whereas really the message should be that you're fucking invincible that word can't hurt you unless you let that word hurt you You know you have the right of your own sovereignty of how you feel about yourself that someone saying a word Shouldn't make you feel any different way. Oh, that's interesting. You feel that way I'm sorry that you're in a state that you have that much anger and prejudice that you feel that way But it doesn't affect me you richer gear that That's the that's the way that you know that's the way that we gotta do it Not remove all of these potential things that can hurt you just tell people hey motherfucker You're invincible as far as your emotional state if you want to be also it's really you make a person more vulnerable when you make words taboo you make those words have more power whether those words are Racial whether they're about gender or sexual orientation whenever the slurs are you make them way more powerful when you make them taboo You know if you call someone a fucker like that if that hurts your feelings we can't talk like hey fucker come on man Like if you know like if if someone does something and knocks a drink over on your lap like hey fucker What up man? You know like if you can't say that to someone you can't be friends with that person right? You can't they do it to goddamn sensitive But if a guy spill to drink in your lap and he was gay and you like you faggot Like whoa everybody just dropped their drinks at the bar. What did he say do you hear the noise? He made what does the noise it came out as well? Hey Whoa, can't believe me that noise what is his intent? What is really going on in his head does he not know that's a taboo word? Like everybody just shuffles out of the party well I guess this fucking party's over and people leave like there's certain circles Where if you did something like that just even as a joke? You would automatically get ostracized you would automatically get like so is that smart to give a word that much power? No, but are they on to something that you shouldn't be the type of person that wants to use that word in a negative way? Yes, but are they not on to something because they forget about humor and one of the beautiful things about humor is you say shit You don't really mean because it's a funny thing to do It's it's what's funny about it is that you know someone doesn't really mean it like calling your gay friend a faggot because he spilled his drink on you It's funny. We would all laugh if we were hanging around Justin Martin down he spilled the drink in my lap I wouldn't I wouldn't say that I would never call him a faggot But if Jamie did because Jamie's that kind of guy's from Columbus, Ohio that's how they are out there. They just think of faggot Tourette's But you know if If anybody has a problem with that like you'd either You think that Jamie's really capable of being homophobic You know in using a slur to like you hate you so much that a simple act of Lack of coordination and and accidental spilt beverage leads to this fucking unleashing of these horrible phrases at Well, it's like you know You're a parent and when you have a kid and if they do something like they fall down and they kind of bump their knee or something If if you go oh my god, what did you two are you okay? They're gonna think their injuries way fucking worse. Yeah, they're gonna freak out like oh my god You're freaked out. I'm I believe detectors saying that you believe something terrible is happening So something terrible is happening where it's like you're right get up. It's all good. You know Dust it off. They'll be like oh, okay. They may be they'll cry a little bit But they'll feel okay about it and what we're doing in societies. We're saying oh my god He said faggot. Oh my god. It's telling that person that we believe that this is really hurting you So it's actually causing the antithesis of what the goal is Where should be say say whatever the fuck you want doesn't fucking matter? You know you shouldn't be the kind of person that's saying it maliciously yes, you know and that's and that's the other part of what we've been talking about but if no matter what is said it doesn't matter you're a human being and your psyche is made A diamonds in the world is full of fucking pillows like that's it. Whoa strong words I I see their point I see wanting to never be around someone who drops and bombs You know and wanting to not be around someone who's prejudice against someone sure because it's the consciousness That's the problem. It's not the words we're looking to downstream We're trying to look at these downstream effects But really the problem there is you're with an unconscious person who fails to see the platinum rule which is We're all the same fucking person. Yeah, and the real the real attention should be focused on enhancing our Understanding of each other are enhancing our understanding of our our true connectivity and not of demonizing the noises that you make face totally that's silly thinking it's like short-sided thinking it's like I Appreciate your horror in the expression of racism, but I know I just think that the the best way to approach it is To first of all lead by example be someone who's you you would want to imitate You know be someone who you'd want to imitate is it is a great way to overcome a lot of things Like as far as like the way people interact with you everyone is interact everyone who interacts with anybody is always Influenced by someone's success or failure I mean I never did coke because I was around people who did coke in their lifestyle part I was like wow keep away from coke, but I've been around people like really hard workers and really disciplined and I get excited by them I get I get stimulated, you know, and I think we're we're entirely We're way more Way more dependent upon the atmosphere of others and the the inspiration of others than we like to pretend We're way more way more and I think that one of the the bad things about short-sighted Like black and white issues, and I don't mean black and white in a literal sense I mean as far as um like someone never using a word you can never use that word as like well The human mind is capable of a lot of different subtleties and variations and when you're talking about language Especially you're dealing with a lot of subtlety You're dealing with like some funny things that go on with people and some of those funny things make personalities exciting Like Neil Brennan had this fucking hilarious joke where he was He used to do this thing all the time with his friends in New York where he would go What's what's going on with the weather today and they go all man snowing it go fucking niggas Anybody knows Neil Brennan he's like one of the least racist human beings you'll ever meet in your life I mean he has a podcast. It's all about interviewing successful black people Him and Moshe Kasha have that podcast the champs where almost all of it is like successful black artists successful black athletes like he's not a racist in the least He might hate white people You know, but he's funny, you know, and that's what funny people do when you know they're not racist and it's hilarious You know you laugh because you know him and you know me and it's like It's funny, you know he was the fucking co-creator of the Chappelle show I mean he's not racist well He's just pointing at he's pointing out and that's what a lot of humor does it points out things that we're not aware of like This is how ridiculous some of the scapegoatism that we use. Oh, it's because in people of use Oh, it's the Jews. It's the black it's blah blah blah. It shows how ridiculous the snow is completely unrelated Right, and so that's why it's funny. It's like it's funny because that's happened before all the time right? It's obviously a huge exaggeration of it. Yeah, but it's hilarious But that's that's the problem with eliminating words, you know, you eliminate it where you say he should never be able to say that Come on that moment that we just laughed I should never do I have to say the n bomb You know, he said fucking n bombs like come on realings. I were doing that silly That's silly. There's the it's intent is the most critical aspect of human beings Communicating with each other. What are you trying to get through? What is your intent? What are you trying to say like oftentimes like you'll hear people speak in political terms or in very measured terms And instead of making you feel calm it actually makes you uneasy He's like, oh god, I don't even know what the fuck this guy really feels like I'm getting this PC or this red or other Publicists version of who this person's thoughts or who this guys What this guy's thoughts really are not getting the true emotion? The fact that we have to judge our politicians based on these really Practice staged events rather than real adversity You know like that's where we should be able to judge our politicians What happens when they're rolling for two hours and they're getting their ass kick like how do they respond after that? What happens when they do a psychedelic what happens when they do this thing? That's how we should judge the character the people who are leading and back when these politicians emerge from amongst the people They emerged because people understood that like that's a bad motherfucker. He can handle it. If shit goes wrong I'm you know, I'm going to his house and that guy was the leader back then, but now it's not Yeah, now it's just who's better at those fake speeches. Yeah, Solaris. I think you know We've almost hot harp on psychedelics too much, but that's because we've done them That's the problem people with people who haven't done them the likes guys are idiots They're just talking about do oh yeah drugs or a solution Fucking god damn shortcut. It's exactly right goddamn giant shortcut But I think that if we did have some sort of an experience where even if it's just a physical trial Like if you had to watch them, you know, go through a mud race together You know how would they push each other away? Do they concentrate on their own performance? They try to hold people down like look look look look Al Gore's grab a shoelaces he's untying the guy shoes You know me like if you saw them do you saw their character a merge character Diversity some form of it some form of competition, you know, they would it would be fascinating to see How these guys performed? You know, I think when you hear like Bill Clinton who I think is a very intelligent guy says he He would do these talks where he would talk about the difference between what the Democrats have done the Republicans have done It was very like team base we did as we lowered the deficit we did this we did that we did there I've been able to do it since it's like us and them and they and us and it's like Constantly talks about this team thing that's going on. You realize like he's in this weird competition with these people You know like this is like he's like gloating and you know He's looking at the scoreboard. We're number one. We're number one I mean that's essentially what you're doing and if you want to get elected in this country and under Especially those conditions back then maybe not as much now But you know, it's kind of morphing in some weird place now. That's what you had to do You had to have that mindset said that was the game The game's not that anymore. No the game is the goddamn internet the internet is the portal of consciousness the portal of information It's the portal of connectivity in a way. They just didn't exist before so he's fucking guys are there My fellow Americans like come on man like that shit is not and to keep flying It's gonna come a port and point in time, but we want to watch you go to the jungle How do you deal with mosquitoes when you're high as fuck? You know like what he I want to see what happens if you eat some mushrooms and sit in a quiet room by yourself I want to see I want to see what goes on in your mind when you eat a pot cookie And you think you're gonna die and then you climb into an isolation tech I want to know what the fuck goes on in there, man What kind of thoughts about your high school did you have like what did you how do you feel about yourself now? What do you do you happy with the momentum that you've created would you like to trim back some of these fucking? Some of these roads that you've got that travel on what would you like to do like good? Yeah, do you do know who you are right now or you are a product of the momentum of your past And I'm not sure he's hard to tell you gotta see someone's You gotta see him. That's the key. 30 seconds 30 seconds keep going Okay, it my feet hurt. I got some gout something wrong with my balls You know like you're gonna see you're gonna see who they really are other than that that nice person in that nice suit with the perfect smile Yeah, and I think that's the direction that things are going, you know, and I'm encouraged by that I think you know the internet's already gotten rid of a lot of the hypocrisy because things get found out You know the transparency is increased but as consciousness increases I think the demand for a conscious leader will become overwhelming and only when the demand for a conscious leader is there Will one emerge and actually succeed? So you know instead of focusing on the politicians Let's just focus on raising consciousness everywhere so that the demand is so high that one will emerge to meet that demand It's also we're in a situation where as far as education goes as far as the The roads as far as like food No food comes it we're dealing with like these structures that are already there They're already there and people seek to improve them. They seek to improve the the prison the structures and the jail Sentencing, you know all the different bullshit that people hate about police brutality They seek to improve those structures instead of like trying a new one like from scratch and that's what I think like when you see something like wake Otexas wakeos obviously a bad idea what they did the video in complex They stocked up weapons or shooting at the feds and they're fucking some wild Texans Running a call the guy was banging everybody's wife allegedly, you know, that's how it goes when it goes wrong but But the idea of creating a community like organizing and engineering a community with resources including security is The dangerous thought like you people go hey, hey, hey, which try to do you try to start your own army? No, we just have guns in case somebody fucks with us Oh, that sounds like an army to me. Well, aren't we allowed to defend ourselves by individually Individually you can have your own weapon that you can use as a home security device But what you can't do is get together with others and patrol your neighborhood as a home security patrol and then a home security Of a neighborhood but we decided to have a city wide security team That sounds like an army boy well We do have bulletproof tanks and laser beams, but it's just to kill bad guys like no no no that's our job You're getting on the government territory and then they'll come down the feds will But fucking jack booted thugs kicking your door flame thrower your kids and start from scratch like lit We told you no compounds. Yeah, no high fences. No, but no more than 30 people guns that live under one roof You just can't do it. It's a fascinating idea But I think that you're gonna see there's a town in Texas that I talked about this the other day and people actually got a set up That I talked about it They fired the cops in 2012 hired a public or a private company To patrol the streets crime went down by 61% They the cops have no no financial vested interest in writing tickets Like they don't have quotas that they have to mean so they don't harass people nearly The cops have no financial vested interest in writing tickets. They don't have quotas that they have to mean. So they don't harass people nearly as much. And they actually patrol areas where there's crime. And that reduces crime. Go figure. And people are like, yeah, man, it sounds like we're talking about fashions. And we're talking about private police and security teams. They're going to be FEMA camps everywhere you are. They're like every other business. And they become accountable for their actions in a way where, you know, you fire them and you hire a new team. You know, you just don't get locked in any ridiculous 30-year agreement with some police department. Instead, like have a security team that is beneficial to the community. And people can maybe be a part of that security team that are in the community. That would be crazy, huh? Have actually people in the community patrolling the community and getting paid by the community to do that. A lot of unemployed people that might make good cops. And you could do all this shit in a way where it's profitable without having all these goddamn quotas that these people have to mean. And these weird pressures that around people that are in law enforcement. The more we can decentralize the structures, you know, go from federal rules to state rules. We've already seen the benefits of that in a state like Colorado when they're able to make their own rules. You know, that's great. And then from there, if you go back even to where the towns can decide, you know, what the town should do. And as the smaller you get, the more opportunity you have for these great situations to develop. And I think one of the paradigm cases I read this book called The Fifth Sacred Thing. And it shows what happens when a utopian society clashes with the dystopian society. It's a fiction novel. But the really cool part is seeing what the utopian structure looks like. Like what a model of a totally cool place to live would be if everything from the family structure to the rules, to how they decide things, to how they defend themselves, to how everything works, what they celebrate, what the rituals are amongst that. And it's cool to be able to look at that and say, you know, that's possible. We just have to allow, you know, people to gather and create their own situation if they want to. It doesn't always have to go where the owner, it's all topped down in the owner fucks all the teenage girls. Just because that's happened time and time again. It doesn't mean that it has to happen that way. I think it's likely to happen less now that's ever happened before. And I also don't think that it has to be centrally located. And I think that one of the things that we're experiencing with, this exchange of information on the internet, is you're finding a lot of like-minded people that are also trying to improve themselves. They're also being super honest about who they are, who they were, trying to improve themselves, and they get inspiration from other people like you, or like anybody else that's out there that is also on that same path of self-improvement and honesty. And I think we find each other cyber-ly. I think we don't even necessarily have to live on your eye favors block. I think what he's got is pretty sweet. That's probably the ideal way to do it, but if it's not available, it's also happening whether you like it or not. It's happening throughout the world. I experienced that at these shows. These stand-up shows you meet these people that are due to lost 150 pounds. Like, whoa, you know, change my life. I started doing this. I started doing that. I eat kale. I fucking kettlebell in my back pocket. You meet these fucking people. And you realize like there's a lot of folks out there that are also trying to, they're trying to better themselves. And they're trying to like tune into that vibe. And they're finding other people like that online that are trying to tune into that vibe. We're all figuring this out, man. No one's perfect. No one's got a lock on this crazy life. You know, spend less time porting fingers at other people and shaming them for making a fat joke. And more time getting your own shit together and we'll have a way better spot to hang out in. We will all have a way better spot. Like, across the globe. I think that's happening, man. People say I'm too optimistic. But, man, I don't know. I see it. I see it in action. I see it at these shows. I see it all the time. I agree. What's happening that I see is you have your nuclear tribe. Those 15 people you say that you could give them a million dollars and never even blink enough. You wouldn't even get nervous about it. And so, when you start to develop these nuclear tribes and then getting gatherings together, I think is another important thing. Like say, hey, everybody, let's all meet for these five days and hang out and have fun. And I think that'll be a cool aspect of consciously bringing into that. But then you have like the megatribe beyond the nuclear tribe. And that's like all the people listening to the show where you know they're sharing a certain sentiment. So, it's not like your total strangers when you meet. There's a part of you that's already connected. And like, you see that at Burning Man. The mere fact that they're at Burning Man means that they subscribe to a certain amount of beliefs, generally. Of course, there's probably some outliers. But generally, you can meet someone there and know like, all right, you're going to be cool with me. You're not going to call me a dick, you know? Hopefully. You got to be a bad patch of Burning Man. Rogue community. Yeah. Dirty sandal. But they would feel themselves, you know, they would feel weird in that because the whole collective would end up trying to force them out like, yeah, Puss in the skin. It would become a pimple that would eventually pop and bail the fuck out of there. You know, the collective organism would reject it. Yeah. And I think the things like Burning Man and the growth of that were so big. It could sold out every year like in advance. Yeah. It's letting, there's a giant community of people that also would like to go to Burning Man, but can't make it there. You know, they might have obligations or family or whatever they have to do, but they want to go there. But certainly, it's not macro, goddamn. I don't have to fucking go around that square. It's nothing. There's nowhere. It's a nowhere place in the desert. It's literally nothing there. Well, that's why it's a good spot to go because nobody fucks you with you. Yeah. But really, it'd be way better if we didn't know why, folks. I just fucking all go to Malley, man. Malley's way better than the desert. Yeah, I thought, you know, but dude, get mad. Dirty hippies. Well, you got to wear dust masks when you're out there. But I think the point you're making is take your 15 people and have your own little Burning Man where you all bring stuff. You all share stuff. You don't worry about who's paying for what? Everybody's contributing. You're all hanging out and experience that together in your own way. You don't need to go to Black Rock, Nevada to do that. You can go to, you know, the fucking camping somewhere out and then you just put up some tents and just hang. Yeah, but what Burning Man seems to be is like a bat signal. Someone throws up and they all meet there. Right. It's the super tribe meeting. It's what the Aboriginalies did at Uluru at Ayr's Rock. You know, like every once in a while, you go to this one fucking spot and it's five days of crazy dream time and did you reduce? Wow, well, well echoing through the whole place. And it's a celebration. And then you go back to your smaller units. Let your freak flag fly. Yeah. How about we do that? How about we do this? How about we? I've been thinking about this and you've been thinking about this too. About us getting a ranch in Texas. If we got if we got a ranch in Texas, okay, if we got like a hunting ranch in Texas that we also had yearly psychedelic rituals. First of all, how quick would we get co-opted by the feds? Whether they're, they're, they're, right, there's a fucking desk. Just got assigned to it right now. McCarthy, you're on this. Let's enter this fucking news stream channel. These fucking hippies. Yeah. You do that like, you know, have like a, the, a virgin, a version rather, a burning man at a ranch in Texas. It's, I mean, it, it's definitely feasible. Screen people though, you got some sure sure sure. Sure is. I am anonymous to crawl up the house. Yeah. Get those folks on the black internet. Is that what's called the dark internet? Sorry. You know, we picked a spot. It doesn't even have to be a place that we own. So there's no liability. That's a good move. If we get a pick, we just pick a spot somewhere and we say, hey, all people who liked what we were just talking about, let's meet at this general area for these four days and then, you know, see how it goes. But we got to be somewhere where you could be high as fuck and not be in danger. That's why the desert's good. There's nothing out there. You can't go one or nothing. It was getting by a bear. Like if we did it in Alberta, we started losing hippies. They started getting buried out there. Whoa. Did you hear something? Dude, it's a drum circle. Don't worry about it. There's some of these things. Like I think one of them is called Envision and it's in Costa Rica and this beautiful fucking place. I mean, there's places around the world that we could pick that are cool with stuff. I mean, Costa Rica is cool with ayahuasca, with a bougou with, they're not going to fuck with you too much. Travel to other countries is fucking problematic. Shit, it's the fan. You got to get back the good old US of A with the quickness. It's from America. Does that plane is fuck all that star spangled bear? Shit, you'd be very happy to pledge a religion. Once that plane was leaving and you hear guns go off behind your plane and Costa Rica, you realize you'll be right as the insurgency takes over the new government. Take care. Good luck with the ayahuasca retreat. I'm going to go to Miami for a week. I'm sure. Drink on the beach. There's good and bad and all this stuff. Ladies and gentlemen, I think people are getting it together though. I really do. I agree. I feel it. I might be delusional. But I think at least in the people that I'm in contact with, they're getting it. And they're, I feel like they're spreading. And when I say getting it, or you get it, what I mean by that is this idea of everybody trying to improve themselves and people just kind of being cool with each other. And people being honest about all their attributes, the positives, the negatives, all that stuff. And working it out together, man. And part of getting it is knowing that you know nothing really. You know, it's just accepting the fact that we know incrementally less nothing and sometimes maybe even more nothing because the expanse of what is possible to know increases. And just understanding that we're just trying to figure it out to the best fucking way that we can. You know, that's it. When I was young and stupid, I was very insecure about things I didn't know. Like I wanted to pretend I knew things that I didn't know. I can't. I know that. Somebody would break up something like I knew that. But I felt like somehow another, there's some weakness in saying like, what is that? You know, which is like, I love to do that now. Like my favorite thing to like, I don't need to know. You can first of all, now I'm smart enough or at least I'm, I'm accumulating enough information to know. You can't know everything. I get stupid. That's why I love when I talk to someone like Brian Cox was his genius fucking scientist dude who works with the large Hadron Collider and teaches fucking science to the whole world. He asked him something. He doesn't know. He goes, I don't know. I don't know about that. Like, oh great. I love that that's fucking giant. That's important because one of the things that plagues human beings in their development is this lack of admitting to failure. This lack of admitting to not knowing something. This this this fear of your own ignorance and denial of it to the point where you're posturing in front of other people. All eliminated by pot cookies. Yeah, you can get rid of all that shit. Well, having something to defend because you're again, it's this illusion of vulnerability. I need to defend these beliefs because if I don't have them, what am I? What am I without being right? You know, do I love myself? If I'm not the smartest person in the room? Well, you know, you got to let all that shit go. Yeah. And you got to build your foundation on the rocks instead of these, these sand castles because that'll never fulfill you. If driving around in a certain car makes you feel good or if being right and belittling people on the internet makes you feel good, it'll never actually work long term to make you feel good. You'll it'll be this hole that the more you throw in it, the bigger the hole gets. You know, you got to find your own internal ways to feel that good and to feel that way. Everything else is just a sidetrack that's taken you backwards. Yeah. And it goes back to what we're talking about where people just automatically look to get in disagreements with people if they feel that they're on a different team. You know, people that are on a different idea. I mean, people that Philadelphia Eagles used to beat the fuck out of people so bad in their games. Like they broke some guys a leg and a fucking stairwell because he was a fan of the other team. Like that type, I mean, that's up that tribal issue, you know, you're talking about like praying on the worst aspects of tribalism. That's that's something that needs to be addressed in schools. Like we need to we need to explain. Like these are why you have these weird instincts to be in teams and to form gangs because you really used to have to do that to stay alive. Right. But you know, now we don't. We don't have to do that anymore. No. All right, fuckers, we've reached the end. This is three hours of love with Aubrey Marcus and Joe Rogan. We have nothing more to tell you. We hope you enjoyed this. We have an on it podcast that you can listen to. Do you have your own podcast as well? Yeah. You know what project and you have the on it podcast, which is their separate completely separate. I go a little deeper into the kind of spiritual psychedelic realms on my own and then on it is about just improving human performance human optimization. That's it. You fucks on it. com o n n i t go there. Enjoy read up. And if you're in Austin, Texas, there is an actual on it gym now that's open and it is fucking spectacular. State of the art, super dope, full cryo therapy equipment in the fucking house. Tell people about that and how do they get to it. And I actually work there. It's so funny. People come and they're like, oh, you're here. Well, no, shit. This is where I work. You know, so if you go by and say hello, you know, I'll be there. I'll be happy to say hello to you on it. com o n n i t. All right. We'll see you guys next week. Lots of funny guests coming up next week and until then, much love. Take care. Much like everybody. We'll see you guys next week. Bye.