the Jerogean experience. The community of people that are obsessed with the JFK. Thank God, it's pretty thorough. It's amazing. A lot of nutcases to out there, but those serious people are really good. And they're the ones that kept this case alive. Well, it's a thing that a conspiracy theorist really looks to. I don't use that word. I think true seekers much more. OK, well forget about that word. But someone who's interested in uncovering the truth about this assassination, the type of person that has that mind said that's interested in uncovering the truth about any historical experience. This is one of the best ones. That's good. Because their story and does. Yes, their significant evidence. And their significant evidence that there is a conspiracy. A significant evidence. A significant evidence. I mean, I would say from the beginning, there was, yes, when you have a shot from the rear and a shot from the shot from the shot. Yes, well, that was going to get into that. So when you detail so brilliantly in the documentary, all of the people that were involved in manipulating evidence, whether it's autopsy photos, whether it's the evidence about the actual shots, where they were fired from, the impact, like where the exit wounds was. All these various people that were involved. How many people knew what had actually happened? Because it seems like there was a concentration of people that was not small. And one of the things that people who like to use the pejorative term conspiracy theorists, they always want to point to people can't keep a secret. The fuck they can't. They had to. It's as giant may. It's so confusing. Yes. And that no one would be believed if they think, right. There's one part. Think of it as a department of this department of this. Somebody pops up and says, I know this. So he disappears, and there is. Right. It's a lot of a piece of information. Yeah. There's been no attempt by government to follow up on this at all. They dismissed. They had the HSCA in 1978, right? That came about because of pressure. And a lot of that was classified still and disappeared for a while. We got it out. All that stuff. They decided that there was a probable conspiracy based on the acoustic evidence of the motorcycles. But we don't want to go into that. Because that's a whole other story. Acoustic evidence of sound from the recording. And the front. Yes. Yes. Well, the shots, the shots. The physical evidence of the impact on the body is way more important. Way more important. And way more obvious that, first of all, the establishment of the magic bullet was one of the most preposterous things that the United States public has ever accepted. And I think we did a great service by driving a stake through that heart of that vampire, because it's been around forever. Well, you detailed in so many different ways, too. You detailed all the various ways that they had tried to establish it. Once they found the wound in the back, they tried to establish it. Well, don't confuse it. First of all, the magic bullet. There's no chain of custody on it. FBI lied. And we proved it in the film. Yes, he did. Because the times don't match. Right. So the FBI down and out lied. Now, Hoover, of course, never believed, one had to believe, wanted to believe that Oswald did it alone. He had to, because they put themselves on a straight jacket. They said three shots. There were not three shots. It was 0.45 shots. Three shots, one assassin who why, what's his motive? He was a perfectly reasonable young man. He was in the corridor. He'd been yelled at. And he said, I need a lawyer. I'm a passive. Yes. The guy didn't behave like he was proud of what he had done. No. Which is what he said. He was a communist assassin who they had this background of visiting Russia. Of course, we found out that we found out that the community found out that it wasn't everything that didn't meet the eye. It was a whole other story going on. What about these? The Oswald had been an associated with the CIA. Yeah. Not that he'd been an agent. But he'd been watched by the CIA for four years. That we know without a doubt now because of what we declassified. Angleton, James Angleton, the counter-terrorism, she had a file on Oswald since before Russia. They knew him. They knew what he was doing up until the week. Well, apparently, they disappeared his flash warning about a week before the assassination, which means to say, you don't need to check Oswald if you're a secret service. You see him somewhere on a parade route. You'd have to clear out those type of people. They get the secret services very aware of people who have backgrounds, who could range. They took that off. They signal on Oswald. The other thing is that Oswald was working both sides clearly that he was working with a pro-caster on the anti-human movement. But the CIA set up both. You see, the CIA set up the pro and the club. So it's very clear that there were well aware of him. Dip him in the Cuban poison. The sheep dip him. It's make him look like a commie who loves Castro. That was the intention, I believe. I believe that the CIA was so upset about these two near invasions of Cuba that this was a chance by killing Kennedy to get the United States to move against Castro. And this is where Johnson is not, you can't blame Johnson because he felt that there was his pressure right away. And he said to the Warren Commission guys, he says, look, there's a lot of pressure to point the finger at Russia and Russia and Cuba. We don't want to do that because we're going to have it nuclear war if we do that. Like 40 million people are going to be dying. That's why he told Warren. Warren was white in those days. He was very serious. 40 million people, my God. He had all the weight of the country on his shoulders. And that's why he accepted this lousy job as the chief commissioner. So Johnson used that story. But Johnson believed, I think he believed it. I think he believed in some way. I'm not sure. Let me put something. This is very important. Marvin Watson was his aid to Johnson. In 1970, in 1970, he testified. He testified that Johnson, after he read the IG report, do we talk about earlier, which said that there were no assassination. President Kennedy, Robert, I never approved, authorized any assassination attempt on Castro, right? He read that report. And he told Watson, according to Watson, he said, I now believe the CIA was probably involved in the assassination. That's when he said, wow, in 67 when he read the report. Wow. It comes out in the church committee, which is classified, disappears for some reason. We find it again because of this ARB. So he was probably left in the dark as well. I do believe so. I think he's definitely involved in the cover-up, because he doesn't want to have a war. But he changes the whole policy of Kennedy. Right away, we have that declassified call between him and Robert McNamara. What is Johnson saying in that call, do you remember? It's in the film. He says, I was never in agreement with you and president about withdrawing for Vietnam. I thought you were wrong. He says that proudly, because he's going in. Right. Why he wants to go into Vietnam. And not Cuba is another issue. But think about that. Just think about the implications. Johnson is moving towards war in Vietnam. And how deep in that he was looking to do something to weaken the grip of the CIA, not just get rid of those three guys, but he also wanted to diminish the CIA's influence on that. But that wasn't his only thought. He had a hundred things to deal with. Right, that's the problem. And it wasn't newly in office. Well, yeah, by 60. He said statements about the generals. He said, they're not worth a bucket of piss and whatever it was. Generals think they know everything. They always want to go to war. They want the parades, but they don't want the casualties. They don't want the result. And that's true for the United States. We go to war with a lot of hoopla. And when we come out, we leave our people. We leave our people who go over there, and mostly in very difficult states, either suicide or in veterans' hospitals, with limbs blown off. It's not fun, war. And we treat it like, I think the United States has never experienced a war. That's what I think that's a problem. On our shores. Yeah. And when we do, we're shocked. So we have a distorted perception of what war is. I think the Russians are much more realistic, because every Russian is related to somebody who was killed in World War II. Right. Well, it's in their hearts. It's seared in. And I can't speak for the Chinese, but they lost a couple million men in Korea. So they must have been a lot of family paying there. Have you ever tried to calculate how many people were involved in the cover-up of the assassination? Because when you break down all the various people that you document, everyone from Ireland specter to everyone that's on the Warren Commission's report, it's very clear that those folks had to know that what they were doing was bullshit. From what you said about the FBI chain of custody for the magic bullet, the alteration of the autopsy photos and the difference between the autopsy itself. Yes, the autopsy itself. The difference between the Dallas autopsy and the way they looked at it at Bethesda, Maryland. There wasn't a lot of options in Dallas. It was just a bit of a tradition of it was very quick. The track, the economy. Yeah. The track, the economy, and also the description of the exit wound. It is head. Well, yeah, that comes out later. Yeah. Although some people didn't see it. But what the ARB did, thank God, was collect all the people who saw in the rear exit wound. And it was huge. It was what we showed in the film. We showed the 40 people who saw it. What's really crazy you document in the film was the fact that it wasn't really his brain. Yeah, that was going to go to that piece. Please, the brain that they had used as a piece of evidence that this was Kennedy's brain had clearly been in formaldehyde for at least two weeks. Yeah. Well, I'm so glad our documentary, and this is James D. Eugenio, who wrote, he's really the guy who reads everything, remembers everything through all these years. And there's a million documents. We drove a stake through the magic bullet. That's clear. There's no chain of custody of the FBI law. Also, in the matter of the autopsy, the brain is intact. And it was photographed as such. It was a clean, the whole area was still there. Whereas it's impossible because the brain was seen that you see it spraying out in the car when there's a shooter film. You see it, the nurse's Audrey Bell is talking about. I can't remember the medical term, whatever it's called. It's spilling out on the floor of Parkland. Yeah. And when they weigh the brain as they do it on the autopsy, it comes out normal. Well, not just normal, but extra large. A little bit. Larger than average. Like it's impossible. And what's more important is, and this drives a stake again to the heart of the photographer of the autopsy, John Stringer, the autopsy photographer. He's a straight guy. He's pro-war and commissioner, all that stuff. They bring him back. The R, B brings him back. And they show him the photos of the, that we now have of the, that are in the National Archives. And he says, that's, I never photographed that. Right. He took an up view of the brain. He never took a basilar view from the below. I never photographed that. And that's very important. There's also some evidence that they had drawn hair in to cover up the exit wound. Yes. Yeah. I know about the evidence, but definitely the photograph shows that the hair had been pulled in. The shot is bizarre. It's bizarre shots. But so the autopsy is off. The brain is off. Photos are off. Then you go, you know, the garrison trial revealed that one of the autopsy's Peter Fink saying that they were not in charge of the autopsy. The military was. Right. They wouldn't let him put his finger in the back hole. Right. They told them what to do. And they were very bullying. In fact, there was, can you imagine having doing an autopsy on the president and having 20 or 30 people looking at you from a gallery? And they were telling him what he was able to do and not able to do. So the autopsy was being directed. Yeah, I showed that in the movie. Don't touch that. Right. Don't do that. Which is you, so you have to think that they have the best autopsy people in the world. Civilian all around Washington. Why don't why would they call them in? Right. There's no desire. So they had a predetermined ending that they wanted to achieve. Or a result of the one to achieve. Three bullets. Three bullets. One assassin. But this is what's crazy. It's like you've got to think, OK, wouldn't you have at least those 30 people that are in the audience watching that autopsy? I mean, what do they know? I don't know that. But isn't that crazy? We have all 30 of them know that Lee Harvey Oswald didn't act alone. No, we don't know that. We don't know. Right. I mean, we don't know something. But there's obviously a directive. Well, there again, we don't know. I shouldn't say obviously directed. But they're doing something to influence the way this autopsies being done. At least some of the people are giving direction, giving instruction. And you've got to wonder, why would they do that? Like, what motivation would they have unless they knew that there was a predetermined result that they need to achieve? You have, of course, Johnson fear that it would get it become a hysteria, Russia or Cuba being accused of killing him. And it would be a situation that they can no longer control. That's a legitimate excuse to cover up. One interesting story. It's in the four hour version, not in this two hour version. That's coming out in the end of February. And we show a moment in the autopsy where one of the technicians, what the doctor looks up, he says, there's cigar smoke blurring this thing. It was just cigar smoke smells, covers up the air and stuff. It looks, you don't smoke a cigar and it's not top secretion. I mean, who's doing that? Find out. Tell me to put it out. He goes over to the gallery and guess who's smoking the fucking cigar? General Curtis Lame, the figure from Strange Love that Kubrick was sat around the larry. And he says, can you put it out? Lame simply looks at him, blows smoke in his face. And the guy wrote that he was a technician. He just wanted, he's telling the truth. walks back, couldn't get him to put this cigar on. Wow. That's pretty interesting.