Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. What's up, Joe? How you doing, Jesse? You're welcome. This is just one of the coolest things anybody's ever given me. So gave me this knife. Explain all this. All right, so I mean, there's a larger explanatory reason behind this. My brother and I grew up. My father died when I was five. My brother and I grew up doing these things called rendezvous. Have you ever heard of him? In what way? What is wrong? So there you go. So a rendezvous is it's not, you know, you go to those like what I don't even know what they call. But people do like reenactments. Oh, OK. Like civil war reenact? It's not like that. So that's the closest thing, approximation, to probably what it is. You get invited to them or these days are easier to get to. But my stepfather, the guy my mother remarried, brought us to him. All you do is camp, but you're only allowed to camp. And no one comes to the camp or sometimes they might have people at the end. But while you're in the camp, everything in the camp has to be 1840 or prior. So there can be no modern pertinence. There's nothing like a refrigerator or nothing like that. 1840, why is that year? At the end of the fur trapping. The end of that, that was considered like Jeremiah Johnson's time like peak fur trapping. So there's people, you know, they dress like either revolutionary, like American revolutionaries, or they dress like mountain man, or they dress like Indians. How'd you guys dress? Mountain man. So while we're there, you learn all kinds of stuff while you're reenacting. Like I learned how to brain tan hides. I learned how to traditionally do traditional archery stuff like that. So anyway, this knife was a knife. I had actually started working on my brother a while ago. I do more of like the brain tanning. Tomahawk. And when you say brain tanning, you talk about using brains to tan animal hides using animal brains. Yeah. What does brains do? What does brains do? It softens the leather in a natural way. And what's cool about it is every animal, no matter what animal you kill, has the exact amount of brain needed in order to tan the hide. So you don't need any additional, like people use egg yolks or mayonnaise or something like that. All you do is you take the brain out of the cavity, you grind it up, you mix it into some water. And then after you've, after you've cleaned the leather and you've scraped it clean, you stretch it, I usually use like a dull shovel. You stretch it over the dull shovel and then you soak it in the brain water mixture. And then you just keep repeating that pattern. And the leather gets like a really nice soft feel to it. What is it about the brain? Is it the fat? It breaks down the leather. I'm not sure if it's the fat or I haven't gotten that deep into it, but it breaks down the leather and just makes it feel really soft, really nice. So anyway, this knife here, I started, I killed that bear. So the jaw is made out of two bear jaws or out of one bear jaw, split in half. So that was a bear I killed in Canada in 2017. It was my biggest black bear. And so we split the jaw, put that together. It's Irish linen threading. Then that's a knife that my brother picked up, that was from 1860. It was totally arrested. We had to grind it back or he had to grind it back down. And then the sheath is traditional, like, you know, you could, the cool thing about doing rendezvous and the cool thing about this is you could have a DeLorean and drop that in 1840 and somebody picked it up and think it was made yesterday. And so everything on there has been done traditionally from the quilling on the beadwork is made from porcupine quills. The backing is Buffalo brain tan and then the front is beaver hide or beaver tail. I'm sorry. And then the sides are horse and turkey hair hanging off of it. And these are bear teeth. And those are bear teeth. Yep. From the same bear. So when I was thinking about what I was, because I wanted to give you something for inviting me on because it's still a shock to me that you did it, even though we've been talking for so long, I just never imagined a scenario where you'd want to have me on here. So we're on interesting, dude. I thought what could I give this guy that, you know, money or people or whatever couldn't get you. And so I thought this is the right thing to do. So it went from a me project to a you project and my brother Aaron helped me out with it tremendously. So how'd you find this knife from the 1860s? Well, he found it. My brother is even more esoteric and odd than I am believe it or not. And he collects this kind of stuff. I mean, the guy who dated it said 1860 to 1890 is what they figured. And you can tell by the way that like around the hilt and the way that it's the the pitting on it and stuff like that. And the way that it was made that it fits that era. I mean, it could have been somebody we did it in 1900. But it's definitely that old, the type of steel in the way that it was worked and the way that it is around the hilt around the bottom there. And so it's at least, you know, 130, 140, but more slightly 160, 170. It actually fits my hand perfect. Yeah. So that's also something my brother and I talked about, about how long it was going to be. And we made some educated guesses and put it all together. So yeah, I mean, like I said, not something you can just go pick up somewhere or something that will, you know, hopefully mean something. Not saying it's practical, like it's not something you'd be cutting a alkyl out with, but well, if we get attacked by zombies in the studio, it's a good thing to have on the desk. Yeah. I mean, if you're going to make a last stand, you know, that's a pretty good, that's a pretty good knife to make your last stand with. It's a good way to go out. Yeah, exactly. It's awesome. Yeah. So the rendezvous is we did those from how long they last? They vary from a week and then some go up to three weeks. And what do you do for food? Why are you out there? So inside of your lot, so there's two types of rendezvous. And most rendezvous is inside of your lodge. You can have a cooler as long as it doesn't leave the lodge. So I have like a 20 foot teepee that I take to these things. And inside of my teepee, you can have a cooler and some modern apartments is did they have any kind of coolers in the 1800s? I mean, they had ice boxes and like steel ice boxes and that type of thing, but nothing like we have today. You know, stuff was getting dug out buried in the ground or put into the ground like cool areas of the ground or dig out and they tried everything. So Pemican would have been the, you know, every day thing to eat. That's just dried. So did you bring your own food or did you have to hunt for food? So you bring your own food, but there are other rendezvous's that are kind of invite only. And I don't even think a lot of people who do rendezvous knew about these, but there's one that I think they're called. I think I might be speaking out of school. Somebody might send me an email after this, but I'm going to talk about it anyway because I never got read the right act. They're called jerry. I think they called them jerryed southerners and I've only been in one of those. And that's where everything in the camp has to be pre 1840. And you meet down in the parking lot. You put everything on the back of a mule. And when I did mine, it was up in the, I think it was the big horns. So you know, he talked to our rancher. Get everything packed up. You go into the back of the big horns. And everything in camp has to be pre 1840 as close as it can get. They'll even look at your stitching and say, oh, that was sewn with a sewing machine. You got to take that off. And it's always these weird like eccentric history teachers that run them like guys who, you know, teaches history at Berkeley or something like that. There's other places. And they just really enjoy living like this. And at those ones, if they're in season, you can hunt whatever is in season. You're hunting with traditional archery. And it's really good for kids. Like the internet wasn't a problem as much when I was a kid. I was certainly into computers. I have been since I was a child. But you could just detach everyone's running around crazy, sitting around the campfire at night. People are singing with the songs in the guitar. You're learning how to do things like this. You're learning how to brain tan. You're learning how to live traditionally. And it's a eccentric call kind of it's not a call. It's an eccentric group of people. It's a lot of fun. People take a very community. People take it very seriously. There's there's there's more advertising surrounding it now than there used to be because the numbers kind of of dwindling. But I did my last one last year with my brother. So if you go on my Instagram, there's a picture of my brother, my son and I doing I think our second rendezvous together. And we're just dressed like you know, I've actually got an awesome warshirt. I can show you the picture. I've got an awesome warshirt that a friend of mine went to war with his he was half native American his grandfather was a jibway or something chip law, something like that. And he was I don't remember what his role was. But anyway, I went we deployed to Iraq together and his grab had made me this warshirt. Oh, there you found it. Fent Jamie, he pulled it up. That's my lodge. How much do you enjoy a shower after you get out of here? I mean, I as long as you keep, you know, they have showers and camp. They've got a shower area, a showering area where it's just like pallets. That's the inside of my lodge. So there's a cooler at this one. This is not a juried round of boo. And so you can shower while you're some of them they call moiuders. They'll be like a latrine in a shower area in camp. But also like some of them I don't I don't do it at all. This is wild. And so there's no reenactment like there's not like civilians walking around. It's not like Renaissance. Yeah, exactly. It's just more like I want to act like it's 1840 for a couple of weeks and not look at my phone one time and not worry about the news. It's amazing after a week here. You really forget about the world and you're like, don't even know you're supposed to be stressed out about things. You're just out there doing your thing for a couple of weeks. And you just cook over open fire. Yeah, everything gets done traditionally that way. Yeah. And did you bring your own meat? Yeah, you bring your own meat and stuff in the cooler. And then there's also cooking classes where they teach you like all the recipes do with like a Dutch oven, like an old cast iron oven. And they do gambling at night. So you'll walk into like a huge they call marquees, but it's like a huge 100 foot square lodge. There'll be three gambling tables in there. Girls are like the low cut shirts and dealing cards and spoken cigars and just have an amazing time. And there are people you go by, camp names while you're in there. Nobody uses their real name. Well, some people use their real name. I'd say 60% of people don't use their real name. What was your camp name? This is embarrassing. It should be. Yeah. So I got my camp name. I got christened with my camp name in the big horns when I was 14 or 13. And it was talks a lot. talks a lot. Yeah. And Sue, it was pronounced yota. And just because you talk a lot or when I was a kid, I talked a lot. Actually, as an adult, I don't talk that much. Unless I know you. But as a kid, I would never shut up. I had really bad ADHD. They kind of diagnosed me with having some low level version of Asperger's. And I was a rap scallion in class. Just never shut up, never listened, never did anything. And those are the people that are the most fun. Well, they didn't enjoy me in high school or in grade school. I probably would have been your friend. But yeah, they can't call me EOAT. And we got christened. And it was a, you know, it's one of the things we're kind of missing in culture today or something that I'm trying to reinvigorate, especially with my son. And with other young men that I run into is kind of like coming of age rights. Yeah, something to say, you're a man. And I'm going to start treating like a man from this moment forward. Like, you know, what does that, there should be structure to that, you know, we're tribal. And it's important to me. So I think that is really something that's missing from society. I think that it's I used to think it was silly when I was young. And then as I got older, I realized, well, I went through that. I became a black belt. And I started fighting. And you had a group of men telling you, you're at this level. We're going to treat you like that. If you fall from gray, so we're going to remind you right away. Yeah. And we just don't do that with young men. And we have a society now where young men act like young men till they're 45 or 50 or 60. And sometimes never stop. Yeah. And, you know, women nature imposes itself on women. They become fertile. They're able to have babies. And they've got to seek security or find a husband or a really good job that will supplement whatever a husband would provide. And they got to start acting like a woman, whereas men can sit in a basement. And it becomes very dangerous. Especially men that never have children. Yeah. They're perpetual children. Yeah. And if you don't impose nature on yourself by undergoing those types of rights and understanding what it means to become a man, nature will impose itself on you by either A, you're never going to have children. And therefore, you're dead forever or B, it will kill you because you're fat in your lungs basement. You get diabetes, the foot chopped off and you're 35. And, you know, we just don't tell men we don't have a, the military did it for me. I had really put off responsibility or seeking meaning or any of those things until I was in the military. And like I said, my father died when I was five. So I really had no central male authority until I was about 13 or 14 when I met this guy, Steve. And he kind of initiated some of those rights for me and held me to account. But it was really the military, which was a turning point for me where I was, there was a standard. And I was expected to hold it. I think there's a reason why most ancient cultures and a lot of ancient religions have these rights of passages where you are like now officially, officially a man. Yeah. Officially, you know, you're responsible. You're, you have to think of yourself as a different thing now. Whereas if you leave it up to your own decision, men sort of dwindle into this perpetual state of childhood. Yep. And it's not about you anymore. It's about other people like that, that for me, having children, I've got four kids. Really, you know, the military was kind of the first inkling of responsibility, but then having children and realizing this isn't about me at all. And I need to be willing to break my back for these people who depend on me. This is weird. That can prime you feeling that you're responsible for these like very vulnerable little people that you love more than life itself. It just changes everything. It just kicks you into gear. But for some people, it doesn't, you know, some people that are so stuck in that perpetual childhood thing, they just wind up deciding it's too much of a drag and they get divorced. You know, and then they fuck up to kids. Yeah. God, we have so many rabbit holes we could go down on this. But I mean, it was, you know, growing up in the 80s and the early 90s, it was really like a divorce culture. And I obviously understand that if you're in a bad relationship or an abusive relationship or, you know, there's certainly there's a threshold where marriage should dissolve. No question. But I kind of feel like it are the central thrust of a lot of culture at that time was about like divorce or not getting married or, you know, discovering yourself and that type of thing, which in some ways is good. There's goodness there. But when it becomes a central thrust or a central narrative and divorce becomes very easy or it's happening everywhere, it's super normal. And it's normalized. It's super destructive. Children are the ones who suffer the most on it. And I think the date is clear on that. When you look at, you know, single parent homes or no parent homes or being raised without an authority or an abusive step person or a abusive. And that is, you know, when you look up the stats on that, like remarriage and having a new family, like that, that becomes the single most likely vector of abuse and a child, young child's life is that new person, right? Because now they're raising someone else's kid or whatever. I mean, it's a, that's an every old movie, the evil step mother. Yeah, you know, or evil step father. But in the old movies, it's always a step mother that abuses the girl. Yes. And so, you know, I kind of, I kind of resented that part of that time that culture was, I shouldn't say when I was a child, I should say as I got older, because I wasn't a single mom home. And the guy that my mother remarried right after my father died was abusive. And, you know, he really got hard on my younger brother and you know, my mother moved us out almost immediately. But when I reexamined that time, it really was, you know, I don't know how to describe it. But, you know, there are no rules when it comes to relationships and family and every family special in particular in its own way and they all need to be venerated. And there's of course some truth to that. We shouldn't deride someone because they come from a broken family. But we shouldn't elevate it like it's at the same level as a unified family. And that's a tricky line to to walk. But also the people who were making those movies and that culture came from the 50s and 60s where divorce was just not in the cards. And so that was the, you know, hoax law as you bend any object. It wants to return back to its natural state. And hoax law kind of played there where nobody could get divorce in the 40s, 30s, 40s, 50s and 60s. And then he had the baby boomers who kind of culture, they said, you know, actually, it's not as bad as we think, but then it over corrected. And it became kind of kind of part of that cultural zeitgeist. And kind of what humans do, right? Yeah. Always over correct. Yeah, we do. Yeah. We go in one direction until we realize it's destructive and then we over correct until we realize that's destructive. Yeah. This episode is brought to you by ketone IQ, the demands on my time, energy and focus arguments. So when I need my brain to lock in for hours and hours and fire at its fastest, most alert state, I'm taking ketone IQ. It's an energy shot powered by this little miracle molecule that your body already naturally makes and your brain, especially loves ketones. I've been talking about ketones for over a decade and this company's finally figured out how to put them in a bottle. When I take ketone IQ, I drop right into a state of laser like focus and sustained mental clarity, whether I'm podcasting, training in the gym or just want to show up locked in when it matters, the difference is night and day with ketone IQ visit ketone.com slash Rogan for 30% off your subscription order or find ketone IQ at target stores nationwide in the protein and electrolyte aisle and get your first shot free. Plus they have a 60 day money back guarantee. That's how confident they are that you're going to love the increased focus you get from ketone IQ. And I would say that's the not this isn't a political thing. This is just the reality of it. That's mostly what makes me conservative in nature is I agree systems need to change, but they need to change slowly and pragmatically. So we because you know any social any social scientists or their salt will know a social experiment almost never has the outcome that we thought it was going to have. In other words, we thought doing something to society would form society this way, but almost has the the inverse the anti pattern like we talked about before and almost ends up propagating itself. And so that makes me I'm still a proponent for change, but it should be slow and thought out and and done in pockets first. Yeah, kind of you know federalism. Let's do the little changes here. Let's let California be crazy for a while and see how that works out for them. But let's not nationalize the craziness. Let's learn from what they learn there and there'll be good news, you know, hot barrisas that make great coffee and it's cool art. And let's take those parts, but how about the rampant homeless? Let's find out what caused that and and and solve for that and and you know, that was kind of the founders intent with federal ism. They're really federalist minded state minded and there's you know, even for that being as 250 years ago, there's a profound amount of profanity in that like let's change things slowly and let social experiments take place and adopt the best parts of those things and then integrate them to the culture overall as we move along. But you know, that's not through the baby out with the bath water. Yeah, I think in this country, one of the primary problems that people have is a profound lack of respect for discipline and how important discipline is for your life. Yeah, and discipline is associated with conservatism. And because of that, like a lot of people think that I'm I don't think I'm anything. I think I have politically or ideologically I have a lot of everything in me. I don't think I identify with one side or another. But if one thing that I agree with conservative people on conservative people lend more towards the importance of discipline, hard work, discipline, don't complain, get things done, deal with the hand that you've been dealt with and just sort it out and get to work. Yeah, don't cry. Don't look for other people to save you. They're not going to. And this is not something that's celebrated in society. It's thought of as a cruelty that if you you say that you need discipline, that you're you're not treating these people that are victims of circumstance with the proper respect or with the proper empathy. And I think a certain amount of empathy is probably not so good for you at a certain point in time. It comes a point in time where you're letting people wallow in their bullshit and just make excuses for why they're not getting anything done. And in that sense, I think California is that that is a giant part of what's wrong with California. What's wrong with California when it comes to crime, what's wrong with California, you know, they're the way they address crime and the way they address homelessness and all these issues that they have. They don't put their foot down at a certain point in time. You got to realize like what God said calls suicidal empathy society can suffer from suicidal empathy in the certain point in time. You got in force rules and you got to make it so that people have to get their shit together. Yeah. And that suicide alarm that the becomes a way for the person who's imposing it on someone else to feel good about themselves, which makes it even trickier and even more insidious because they're they're they're feeling good from the the weaponization of other people's. Lot in life and and and the thing about that is none of the rules that you're going to impose, especially as a legislator or as somebody in a think tank, you'll never feel the repercussions of them. You'll never have to actually deal with it day to day. You're just imposing it on someone else and saying, I better understand the the structure of reality and the fabric of the world. And you can't help but be this way as the system that's done this to you. So let me give you patents that I'm going to take from someone else and and that makes me benevolent. I get to feel good about that. Does a giant part of government for sure. That's a giant part of what's the problem with like liberal governments. Liberal governments should they should get paid based on whether or not the city does better or worse financially than when they were in office. If their policies lead to a greater domestic production of goods and services and you know GDP does better and everything does better than you should get paid more. If more real estate sales, more people are making more money immediate medium income raises less homeless people. you should get paid more and you should get paid less if homeless just goes up if crime goes up if there's more destruction if there's more you know assaults and home invasions you should get paid less. Right. You're you're doing a shitty job. And if you did that, I think they would impose laws that made it safer and healthier and made it for you know better for society. Yeah. And then they were just inevitably changed the ways that we track and measure those things and pay themselves more and they shouldn't have the opportunity to do that. Then you need some sort of an oversight that's going to be identical. You're right. You're right to be cynical because that's what they do about everything. Someone's explaining to me yesterday that one of the problems with cleaning up fraud is that fraud is responsible for a giant percentage of GDP. And if you have hundreds of billions of dollars of fraud in this country and you eliminated that, you actually lower GDP because you you actually lower the amount of money that's in circulation. That's interesting. I've never thought about that before. He was explaining to me and I was like, oh my God, that is crazy that a giant percentage of our GDP is fraud. And if that was somehow or another eliminated, it'd be like one of the things that they do when they raise jobs like they increased GDP. We've we've added you know 200,000 jobs to the market. One of those jobs like what are those jobs? Are these government jobs? Because the government is a giant percentage of our GDP government jobs. It's way bigger than it should be. Way bigger. And those jobs, a lot of them are bullshit and waste a lot of them. Yeah. You know, and that was some of the stuff that was uncovered during doge, you know, the limited amount of access that doge had to it just just the beginning of it where you got to see the curtain pulled back and get to see exposure of so many of these fraudulent, supposedly charitable organizations that were really just money laundering. They're really just funneling money into these people's hands. Like like the homeless thing in California. Oh my goodness. It's a bonkers situation where they've spent 24 billion dollars. They cannot track it. They've tried to audit it. The government has vetoed these audits. And they have no idea where that 24 billion dollars went and yet homelessness went up. Yeah. But you've got a giant machine that is this homeless establishment, this homeless industrial complex. Yeah. That is being funneled money into that and that actually aids the GDP, which is kind of crazy. Yeah. I mean, it was one of the things my last three years in the military, I was advising a colonel and a two star general and they were in charge of all of the offensive cyber development, ethical hacking offensive cyber development. How was their technical advisor? And one of the things that kind of learned about government at that point was these systems have their own incentive and as said to as not the output of their purported mission, the incentive is the growing of the organization and the execution of budget. So while they're in there, you know, I've never seen a field grade officer get dressed down more than when he didn't spend all of the money that he was budgeted for for that year. Isn't that crazy? He would go to the Pentagon and they'd be like, well, you didn't execute $300 million of OCO of overseas contingent operations funds here and they would dress them down for an hour. And what people don't understand is if you don't spend that money, your budget for the next year will be lower because there's no need to have a higher budget. Instead of tying it to mission to say, right, did you achieve your mission objectives? Right. We started the year of grilling agreeing from the Fred President's framework, the NIP if the National Intelligence Priority Framework, we wanted to achieve these effects. You what you would want to hear is we achieve them and we save 25% but instead it's we achieve them, but we didn't execute all this money while you're fired. And I literally have seen that happen. I've literally seen that happen. And that kind of six as I yeah, and that kind of shifted my thinking in that these systems have their own incentive to exist and to grow because those guys that were holding that general officer that O6 is that kernels feet to the fire. They also have an incentive to because they were part of that trickle down and they've got bureaucracy that surrounds them. And if they didn't execute it, that means they didn't execute it. And that means they have to go to whomever. This is during the Biden administration. I believe Higgs for everything we could say has actually tightened this up quite a bit and he's kind of rehaul the way development works, especially on the offensive side or side, but they have bureaucracies and the incentive of the bureaucracy is to make sure that we grow. And that's it. And then then you think about that for a minute and you're like, well, it's no longer a question why we have $30 trillion of debt, 39, 39 trillion. And then what like 150 trillion of unfunded liability. In other words, we've promised people money for the next 30 years. And it's debt that you know, I don't see how I'll ever escape that debt. And it's the thing about it is is and I don't want to be pigeonholed because I'm actually quite liberal when it comes to my politics are like yours and that I'm kind of of man without a home, but they also change at different levels of analysis. I'm very liberal with my family. And I'm very like communist. I protect them. I forgive them everything they need. I'm trying to give them structure. And even in my community, I'll help someone out out of pocket or do something for them. That's a strain on my time or might hurt something else because there are really no solutions. There's just tradeoffs that's supportive for the community though. That's how people are supposed to do charity. And I'm also very non-judgmental and someone how they care. I don't care what they do in their house. I don't care if it's a Roman origin on the weekends like be a predictable, productive person Monday through Friday and go do your Roman origin on the on the weekend. I don't care. I won't judge you. Like I don't I really have enough crap in my own life. And someone's not getting hurt. As long as no one's getting hurt. Consented adults. Yeah. I have enough problems. I screw up enough and people have there's a laundry list of things that people could say about me how I've screwed up in my life. But then as I graduate and get higher and higher, more conservatism takes place. And that's a result of just, you know, having an engineering mindset when I'm looking at life and understanding that it's just not Republican or Democrat or leftist or rightist or liberal or or classically liberal. All of these monitors don't work for me because they break down at some level of analysis. Right. And I think that's the problem. I think the problem is these ideologies that people subscribe to we have a predetermined pattern of thinking that you're supposed to adopt. level of analysis. Right. And I think that's the problem. I think the problem is these ideologies that people subscribe to, where you have a predetermined pattern of thinking that you're supposed to adopt. Yes. They're supposed to adopt these opinions. And some of them just don't fit. And that's how people get pigeon, that's like on the people on the left, they get pigeonholed into weird stuff that you can't really really justify like trans women in sports. Like what the fuck are you doing? Yeah. And you know, like we're, you know, we're being inclusive. Like, no, you're not or loving the borders of Ukraine while hating our own border. Yeah. The fucking bonkers. Yeah. There's so many crazy things. There's so many crazy things that people just adopt that don't make any sense. And you know, when you subscribe to an ideology, the problem is if like, if you define yourself as this person, I am this. I am a hardcore right wing blob, whatever it is. You, you immediately close the door to all the very productive and interesting things of the other side. Thanks. Yeah. And you're also making yourself into a tool of propaganda. Because if I, if someone, if I meet someone and they just say, I'm this, right, it's like, well, I could reasonably predict everything that's going to come out of your mouth. Yeah. That's not entertaining. I don't want to have a conversation with that person. Right. I can't seek to learn from them because I could just pick up the communist manifesto or mine, comf. Right. And have a pretty good understanding of who I'm dealing with. And therefore, a conversation is not, it's not relevant. It's not needed. A lot of people are afraid of social ostracation too. So they're, they're afraid of, of straying outside of the narrative, whatever side they're supposed to be on. And, you know, some groups are really good at making you feel like dark shit if you don't agree entirely with even things that don't even make any sense. Yeah. So that's why people go along with stuff that's illogical, like open borders or whatever it is. Yeah. They go along with things that's not in their best interest because they're scared. They're scared of being ostracized. They're scared of being cast out of the kingdom. There's, you know, they're scared of being excommunicated. Yeah. I dealt with a lot of people, first my retire from the military. And then more recently leading up to the last election where, you know, I was entertaining the deal of doing some work for government. Believe it or not. And because I'm, as we talk more, you'll figure out I'm pretty anti institutions. I'm really against those types of things. But I really felt, if you would have asked me three years ago how I felt about the Trump election and all of that stuff, I was very excited because he was saying a lot of things that I wanted someone to say. Trump fits a pattern. And this is what people I think kind of lack when they, my whole life is built around pattern analysis. I really enjoy patterns and exuming and exuming and looking into patterns. And there's a pattern of like a, there's, you'll laugh when I say this first part of the pattern. But then I'll make it make more sense later. But he fits the pattern. Well, first he's a Jack Sony and, and in that, he's a pragmatic person the way that he governs, which I liked or at least I didn't, you know, there's some things he's done recently that I don't enjoy. And, but he's also an outsider or a savior type. All, you know, I don't remember the movie, but the magnificent seven back in the day. I don't remember the actor's name. There's this group of, you know, there's this western town, everything's going to shit. These seven guys walk in. I think Chris Pratt remade it with Denzel Washington or someone else. I think so. I can't remember. But there's an old one that I used to watch from the grandpa. There's too many movies. Yeah. And there's this pattern where you wouldn't invite these guys to a dinner party. You wouldn't want them in church on Sunday. But when a system is so corrupt and so horrible, you have to rely on these types of people to come in and be a check to the system. But then also you don't want them to stick around when the system is reset. So there's a scene in the movie where he says, you know, man, these, this seven guys are talking and they said, man, these people must have really wanted us like it's crazy. They must be happy we're here. And I think it's Gary Cooper or someone or one of these guys says, it looks at him and says, they're going to be even happier when we leave. And Trump kind of fits that narrative. Wolverine from the X-Men would be another one who fits the narrative. Like, is he going to be at the X-Men Christmas party? No. Right. Is he trying to hit on Scott Gray's wife, Cyclops. I'm a comic nerd. I'm sorry. Is he trying to hit on is he trying to sleep with Cyclops's wife? Yes. Did he chop a guy's head off and throw it at a car? Yes. But we're about to go face Galactus. And we're going to need him. And so we have to put up with all of this other stuff because we understand that when their system is corrupt at every level, you need to someone who's outside of the system to come in and set the system right. It's a Western pattern as well. Other people who fit this would be like pattern, right? Mary, does cousin slap soldiers who are they really? Oh, yeah. I think it's a third cousin. How many cousins removed or doesn't become okay? I don't know. Is it third or if there's blood? If you never met them? I'm Icelandic. So I really can't say anything. Right. They literally have apps in Iceland. Like my grandparents are in my great grandparents are all from Iceland. They settled in Manitoba, Gimmley, Manitoba, which is this Icelandic community. And they literally have apps in Iceland to make sure you're not dating your cousin. So, you know, less than such a small community. Less than a million people all in one island, you know. So you're trying to prevent that stuff. But anyway, um, pattern, yeah, slap soldiers who had tuberculosis, one of them probably had shell shock. They got in a newspaper. They wanted his head and thankfully the generals were like, no, he's the guy that we need for the moment, right? He had the ivory pistols and he dressed like not like a general. He didn't talk like a general. He wasn't like a Eisenhower where he had the veneer of a general. But we knew he was the only guy we could have at the battle of the bulge. Like the Germans talked about him like he was already a mythic legend in his own, in his lifetime. Um, but the part of this pattern that people should understand or when they examine this pattern is that it never ends well for these anti heroes. They're always killed and they're always killed or defamed in the final analysis. So when the significance of his seven come in, they'll go to another town and I'll get killed when Patton retired. He died in some weird Jeep accident. Um, you know, Wolverine, he's the only guy left on this desolate like world where the Hulk's in charge and it's a horrible existence. Uh, Patton or not Patton, um, Patreus is another one. Uh, you know, I, I briefed Patreus. I worked for, not for him, but for people who worked for him in an Iraq and, um, he was the guy that got us through with the surge. But, um, he, he was really a weird guy when you would talk to him like you knew that he knew something you didn't and that he was seeing things that you weren't. But even for myself as being like a chief worn author at that time, a low level technician, he would ask questions like he got it. He didn't act like other generals. Like other generals would have their three things they want to talk about. Then they'd want to get out of dodge. He would ask questions that really had implications and, and, and he is another one of these outsiders who came in to write a system that was not working vis-a-vis Iraq in 2006. And then what happens to him when he leaves, he could, they put him in charge of the CIA. They knew he had been screwing around with this woman. And they're like, okay, we, he served his function. Now he needs to get out of dodge. And then he, now he's, you know, uh, got tried for all these things and sleeping with someone while he wasn't married. And, you know, there's, it's not a ceremonies and for these types. I saw and sorry we would have been Patreus. That's how he ended. Yeah, he was sleeping with someone girl that was writing his book or something along those lines. That's it. Well, not saying that. Yeah, I'm not saying that's the end of him. Right. All I'm saying is that history will remember the pattern is ending unfavourably. You know what I'm saying? And so when I examined Trump, I said, yeah, I don't like what he says. I wouldn't want him around my daughters. I don't want, wouldn't want him out of dinner party. But he seems to be saying these things like he's going to reset this system. You know, I think it was Chappelle was on your show or another show or someone like that where he talked about Hillary saying, uh, you know, something about the tax loopholes or whatever. And he just hit right back at her and said, well, you're the people who are funding your campaign take advantage of those same loopholes. And if they're there, I'm going to take advantage of them. I wouldn't be a pragmatist if I didn't. When he started saying stuff like that, it seemed to me like he was going to up end this system. Uh, the jury's out on that because I don't know how I feel these days. We can get into that if you need to if we want to. But, um, uh, he's an outside personality and I thought he was going to really reset the system. And there are, you know, good things that are happening. You know, if I were to grade him, I would probably give him a C plus or a B minus. Um, he's certainly better than, you know, what was happening under Biden. I was still in the military when Biden was in charge and it was awful to say the least. Um, what were the problems? Oh my goodness. Um, books that general officers were being told to read and that I as an advisor were being told to read books like white rage, like understanding why your problem, uh, you as a white man or a problem in the modern day military because, um, this whole thing's built on systemic racism. You have in built implicit bias that you can escape even if you wanted to or you recognized it is world politics. Yeah, it was world politics and it was, um, and it was, uh, you know, I would sit there and say, you know, all of the friends, all of the people that I know who died during this war, not all of them, but 80% of them and the numbers bear this at when you look at them. They're all white guys from the middle of the country who were on their farms or, you know, not all of them. 80% of them. I think the numbers bear out about 80% of them. We're these guys from the Midwest or these places where they didn't really have a lot going and they went off to fight a war that we probably shouldn't have been white fighting in the first place, especially in Iraq. And they died for their cause and, uh, and now you're saying that those people who make up the majority of the combat deaths are somehow part of this problem and that other people aren't benefiting from it. Um, I don't believe race to me is disgusting, even to talk about someone's race, even, you know, on both sides of the spectrum, when they were, you know, electing that Supreme Court justice. I can't remember her name right now at the top of my head just because I'm a little nervous still. Um, she was black and they were talking to you Brown John. Yeah, they're talking about how it's historic because she's black and binder said he's going to hire a black woman to do this job. If I had worked my whole life to do something, but not only being elevated to this next position because of my gender and the color of my skin, I would turn that job down so fast because that's not what I want to be known for. These are immutable characteristics that I'm not in control of. I wasn't, I didn't choose to be born white or blue eyes. I didn't choose to be born in a trailer park in the middle of nowhere without a data at five. I didn't choose any of those things. I don't see how I benefit from these things at the individual level. And, you know, the individual individual level of analysis for me is really the only way to evaluate someone for their pluses and their minuses and anything beyond that to me is discriminatory on its face. Of course. It's just a great way to control people because you pit people against each other that way. And it's just an awesome way that they can stay in control and make everybody walk on eggshells and think that, you know, they victimized people in order to get to their position and they have to be shameful of who they are that they had no control over. And also, there's people in easy rubric to judge other people. Because nothing's easy really and it gives them like white guy bad, you know, black guy good Chinese guy, as long as he's not applying to the college I want to get into, he's good. And it gives people one easy answers. Really, at the end of the day, they want to be told the easy rubric to navigate life because really, none of it's easy and it requires discipline like you said before and thought and and so that it was that stuff in the military. I remember getting told in an equal opportunity briefing we were getting. It doesn't matter what you meant when you said what you were saying. It only matters what the person felt when you said it. They said that in a military. It was a military equal opportunity briefing. So the example they gave was if a woman walks into the like we worked with a lot of civilians at this military organization where we're developing these offensive cyber capabilities, lots of values in there. And so, you know, woman X walks into and she's got a dress on and the thought in your head is I'd like to get my wife that dress or something like it or find out where she bought it. And you just say that's a nice dress. Anyway, here's the TPS reports. If she heard something sexual or didn't like the connotation or whatever, there's going to be an investigation. You're going to be pulled out of that office. This is all going to happen despite what you meant. So the idea probably was good. We want to prevent sexual harassment inside of the office. But it was weaponized. It was carried out in a way where it's only about how people feel and not what a reasonable person standard would be in a particular situation. And from the time I joined the military until that time we'd been at war, my entire time in the military we were at war. I deployed throughout my career. And I wouldn't say that I was a war horse. I was not a long tabber. I was not a cool guy kicking indoors. It was my job with the guy with tape over his glasses to point out the door for someone else and say bad guys in there. So I was not, you know, a super badass in that regard. I was a nerd for super bad asses. And, um, but we also all engaged in galle's humor. And we would, you know, the jokes and stuff, even someone who had recently died would make a joke about. It's because you have this tremendous pressure and comedies, the relief valve for that in a lot of ways. And, but then someone would overhear that joke or something. And now you're looking down the barrel of a 15, six, which is a military investigation. And all of these things that could permanently impact your life in a way and give you a scarlet letter to where you could never be employed again or do anything ever again, because you were simply trying to relieve some pressure or you were trying to find what outward to buy your wife in the next dress. And now you're a life-sping room. And I know guys who suffered under that sword, like I wouldn't name them, but I know guys who, you know, their career a terminal end because of a dumb joke or something. So you can't be expected to go out and shoot people in the face and then be sensitive to someone's feelings an hour later. Right. It's just, it doesn't, it does not work. Now should you talk to that guy and say, hey, you know, you made woman X feel so and so be more cognizant of that whenever you're around her in the future. Well, you shall also have a rational discussion with the woman. Yes. And what did he ask you? He said, where did you get that dress? It's very lovely. I'd like to get one for my wife. Why were you upset at that? Like, what does this is this rational? Like, how you can't be in an office if you're that sensitive? Like, it's one thing the guy said, I'd like to get you out of that dress. Okay, now we're in a different world. 100% 100% right. But if someone says you look great, you know, have you lost weight? You look fantastic. That's the, that's a compliment. Yeah. And if someone gets upset, I felt sexually objectified. I felt harassed like, okay, he just said you look great. Yeah. That's it. Healthy. It's not. You look great. I'd like to get you naked. Right. Now we've crossed the Rubicon right now. Yeah. For sure. For sure. But just you look great. Or I like your dress. That's like, if you said that to a man, like, hey, great suit. Yeah. He's like, how do you try to look complete? Yeah. I need to follow a complaint. Yeah. You've trimmed up, Joe. You're looking good. Great bill. Like, oh my God, I'm being harassed. I need it like complaint. That would have worked during the Biden administration. Fucking crazy. That would have worked. That's so crazy. And the other thing that they were doing this briefing, which is where I kind of, you know, the last couple of years, my military career, I got in trouble a couple of times or I should say called down. I was a senior, I was a CW four. I was one rank from the top. I was advising two star generals, colonels on very important matters. I wasn't high. I was a, I wasn't high in the, in the dominance hierarchy, but I was adjacent to people who were as an advisor and the, the amount of, in this briefing in particular, they had gotten into, you know, it's bad that there are so many white people. This, I'm doing high points here, but we need more diversity. I was part of a accepted career program that they were starting to call like the old white boys network because most of the people, so the requirements for the, for this network were you had to speak a couple languages. You needed an engineering degree or some kind of demonstrated engineering background. You had to have deployed. They wanted you to speak the language very well. They wanted you to be able to go through these engineering courses, these other things. And, and what happens naturally is you now need people who are interested in engineering. All right. So you've got somebody who's maybe more constrained in their thinking. You need somebody who speaks languages. Well, now they also need to be kind of, um, you know, speak French, speak Russian, whatever it was. So they had to have studied or lived in an area and done this. And they need to be able to go through these crazy tactical and strategic, strategic types of courses by virtue of those things, you're going to get men. And there are, we're lots of women, but then they'll be more white men. And it's, it's not because the, the pool presented itself that way. And now you have to extract from that pool. And so in this briefing, when they were talking about like the old white boys network or how we need to change things, I said, you know, do you realize that most men are have more in common than most women? Or like, if there's a, if I, if I say I need more diversity in a particular room, if you said diversity of thought, I'd be fine with that. But, but Joe and, you know, random black guy in the, in the same program in the same office have far more in common than the white woman. But if all, but what you're saying is these people need to have all separate different colors and different, and different, like all of this needs to be this way, it's going to naturally present itself that way because men in the military generally are disagreeable. Men in the military who like engineering are generally hyper disagreeable. And, and the, the only difference between these two people is the pigment pigment of their skin. So this fake diversity quota that they're putting on top of us doesn't achieve anything other than giving some officer a bullet on their OER. And, you know, I got pulled into the office afterward. I said way more than that, but essentially afterwards they're like, hey, Chief, you can't say that. Those briefings like the way that you were getting animated in there and what you're saying what you're doing like. Yeah, this is not going to fly. And this was like 2018 or 2019 years. This is being rational. Yeah, just trying to be rational and say that there's, there's more difference in groups than there is between groups and that the similarities and the way that things stack up, you recruit from a pool of volunteers and candidates. If I'm recruiting from a pool of volunteers and candidates who are 80% male and white, I have to expect that the selected individuals are going to be a male and white. The majority of people who join the military, I don't control this. I'm just, as an engineer, I'm looking at statistics. Also, if you want a highly functional productive group, it's got to be based on meritocracy. Yeah, for sure. For sure. Anything other than that is literally a threat to national security. Yeah, you're, you're denigrating lethality. Yeah, the role of the army is to deter war through exuding superior military fighting and technology. And when deterrence fails to win, that's it. Those are the, there's the two things that we need to do with our military. It needs to look like the guy in the playground who you would not muck about with. And if you were to muck with him, he will beat you senseless. That's it. Now whether or not we should be using that all the time or how we use it or that's a separate question. But the entity itself needs to comport itself in this way. Otherwise, you are endangering this, this truly special experiment, which at least in its beginnings, valued the individual, it valued individual rights and states rights and, and, and, and, and the founders, and this was another thing I said in that briefing was the founders knew, yes, they were all slaveholders, but they knew that the Constitution and the Bill of Rights and the Declaration of Independence would eventually lead to a system where we had to acknowledge these people as people. And we fought a civil war where a million white dudes died to see this experiment through. The scaffolding was there. You have to look at the things, the zeitgeist of the time. If they had just said, no, everyone's going to be free. There will be no slaves. You would have never gotten ratification through the southern states. But they knew that there are, and when you read the federalist papers, they knew that they were erecting this system. And when you look at Thomas Jefferson and some of these other great thinkers who, yes, the own slaves, they get it. They knew what they were building and they knew that what, what would ultimately terminate in, and then we had a civil war where we destroyed our country from the inside to see this dream come about. And now we're just going to all go back and say they're all slave owners. Like I know this has all been said here a million times, but this stuff animates me because it's built with blood and treasure. Well, it's also you can't judge people from the past based on the standards of the present. For sure. Because culture changes, people understand things better. We have a much greater recognition of what was wrong with things a hundred years ago, 200 years ago. And I'm sure in the future we're going to look back on today with the same lens. There's, it's just always works that way. Did you know Joe had a gas powered car? Exactly. That kind of stuff. Yeah. Did you know that? You consumed more. You flew more. You ate more meat. You did whatever you did. Yeah. You were a problem. He was a problem. Yeah. And and now why would we ever like I'm voting to get rid of the Joe Rogan experience from the National Archives? Because you drove a gas car? Yeah. You know what I mean? Like someone, you know, storage your stuff for a profundity sake for the future to hear about this. You know, I've always loved your podcast Joe. And it was because you're a genuinely curious person. And I'm not kissing your ass right now. You're a genuinely curious person that was saying things that were not in the current zeitgeist at the time. And you refuse to apologize for it. And let it, you know, led to a lot of great things. But it led to the and updating of the system. And you did it with dialogue with the deal logos with, you know, two people trying to learn things about each other. And it led to an updating of a system. I think it's very important for culture to have free and open dialogue so we can update our system. So bad ideas can die. So we don't have to die instead of our bad ideas. Yeah. Because if I can't express a bad idea, I have to act it out. And if I act out the bad idea, it could kill me. And the celebration of good ideas and the celebration of good ideas. And it's just really, there's just been such a weird and version in politics where the free hippie loving liberals of yesteryear are now the ones telling you what words you can use. There are no borders. All of these crazy things. And I always say to people, I said it to some fun. My last podcast with him. I'm like a 1996 Bill Clinton Democrat. If you go watch the state of the union, he talks about lowering debt, getting out of debt actually working with nuclear and goods to get out of debt, securing the borders, making work and education freely accessible. I'm voting for that guy. I know. Isn't it crazy that I mean, that's why the problem of labels doesn't work ideological labels. Because if you go back far enough and look at Clinton for example, he's one of the best one. And by the way, did balance the budget. Yeah, he did. We had a surplus when you left the office. Yeah, amazing. Did a fucking amazing job. So he got his dick sucked. Who didn't back then? That's the other thing. Judging people by the standards of the past, you know, JFK doesn't look so good in the Me Too movement. You know what I mean? He would hear canceled. Yeah. It's like you have to recognize that those this ideological bubble that we find ourselves in left versus right. Bill Clinton does not fit in that. Bill Clinton is securely on the right in terms of, you know, 1996 standards applied to today. He would never want to hear that. No, he would never want to hear that because he's kind of shifted with the zeitgeist because that's what you kind of have to do if you want to stay in your party and be protected by your party. Yes. But he was essentially, he had a lot of the, I moved talked about this before. We've played clips of Hillary Clinton from 2008 and she's more magga than magga. I know. You know, her take on the border was like hardcore. Yeah. Was hardcore. If you've been convicted of a crime, get out, you know, if you stay here, pay a stiff penalty and you have to get in line and you have to learn English and everybody cheers. Yeah. Like that is a hardcore right wing, 2026 perspective. Obama did it to in 2012. Yes. Absolutely. And Obama deported more people than Trump. Yes. Exactly. Yeah. This episode is brought to you by threat locker. Data breaches are happening more frequently than ever. And it's not because of sophisticated tactics. Attackers are using the same methods and exploiting the same vulnerabilities. What's changed is speed and scale. Reacting to breaches can leave you exhausted constantly chasing threats instead of preventing them. That's where threat locker comes in with threat locker zero trust. You only allow what you need and block everything else by default. You control what runs when, where and how blocking ransomware before it executes because no matter how you respond, a fast response simply isn't fast enough. Visit threat locker dot com slash JRE to learn more. And it's just, I'm not saying like my thought is I'm always updating, I'm always updating my systems. I'm always getting told things. I always have a pretty pre prescribed wave looking at the world that I'll have a good conversation with someone and I'll update my system. But generally my principles are in place. And when you watch these people who get in the 30s, 40s, 50s and 60s, and their core foundational principles are changing. It really should give you cause for concern because like you were saying this at this time and now you're saying this at that time. It's like generally my rubic that I don't think will change about myself is I'm fervently for the individual and I'm fervently for truth. And that we can, that the world, you should measure it and look at not what your intentions are but what the outcomes are. And then evaluate the system and how it scales based on those outcomes. Those are, that's principally if you I try to live that standard up to myself. I fall short of that standard all the time. It's probably in a human. I try to live by that standard. And I feel like that will always be me even into my 90s. Like, something goes horribly wrong. Right. Right. And I've pretty much been here since, you know, the past seven or eight years or so. Like even into my 30s, I quite wasn't quite sure who I was as a human. And, but I'm pretty, you know, steadfast in that. The amount of opportunities and the amount of goodness in my life and my children and my home and the things I've been able to do have really been born out of that last seven years of the truth is going to be the top of the decision matrix for me, the top of the hierarchy for me. I'm going to try not to cut corners whenever I can and help good people around me. And the truth is the way that I'll organize and function myself in life. And that I will try to only judge people as individuals. And the world, you know, these are Christ's teachings from 2000 years ago. And, but the world for me has just opened up in a way that I could have never predicted using a very simple rubric. It's not easy, but it's simple. And if more people just took those, and this isn't me, I didn't come up with this. This is the result of, you know, watching a bunch of experiments go bad. But if people just adopted that very simple thing and just tried it for three you'll feel better about yourself, you'll feel better about the world, you feel better about the people proximally around you. It might make you hate the government more. But I don't think if you don't hate the government, I think you're not paying attention. Yeah, for sure. I mean, when you were working in cyber defense, like what was that? That were often cyber offense. What was the the primary function? Like what did you do? So in the beginning, I have no short answers and I apologize. In the beginning, I always feel like I'm like a good longer. Yeah, I worry about that. Okay. When I joined the military, I was in signals and intelligence and essentially learning the ins and outs of radars, how radars work, what they do, how they function. You guys ever see any weird shit? Like, you're a folkship? I wish I had. I really do. I would share that too. Yeah, I really do. I was more in the signals and intelligence side of the house focusing first on electronic signals or emanations from radars, mapping them so that, you know, if we were going to go to the ground invasion and there was going to be some air support going in first and blowing shit up, we would tell them, hey, there's a man packable, S A 7 here, there's a S A 10 here, there's this here, there's there. And then telling these pilots, let in get shot out of the sky. Quickly when the war kicked off, that became irrelevant because there was no, you know, surface air missiles, surface to surface missiles and Iraq. We've knocked them all out in the first few weeks. So then it shifted to communications intelligence. So I kind of retrained on communications intelligence and that was at that time off of cell phones, off of push of talk radios, repeaters, long haul networks, terrestrial networks, extra terrestrial networks and what I mean by that stuff, satellites in the sky. off of push-to-talk radios, repeaters, long-haul networks, terrestrial networks, extra terrestrial networks, and what I mean by that is the satellites in the sky. And doing analysis on those to try to inform the, what we call the common operating picture of the battlefield for a combatant commander. So a combatant commander wants to know where the bad guys are and what they're doing, what they're saying. To the amount that we could, my job was to come up with the solutions and conduct passive and active signals analysis on these things and then inform the commander so that we could mitigate risk. It was all about mitigation of risk. This is 2008 or so. I'd been doing this for about seven years, eight years. And from there, it shifted to the phones getting smart. And essentially it went from you walking around with a 2G phone or a 3G phone that had limited capability to, now there's robust capability with the advent of like the iPhone. And now it's like, well, now we've got to get after guys who are essentially walking on with a computer we couldn't ever have been vision 20 years ago in their pocket with all of this capability. Because the military and our forces that were fighting against, it all comes down to our ability to shoot, move and communicate. Communication being the part that I was focused on. So as the advent of the iPhone and those things came out, the Army realized we didn't have a computer network operations in the MOS. We didn't have a defensive cyber component. So we kind of, I was there at the ground floor when we were building out these new MOSs now that are all over the military. But at that time, there was a thought going into, we need to have people who know how to be on it, operators. Ethical hacking is paradoxical, is that sounds? That's how the lawyers called it that. So attacking at the end of the day, but ethical hacking because you've got the backing of the US government. And so we set up that framework and really started launching into operations, 2006, 7, 8, all the way into my last deployment in 2017 or 2017. It was all focused on computer network operations and how they lash up with terrestrial networks. How do we exploit all of that? Was one facet of my job? And your question was how did I get into all of that? And that was the, that was the, how do you get into it? What was, what was the operational aspect of it? Like how did you actually, what did you do? Go, so, you know, there's all stick to terms that are more generally understood by the public, but learning how to do things like war driving, collecting on networks, Wi-Fi, endpoints, cell phones, understanding the instant outs of them, understanding how to do forensic analysis of them. So after there was an operation and a bunch of gorillas have been sent in to kill a bad guy, we could derive maximum intelligence value from the handset to plan other operations. And so, you know, it would be passive monitoring of networks to inform the intelligence picture, which would lead to either combat operations or active computer network operations. We're now, it's like, well, there's, you know, I don't know a, an Iraq year and a half ganny router that hasn't been patched in three years. And we think we can either write or find a zero day, which is just an exploit of those routers, where we can muck with their router in a way where they think they're getting good information and they're not, or they're, or erecting other things to mitigate risk for the commander. And so that really, you know, exploded at that point and between that and human intelligence, which is kind of the, the actual gathering of intelligence from other people, you know, you would call it spy or, you know, James Bond, but that's James Bond was a horrible spy. Was it? I mean, yeah, you know, your jobs to remain anonymous and you're walking into a casino and there's gold finger calling you by your first and last name. It's not a great look. You know, you generally don't wanna be sleeping with your sources or, you know, using your real name or whatever. So human intelligence. And then my focus for the last 10 years was how does signals intelligence, computer network operations become a force multiplier for people conducting overt and clandestine operations throughout the theater at that time. My, you know, my deployments and my time was spent in Iraq, Afghanistan, Africa, Northern Africa. And then the, a lot of people don't know it, but we were in active combat operations in the Southern Philippines as well for a fair amount of time. I wanna maybe say seven or 10 years. We were doing combat operations. Why was this? In the Southern Philippines. My first deployment to the Southern Philippines was 2007. Who are we doing operations again? So there were terrorist elements down there that were traveling back and forth from Pakistan and Afghanistan. And there was a terrorist organization down there called the Abu Sayyev group. And there were other ones as well, Jamal Islamia. I think was the name of the other one. And they were conducting their own terrorist anti-Christian operations in the Southern part of the Philippines and the Southern part of the Philippines. I don't, can I say it? Can I say the word? What do you mean? Jamie, can you pull up a map of the Philippines? Can you pull it up? Oh, can you see that? I want to turn it up. I'm gonna pull it up, Jamie. But listen to it forever. So there's what's called the autonomous region of Muslim Minna now, which is the Southern part from like a place called Zambwanga, down to Hulu or Hollow Island. And there's a funny joke because if you zoom in to Zambwanga, which is, God, look at me, island. I know, go down to the South there. See Zambw, go down right there, right, zoom right there on that island. Now move to, sorry, now move to the Southwest. See that penis? At the tip of that penis is called Zambwanga. All of our combat operations, now if you zoom out a little bit more and pan more South, and zoom out just a little bit more so the joke hits. All that sperm south of the tip of the Zambwanga city, this, there are terrorist operations in here. Now if you go to that main island called Sulu, or Zaloh Island, that's where I was. On this tiny island out in the middle of nowhere, and on that, there's a mountain. That's all the Philippines? Well, no, I mean, this is all the Philippines out here yet. So this is called, there's a mountain in there, I think it was called Mountain Tombah Talk, or something like that, on the Eastern part of the island called Luke, it's called Luke. Yeah, so there's mountains, there's a mountainous region there. There are a bunch of terrorists up there. They were killing people in the area, conducting bombings, they were getting trained. In fact, there was a guy and I believe I'm gonna get his name wrong perhaps. But I believe his name, it was either in salon, Haplon, or, oh, it's Jamar Pothek, Jamal Pothek. He was actually arrested outside of Osama bin Laden's compound the day after he was killed. We were trying to kill him on that island, or in and around that island is where we were trying to find him and kill him. So there are terrorist facilitators. They did the USS Cole bombing. Well, could you zoom back out, I wanna see the Philippines when we're talking? Like all the islands? When you zoom all the way out? It's so nuts, how many islands are. Yes, so big. Up north of Manila is mostly the Christian population, and as you get down south, it's the autonomous region of Muslim in now. And that is all of where these terrorist operations were happening. And I believe that mostly pulled out of there, there might be still some people in Zambuanga. I'm not sure anymore, because it's been five years, four years since I retired. But yeah, we were doing counterinsurgency operations down there, and guys died down there, and they're combat operations. And I was out there, I was in a tactical military intelligence battalion, and I was attached to the first special forces group. And we were down there a couple of times. And a lot of people don't even know about it. So. I never heard about it. Yeah, so anyway. I'm sorry, no, no. No, no. I'm not, but I'm so stunned at how many islands are in the Philippines will spread out of this. Yeah, it's insane. And the thing about it is, I go to all of these little outposts in these out islands. We're always debriefing these guys, and I'm gonna get these terms wrong. So I'm sure there'll be people in the comments. But I think they're called bongarize or something like that. But they're like these mayors of each one of these little islands. And there'd be terrorists in and around those areas. And we'd try to make friends with these guys so they'd give us some information. And every one of those places was absolutely beautiful. Like you'd go there and be like, man, Hilton could turn this into something in a short order. You know, when you're out of these places, beautiful beach, beautiful lush jungles, the best swimming water. I just people too. Oh, the Filipino people are some of my favorite people, man. Like you want to talk, the guys that we work with out there, I think they're called scout sniper scout rangers. And they were especially, I think they were like their special forces. We go to the range with these guys and show them stuff. And they're the most rider-dike type of guys you'll ever meet in your life. Like, you know, so and so said this about you last week, and I can kill them. It's like, no, dude, it's cool. It's like, don't worry about it. Like fun fact, there's some of the best pool players on Earth too. Oh, really? Some of the greatest pool players of all time came out of the Philippines. They're just great people. I mean, I just, the people down there were fantastic. And it was awful because those guys would be bombing churches, Christian churches and stuff like that. And they're doing counter-opera, like I said, counter-contelligent operations, either doing intelligence operations collection to inform that battle picture. But those guys had direct links with the summer bed and lawn and other people. Wow. No idea. Right after we, like I said, I think it was, I think if you look it up, I think his name is PawTech, PATEK. And he was arrested outside of a summer bed lawns compound. We had been chasing him in the Philippines. Wow. Because we thought he was still down there. There was another guy that we, I believe we killed him. His name was Elbaiter Parad. But yeah, my job was not, I always say this on podcasts because the veteran community is wild right now. They love to cut each other down right now. There's something weird going on where, it's like obviously lying, yeah, call the people out. I prefer to call people out face to face. But I always make sure people know, I was not a cool guy. Like sometimes I got to dress like one. You know, for a few years, I didn't wear any uniforms and I got to grill my beard out and act like a cool guy. But I was really a nerd for cool guys. I've literally got pictures of myself down in the, in the holo or in Afghanistan or anywhere else and tape around my glasses and, you know, PES dispenser and my radio and collection equipment, looking like a true blue American nerd. But I was not the guy who kicked the door in. I was always the guy who pointed the door out. So I'd be safe in the Humvee in the back, you know, eat an MRE and somebody that looked like another gorilla, you know, like an anti stone for Tim Kennedy or someone like that would be like, is that the house? I'd be like, pretty sure that's the house. You guys might want to be safe, but go ahead and I'll be in the Humvee. I'll be out here or I'll be in an airplane above, you know. And yeah, it was being born in North Dakota and, you know, my mother, single mother, after she left that first guy, trailer house in the middle of this little town called Cavalier, North Dakota. I had no options. I was a horrible student. And what did you... That's crazy that you're so smart, but you were horrible, too. I wouldn't, yeah, I would call myself curious before I'd call myself smart. But, you know, my mother, you know, I don't know if you remember, you would remember this, but maybe other people my age, you know, you get these scholastic book order forms that you'd bring home from school and you could order books. There'd always be a lot of the back page and it'd always be like little cool stuff, like you could get like, you know, a pair of gloves or a hat or something. Anyway, one time there was a coil radio that you could order with an earpiece and you put this coil radio together. And with an earpiece, no battery. It was just the electromagnetic radiation would activate the coil and the coil would, you could listen to radio chatter. Really, with no battery? Yeah, yeah, just tiny little radio. How did it, what was the power? The electromagnetic radiation. And you were just kind of like a record, like, you know how you call it? You hit a record. Leshoe magnetic radiation would hit the coil and the coil would feed up to an amplifier or up to an earpiece and the earpiece, you could hear chatter and you could just hear the earpiece have a battery? I don't think anything had a battery on it. I think it was just a, wow, I could be mistaken, but I don't believe it was by electromagnetic radiation. Yeah, I mean, you could look at a Jamie if you want. Sorry to say that again, but I'm not thinking that down. The thing's driving crazy. Yeah, sorry. This is like, like, here or here. Right here, look at my finger. This is right here. I've been meaning to do that. Like literally when everybody uses this fucking thing, it's wobbling around ready to follow up. Yeah, but if you look up coil, coil radio with small earpiece, I could be wrong. I don't remember there being a battery on it, but the magnetic radiation powered it. That's bananas. Yeah, so kind of like a, it's the same thing with like, you know, not the same wattage, but a microwave, right? Send power through the air. Right, but it uses DC. But it uses power. Yeah, send it. Yeah, but I could be wrong. But at any rate, that was the first time I got a radio. And I was hearing things and I'd put it together and I'm listening to things and things. Like, what kind of things? Hf radio, VHF radio, people talking, that type of stuff. And it was just, and then I found out how to get an antenna to make the antenna larger and started ordering auxiliary pieces for it. And then really changed me. Well, my mother, let me get a, my mother and I would clean houses. She was a waitress, but we also would go around and clean houses. And the lawyer that we worked for, his name was Phil Kulp. And he had an old 286SX IBM. And it was just sitting in his basement. And I told my mom, I was like, hey, if I clean for like a month, can I have that computer? Like he doesn't use it. He's got a new 486 up in his place here. And he instantly said I could have it. And then that started me down the computer networking realm and like, look, how could I get this 286 act like a 386? Or how could I force it to run Windows? Or how do I update the memory? How do I do these things? In this little town, Edenburg, North Dakota, there was a guy who had a computer store in a basement of an old general store. And his name was Jeff Muncibroton. And I would go there and ask him questions about computers and just start learning like ins and outs. And how do I update the RAM? How do I get memory better? How do I augment the storage? How could I force this thing to run Windows 3.1? So I could have a GUI instead of using command line. GUI mean graphic user interface. Yeah. Yeah, sorry. It's okay. So that kind of started being on that. And that for me, like I said, I had all kinds of problems with attention deficit disorder and not being able to pay attention. That was the only time I could go for. Yeah. I don't remember to leave in ADHD. I might be wrong. I think it's a superpower. I mean, it's certainly, I remember I would spend two days working on a problem and not sleeping. That's what I'm saying. I think it's a superpower. I think it just keeps you from being interested and things you're not interested in. Yeah. I have a theory on that too that I can get into after. But that started me down that road. But in school, I couldn't pay attention to this. Me neither. There was this teacher. I always tell a story. It's a great teacher. She's still around. Her name is Connie Trendbeth. And she was my English teacher or literature teacher or something like that. She might not even remember the story, but here I am telling you on your podcast. I remember it. She kept me after class once. And she goes, you know, I knew your dad bill. And you know, your uncles roll smart. And my great uncle has an engineering wing of a school named after him out in Western North Dakota. And she goes, all these guys were thinkers. And your dad did all this great stuff and built all this stuff. And essentially what she was telling me is you're a waste of life. Like all you do is you come in here and you disrupt the class. You upset people. No one can talk. I was like me. You're trying to dominate every conversation. But when you had written one paper on something that interested you, and I don't remember what it was, it's just like, that was a wonderful paper. It was like if you could just do that every time. And I was not hearing it. Like I remember the conversation because I actually remember her. I think she said waste of life. I think she actually said that. Like you're obviously, my CPU clocks high. I'm always thinking even when I'm not thinking and even as we're sitting here talking, I'm thinking about other things or stuff I want to do when I get back to my computer or stuff I want to do for my business. So I joined the military and the absurdity of life is this. I joined to be a military policeman, which I absolutely would have hated. All of them got turned into infantry people or were stand gate guard, which is a needed function in the military. But it doesn't apply to my personality. But when I went to the recruiter station out in many of the applicants, I think it was. I was a bonehead and I forgot my driver's license. And they're like, well, and I was supposed to leave. And at this time I'd dump my girlfriend, told everyone goodbye. I'd wipe the dust off my boots. Like left, cavalier North Dakota. And I was like, hey, I'm not going back. So whatever we got to do right now. And he's like, well, you can go home, get your license because the MePS station was in Minneapolis. It wasn't far ago. It doesn't matter. It was five, six, seven hours away. And they're like, well, you're not leaving today without a driver's license. So I looked at my recruiter and I was like, I don't know what job you need to get me into, but it needs to be a different job. And they're like, well, you scored exceptionally high in a general technical part of your ASVAB, which is like understanding machines and objects and stuff. So we could get you into this like Intel job where you'd learn about radars and stuff. And that immediately clicked for me. And then he's like, well, we've got to go brief you in this skiff room. There's a secure compartmented information facility. There's only one guy who's got a clearance and he can brief you on the job. And if you want that job, then you can leave tomorrow. I instantly started hearing like the James Bond music. You know what I'm doing. I'm telling you. I'm telling you. I'm telling you. And so they walked me into this back place and nothing super crazy and briefed me up on the job. And I went back out and I said, yeah, this is actually the job for me. So the absurdity of life is me forgetting my driver's license when I was 16, I was 16 when I signed up. Maybe 17. No, I was turning 17 that December. When I signed up for the military, I can connect with a string to forgetting my driver's license to being here with you today. You can sign up when you're 16. I think I was turning 17. You can sign up when you, I didn't even know you could sign up on your side. I didn't sign my delayed entry program thing. And I left a little bit before my 18th birthday. So I was graduated from high school. But yeah, you can sign up when you're 16, I believe, as long as your parents signed the waiver. My mother signed the waiver. She's happy to get me out of that trailer. So yeah, I was 17, almost 18 when I went. I got you a radio out of that. Yeah, right there. So that's all the pieces. They called it crystal radio. Yeah, I was gonna say crystal controlled. That's a radio. There it is. That's actually the exact thing. That looks almost, that is almost exactly what a little link he made it. Well, they bought the brand. They just, like the slinky brand now. Oh, I think there's a bunch of these all over the internet. Yeah. Wow. Make your own working radio without bad or. Yeah. And it uses a, I was gonna say crystal controlled radio because it uses a crystal diode on it. Would you say Tesla coil Jamie? We have to test the coil. We have to test the coil. So this thing has a kind of cool to me find this thing. A rocket radio they called, which is like further development. This thing, it attached to a phone. Oh, you plug that onto a phone key. there's a picture of it somewhere on here. But it explains like you're picking up. There you go. Wow. The power. No battery are current needed hence no operating expense and long life. Yeah, this is on to a phone. What year was this? Man, this is old. Yeah. So it also shows here. This is like you're picking up power from a radio tower. Yeah. Wow. And they're powerful to signal. This is cool like what they're paying for. the FCC the more powerful your radio tower, the longer and more people you can reach. Crazy. There has no battery. And that's also why some radio signals come in very well on your radio and some don't. And it's like dog shit. Yeah. I got a weak power. Yeah. And then the frequency modulation. Like amplitude modulation isn't as efficient as frequency modulation when it comes to for the vocorder to produce sound. Amplitude modulation travels farther, but it doesn't have the amount of information. It's not modulated with the carrier away. It can't be modulated with as much information as you need. Whereas frequency modulation is much quicker. Megahertz. And you can amplitude and add more sound or met more information, which is why it sounds better. So FM sounds better, but it isn't travels far. Right. And it sounds worse. I always, when I was training people in the military on this, I always use the analogy of, if a party is happy next or you can hear the bass music, which can't hear the treble. You can hear the bass music because that frequency travels farther because it's lower in their frequency band. But you can hear the treble, or you can't hear the treble. I'm sorry, because it's higher frequency. And there's more modulation. And so it disperses quicker. And you can't hear it as well. And it's the same thing with like VLF comms coming off of like a submarine. You can travel underwater for a very long ways. But you can't put as much information in them as you could if you were doing VHF or UHF comms. Where there's lots of modulation. So it's the dispersal. And a lot of my mid part of my career was explaining this stuff to military guys who were trying to understand like, here's how a cell phone works. And this is how frequency works. And this is how we send information and just kind of demystifying how a GSM network works. One of the things that I wanted to ask you about that is when new technology is emerging, how do you stay ahead of the ability to extract information from this technology, hack into networks before people understand the capability? You really can't. You really can't. And that's the beauty of the free market. Is that the innovation to perform the function that you want someone to pay for will always move faster than your ability to exploit the technology. Then how do you explain things like Pegasus? Well, I mean, something like Pegasus, well, first off, explain Pegasus to people that don't know. It was a persistent implant on cell phones for people. Initially, it was you had to click it. It was a clickable. Initially, it was click a click. And then it became a non-click exploit. So in other words, you had to interact with something on the phone in order to initialize and install the implant. And then after, but the reason why it was so good is because it wasn't stored in the, it wasn't stored in the usual areas that you would want a persistent implant. For instance, you might want to put it in the application layer of an app or something like that, where there's a binary that can run and execute commands or functions. And so they, I won't get into the very specifics of where and how they did this, because I'm not sure if I got this information from the government or not. I won't say it. But they stored it in a place where it wasn't normal. And you can read papers on your own and look at the forensics of it and how the actual implant was executed. But it essentially, you know, all of the people that own your phone and, you know, was the kind of implant I only dreamed of when I was helping to develop my own plants, implants in the military. Mostly what we would rely on is zero day architecture and looking for something in a phone that either they hadn't patched or that the phone that you are looking at hadn't been patched. So phones as they have their own red teams are going through the phone for their own, because they want to sell a product that people will use and people won't use stuff that can get hacked. So they'll do their own red teaming. And they'll discover like, oh, you know, we, we, on this router we developed, we left this port open and it shouldn't have been open. So now we're going to write a patch that will close that port. So this port is no longer accessible by a guy like me. so I can't go in there and do something to this particular type of router. Another great thing, I'll say something good about the administration. They're doing some stuff right now to make sure that we're getting rid of Chinese technology and Chinese routers. And, you know, there's a widespread network of the PLA has, and I can't remember the name of the botnet, but they essentially implanted a bunch of old unpatched routers to get access to government and business proximal people. And it was widespread and huge. And, you know, they, it looked like to me, I haven't read this anywhere, but if I were looking at this implant and how it was done, they were trying to really cause some trouble. It was being placed at critical places, think power, think energy, think banking. Like they really wanted to cause some ruckus. And I've not been part of this administration, so I'm not saying anything classified for those of you who are listening. And so, but there was a decision to say, hey, we need to make sure that these things get patched, and also that we're not bringing in architecture from the overseas, because they don't play by the same rules that we at least say we play by. But that's why they banned Huawei devices. Oh yeah, ZTE. Yeah. Well, Huawei had a phone that I was really interested in back in the day. They had a Porsche design, had partnered with Huawei, and made this insane Android phone with like the best camera, the best battery. It was like really high level. And I was like, gonna buy it. And then all of a sudden they banned all the Huawei phones. And I was like, what's going on? And then I'd heard some people say, oh, they're just trying to stop competition. It's like American companies are trying to stop it. And then I went into a deeper and I said, no, it seems like there's third party input on some of the routers and some of their network devices, that they had engineered in order to be able to access them by third party. And this because of whatever, lack of understanding, lack of knowledge of how these things are constructed, the people that purchased them didn't, weren't aware of them. And these things had gotten into place. And they had gotten into place in universities, they got into place in military establishments. They were using them in cell phone towers that people had inadvertently bought from China. Yeah. And that's really, I mean, I can tell you firsthand from having done some other forensic exploitation on this stuff. Another large part of my career didn't talk about what's just on mobile forensics and media forensics, which is essentially, you think of like CSI Miami or CSI, whatever the city was. There's a crime, someone was killed. You have forensics that are doing forensics on like blood and fingerprints and blood splatter and all that stuff. There's a whole another part of that same forensics branch that focuses on media forensics. What was deleted off this phone at one point? What remains on this phone? What was it being used for? I would do this in the military so that when we did do an operation and I was part of some of the largest ones ever done out in Afghanistan, there would be treasure troves of phones and all of these computers and stuff like that. And it was my job and I had a great team that worked for me. In 2015, we would go in afterwards, gather up all of this stuff and this task force commander would literally be standing by and we'd say, here's the intelligence that we've derived. Here's the multi-point analysis. It was on this hard drive, it was here, it was here. There's a bad guy placed out here and those guys would be rolling within moments after the last operation. Some operations we'd be rolling one after another target because we're getting really good at media forensics and the intelligence that was there and then getting into active media forensics, which is a different discipline but essentially I'll get an ekna that later if you want to. But launching and doing these following operations off, dumping the binary from a phone and examining it at the ones and zeros level to say everything that was going on with this thing or if it was a really high like the organization that I worked for at that time did the analysis of the summit bin Laden media. And on that media we're doing far more than we would for another piece of media and that we're x-raying it and we're looking at maybe what the disc looked like before or what was destroyed or reconstructing things. Spending millions of dollars on that intelligence analysis because we wanted to fully understand everything that the sky was involved in and what he was doing and where he was and who he was talking to. And so that was another part of my career that I did for about five years or so. What was going on with the Huawei phones? Like what were they doing with them? I mean, there were some of them were coming out implanted in other words there was access built in for a foreign actor and then in other terms, other places with routers with the ZTE stuff. There were just things that you would patch or that you would fix as a company who was trying to protect the consumer and create a product that would people you would use and they weren't doing it. So they were creating persistent back doors either by actively placing code on there that would allow, you know, root access or they were leaving things open, especially in Africa like the work that, you know, as working in Africa, the Chinese were just owning Africa. They were just giving them communications infrastructure and they were doing that because they wanted their resources and they wanted to know what these people were saying and what they were doing. And so. giving them communications infrastructure. And they were doing that because they wanted their resources and they wanted to know what these people were saying and what they were doing. And so I'm a free market, real, like I'm as free market as a guy can get. I want the best people building the best products and I want everyone to be able to compete. But in that case, I would never own a Huawei or a ZTE or anything else. On a consumer level, what were they doing with those phones? Like if they had imported them to the United States, if they didn't have that band, what would have been the issue? Getting access to any number of people that the Chinese really want access to everybody. But you could start at the topical level of just saying, you know, getting Joe Rogan to use a ZTE would be, that would be my wet dream is a guy you used to do this work back in the day because you're talking to the president or you're talking to this guy or that guy. And I can build out a network of understanding who you're in contact with, who you're talking to, what's being talked about. But then also finding out, you know, this person's phone number and now doing a deep dive on there. So it's really about, you know, getting all of that data and constructing an analyst notebook essentially outline of who's talking to who, who do we need to implant? But it's for business as well. Like they're really trying to go, they would want this in the hands of somebody who's in charge of a business because they want their IP. They would want this in solders hands, so they would know deployment dates or who's going where and who's doing what? They want this in routers because routers are usually the most unpatch piece of technology in that, you know, especially, you know, these days are more automated patching. But back in the day, like you had to manually update a router, if you didn't, well then you had potential exploits that were sitting on that router where I could gain access to the router in your home or I could gain access to a BGP router, which is like a board of a gateway, which is moving all of the internet data where I could get access to a microwave terminal, you know, if you look at a cell phone, you've got the microwave terminals on there that are setting information in between them. If those are Chinese parts that are either being used for the processing, the CPU or the physical infrastructure of that, the products that they were putting out would give me direct access to the information that's being passed on those terminals. So you're getting, you know, system level access through machinery, through communication devices and through things like routers where you can know everything you wanna know about your enemy. Wow. And so as far as today's technology, you use an Android phone. Like is there a phone that is more secure or a platform that is more secure? It all depends, like I always take this from Thomas Soul, there are no answers, there are only trade-offs. So there's like the way to answer that question would be is like who are you? What are you trying to do with your life? What are you talking about on your phone? What are you doing on your phone? You know, most of these phones, if you're just an average everyday citizen, you're just going about your job. You know, the phones say are pretty secure, especially versus a few years ago. If you're a reporter, now that come to the next, this is do you trust the government and do you trust Apple? If you trust the government, you trust Apple, then Apple's probably your best bet. For using an, you know, there's lockdown mode on an Apple phone or they used to call it back in the day. I think it was called reporter mode, but there was ways to encrypt the devices and to encrypt the chatter and the tunnel coming out of the phone, the RF coming out of the phone. And what is lockdown mode? I don't know if that's exactly what it was called or not, because I've never really used Apple just for my own personal reasons. What personal reasons? I don't trust Apple. How so? They are more interested in monetizing people's data than they are providing them capability. So every time you take a photo, every time you upload a document, every time you talk to it, every time it asks you about your, you know, you'll get these questions where it says, if you're to password's lost, you can back up your password in these ways. Tell us where you were born. Tell us your mom's maiden's name. Tell us your mom's name. Lockdown mode is an extreme optional protection. It'd only be used to believe you may be personally targeted by a highly sophisticated cyber attack. There you go. There are people who are never targeted by a tax of this nature. When iPhone is in lockdown mode, it will not function as it typically does. Apps websites and features will be strictly limited for security. And some experiences will be completely unavailable. Yeah. So when I was advising guys back in the day on going out and doing like a high risk source meet. So we're going to go meet, you know, aspire for another country. Then you're a military guy and you're debriefing someone or doing something. I was always telling them to use lockdown mode. I knew that it did those things. I didn't know if that was the term or if I thought that. So can you still set eye messages? You can still text and call. Text and call that's it. But there's other things that you can't do. And so when you're like meta, just recently announced they're no longer encrypting your DMs. Why would they do that? Well, they said that it's for protection or whatever to make sure that people are doing bad things. I don't know what. See what their explanation for it was. Well, I'm sorry. I'm worried about this reporter. I'm sorry. It's the word meta. Metta recently announced that they're no longer encrypting your DMs on Instagram. And a lot of people are up in arms and they're stopping using any DMs on Instagram and any of that stuff. And the idea is that other people can read your stuff now. Now, whether it's meta can read your stuff or who. That's what I mean. And I said, why don't you trust Apple? It's the same reason I don't trust meta. They're not interested. The dangers behind meta killing end to end encryption for Instagram DMs. Metta-blamed users are not opting into the privacy-protecting feature. Experts fear the move could be the first major domino to fall for end to end encryption tech world. That's horrible narrative. Yeah, it seems squirrely. So, oh, you've read your last free article. Oh my god, give me money, motherfucker. But what Apple and meta want to do is, like they're trying to build these new neural networks. They're trying to humans, and we can get into this too later if you want. Humans are the only thing, in my opinion. And I'm happy to have you to disagree with me. And I love to have this conversation. In my opinion, we're the only ones that are, after May 8, 2026, announced plans to discontinue support for end to end encryption for chats on Instagram. You have chats that are impacted by this change. You will see instructions on how you can download any media or messages you may want to keep. Social media giant said in the help document, if you're on an older version of Instagram, you may also need to update the app before you can download your affected chats. When reached for comment, this is what meta had to say. Very few people are opting for end to end encrypted messages in DM, so we're removing this option from Instagram in the coming months. Anyone who wants to keep messaging with end to end encryption can easily do that on WhatsApp. But WhatsApp is a little squirrely, right? WhatsApp. Yeah, I mean, they're all squirrely. And that's the problem. And so you ask me why I don't trust them. It's because they want to, they want to, so humans, in my opinion, and some animals, are the only things that have the ability to protect consciousness and projecting consciousness is how you train a neural network. And it's how you train all of these large networks that a lot of my time, also in the military, spent our, I was doing artificial intelligence in 2012, 2011, like before it was even a catch term, we were using artificial intelligence to map dynamic networks and to do other things. More pragmatic uses of it than how it's being used today with large language models or convolutional neural networks. But they need consciousness to train their models. So when Google offers you meta or Instagram or whoever else offers you photo storage, it's because they want your face to train neural networks. If they're going to pay for the compute, if they're going to pay for the storage for these things, they're doing it because they're going to use the data. If you're getting a free app in essence, any free app, any, if you're the product's free, then you're the product. So when Google is allowing you to use a Google drive and get a gig of storage, they're going to use those photos to train neural networks to do better facial recognition. What if you're paying for Google drive? I don't know about their terms of service now. That is one of the best things that I use with large language models is any product I download, I have the neural network examine the terms of service. And then you can pretty much understand like, here's my focus. Here's the 40 page terms of services document. When you click that link that you got, what are they able to do with my data? So that's how I sign up for apps. And that's one of the great uses of a large language model in my opinion is to quickly understand what how these things are being used. And that's why I say with Apple, with meta, with all of these large information, you are more of the product than the products, the product. And that is because they're trying to build the most powerful, capable artificial intelligences, which I think is a misnomer and again, we can get into it later, but they're trying to build these hyper competent artificial intelligences. And you need two things for that, really is training data and you need compute. And that's why you start seeing them coming out with like meta's billing. It's own nuclear engineering facility or something, a nuclear facility or something like that. And they need more, they need more training data. So if I want to build a replica of Joe Rogan that I can make hyper realistic AI videos for, I need every picture of your face from every angle, I need every wince, every squint, everything you've ever done. So I can introduce more training data to better train that neural network in order to generate more hyper realistic versions of yourself. And so when a company's offering you something for free, and it's fine, like if people are fine with that idea, then by all means download all the free apps that you want. But if you're downloading a free app, it's because you are the product. They either want to see how you type, they want to see what you're saying, they want to see how you're thinking about things, they want to understand your political biases, they want to look at your photos. And this isn't because they're a deep-seated nation state actor. They can become that, but it's because they're trying to build the best products because the big money is in AI. That's where the biggest money is. So anytime you're doing any of these things, and it's just been obvious to me from the onset, pretty close to the onset, that, yeah, this is a good example, right? Pokémon Go players built a 30 billion photo map. That's how training robots deliver your pizza. There you go. So, you know, they view, and they can say they don't. And maybe if someone from their catches this podcast, which they well could, they might put out a statement that saying that that's not what they're doing. But I'm telling you as a person who has done media forensics, who has done computer network operations, and who is trained, artificial intelligence models. That is precisely what they are doing. That is, there's no, what is the difference between using Apple and using Android? Well, Android will do the same things, and Google will do the same things. It's just that I can root my phone, or I can install a custom operating system like graphene or something like that, which I'm not doing right now. I had to make a sacrifice when I started my company, Spartan Forge, and the sacrifice was, I had to be the face of this product. And so I never had a social media until I started the company. And I didn't upload things to the cloud until I started this company. And it became just like, I have to sell a product. I have to, you know, and I'm actually selling a product, not people's data or people's photos. I have to sell this product. I have to let people, people often don't know who is the company or who is the organizing principle and what do they care about in the company. And I just made that trade and said, I'm gonna have to become a public person and start putting things out there. So, you know, I started a company, we started our first Instagram, and I started my marketing team, started my first Instagram. And I had to start uploading things and talking about how I felt about things because I wanted people to know that this company was not going to be like the other companies that are out there. We don't sell their data, we don't sell emails. I can make half million dollars off my email list tomorrow. And I've been offered that money. You know, we've got millions of emails from people who signed up for our apps. Other companies who are starting companies, they want to go out and reach marketing people. So if you're starting another hunting app, maybe for cameras or for a call or a trick you call, or an alcohol or something, and you have found Spartan forgies, I think about 2 million emails. I could pay them a half million dollars for that 2 million dollars and start some top of line marketing, top of funnel marketing, and go blast them. So they'd pay me a lot of money for those emails. I will never do that. I'll never sell my company's emails, the people's emails, I'll never do any of those things, because the product is the product for my company. It's not the people. So the reason why you use Android over Apple is the ability to root it and install things like graphene. Yeah, custom OS's and all you don't use it. I'm not now, but what I still can use and what I still do use is Android also publishes their framework in an open source fashion where you can look at the end. It's called A-O-S-P, Android open source project. So the basis of Android, the nuts, think of it as the nuts and bolts. I'll try not to talk in two technical terms here. But the basic framework, think about it like a car. The frame in the engine makeup is published. So you can look at how things work on the inside. Apple goes the opposite way, they don't publish any of that. You can't see any of that stuff. I'm for the free and open version because at least if I'm worried about my phone having a problem, I can actually dump binary or I can create Neo one file and exhume. I can look at the binary and say, is my phone acting like it should or doing what it should? Or is there some kind of persistent implant? I wouldn't be able to do that with, I would have to trust Apple and Apple's ecosystem and whoever they're Macafe or whatever they're using. I would have to trust them, which I don't. So I like the Android because that option available for the average consumer that's not that learned in computers. Well, the great part about large language models now is if you wanted to dump your own phone today, you could follow along with a large language model and do it, your own Android. And how would you do that? Well, you would have to buy some expensive, there is something, you'd either have to pay a firm to do it or you could download things like a celebrate, you could get a celebrate, or there's other things called forensic toolkit, other things like that that allow you to examine your phone at a deeper level. And is this an app for their products? So it's a physical product that you have to dump your phone into? Yeah, and they're software. And they're connecting and all that type of stuff. Tools I used throughout my military career, celebrate was one of them, but there is really owned. I've got nothing against Israel. I've just got everything against foreign actors. Just if they're not an American company that automatically kicks them down a level for me. So anyway, there's all kinds of, Android just makes it much easier to examine your phone or to understand if you've got something going on that's funky than it is on Apple. So for the average person, like for me, like if I get out the average person. Well, let's pretend that. If I got an Android phone and I wanted to examine my phone, what would be the process? You would download some of the software that I talked about, you would jack your phone into it, you would open your phone, and then it would start carving the binary of your, everything in your phone, it would start, you could create a one-to-one emulation of your phone if you wanted to, and then you would be able to get under the hood and examine the apps, you would be able to examine the binary, what's the executable code? You'd be able to look at all of those things and then determine because Android open source project is published, you could do a one-for-one and say, well, at the kernel level, there's this weird code that's not in the Android build. So what is this code? And then with the neural network, you could probably, I've never done it, but I'm sure you could figure out what the intent is of that code, even for a layperson. So I could take that information, I could put it into perplexity, and perplexity would lay out what's going on with it. I stensively would be able to use, unless it was some type of weird code. I don't know if I haven't used perplexity, so I don't know if they have something like chat GPT's codecs, but... I'm sorry, I just tried to be like, can you help me examine my Android phone as doing looking for any malicious actors? Yes, I can walk through structured, non-destructive check for malware, other shady activity on your Android phone. A first, what are you noticing? For tools, commands, quickly check for common warning signs, sudden big battery drain, we're not using the phone, unusual data usage, particularly in the background, apps you don't remember installing, or icons briefly appearing and then disappearing. Lots of pop-ups, redirects and browser, or new default search launcher, strange calls, SMS messages you didn't send yourself. If any of those ring a bell, we'll focus on them in later steps. You're just asking, like, why do you want to do that? So this is just something that you could do with an Android phone that you just can't do with the app. You can't do it. Apple's not open. So what other reasons you don't trust Apple? Well, could I ask, can I do one thing before you remember that question, because I want to forget it? Could I give you a prompt? Sure. Because I want to answer your first question before it had gone past. If you can you bring perplexity back up, please. You're going to go to edition of that or start new one. No, this is fine. Just say, my friend helped me carve an EO one file, EO, E, Echo, Oscar, EO one file. And he says that there is code in there that doesn't comport with the rest of the Android system. Yeah, PRT, the rest of the system. Could I dump that code here? And could you tell me what it means? I'm sure the answer is yes, but I just didn't want to answer it, because I've never done it. Could you tell me, could you tell me, Jeremy? Could you tell me what it means, yeah? Get the U out. Get the U. Tell me U. Could I have some of your coffee, please? Yeah, absolutely. It's for you. OK, let's see what it says. Yes, you can paste a suspicious code here, and I can help explain what it would appear to do, line by line, and whether anything looks malicious before you paste few important notes. Remove or redact anything that looks like private data using these types of keys, tokens, IPs, email addresses, phone perplexities, our sponsors. I love that. Because you'd never get that from chat GPT. You'd want all that information. Proplexities to shit. And so you're not sharing personal or case sensitive information. Wonderful perplexity. If it's very long, send in chunks, and tell me chunk 1, dash 3, chunk 2, dash 3, et cetera, so we can help keep track. I can do static analysis here, read and reason about the code, but I cannot actually execute it in a sandbox. So this is more like a careful forensic read through than a full dynamic malware analysis. Go ahead and paste the code snippet. Your friend flag does not fit in with the rest of the system. And tell me in a sentence or two, where in the EO1, it came from example app folder, system partition, random file path. Yeah, exactly. So yeah, I thought that would be the answer. I've just never done it. And so you can do a forensic examination of an apple, by the way. Sorry if I misspoke there. But you can't do it to the level that you can with, because the Android open source project publishes all of the code, I can get an understanding of the very inner working. So if something's being done, for instance, at the kernel, or you could think about it, it's like the lowest level of the phone, something that wouldn't normally get caught in a forensic examination, I wouldn't be able to do that with Apple. So and the nation state actors are doing things at very low levels in the code framework for that exact reason, because most people who aren't very deep into forensics would miss that. It'd be like the fingerprint under the couch cushion or something like that. And what is the difference between what someone can do with an Android for phone with the standard Android operating system versus gravity? So that gets into, if you wanted to war drive or sample Wi-Fi networks in an area, or if you wanted to run a barrage attack on a Wi-Fi endpoint, you could work that in there to do things with the phone that you couldn't otherwise do with a standard Android operating kit. But as far as on a consumer level, what protections do you have by running graphene that you don't have by running Android? Much more in control of the ecosystem, you have a firmware understanding, and again, you could use a large language model to do this, to understand exactly what's being run on the phone. You control the background services that can be run on the phone. So if you're getting hot, Mike, or if you're camera-staking pictures of you and you're not looking or it's listening to you for advertising content, stuff like that, you would be in control of all of that in a way that you're not control of on a native Android app. In controller, how so would it alert you that this is happening? Or just the functionality wouldn't be there for it to take place? Right, because the functionality is it's only designed for the standard Android operating system. And I haven't installed graphene in a while. So a lot of us, all of us updates and I could be saying things that are incorrect. My data, I stopped doing this about three years ago. Well, I know that there was, I forget what country it was, but they were focusing on people who use Google Pixel phones, for example. Yeah, because that's because that's one of the phones that are more commonly rooted. Yeah, it's easy to do. And you could do it with a large language model. You could sit there and be walked through and how to do it, which is a great, you know, part of that is it complicated? Like for a person like me, that's not that astute. But no, it's not something I would do with a phone that you care about the first few times. Right. Because you're going to jack things up. You have to, you know, get the bootloader and essentially the starting, you know, the starting mechanisms of the phone that launches all of the other things. You have to get down to a level and unlock that so that you can. Is that available for all Android phones? No, no, no, Android phones. Lots of them lock it down so you can't do that. Is that available for Samsung phones? No, not this one. You can't. So the question has to become, can you lock unlock the bootloader? And that is the starting, think of it as the starting engine of the rest of the phones. Why isn't only available on Google Pixel phones? I'm not sure why they do it that way. I haven't looked into that. It was just pixels and the older Samsung's made it available. Older Galaxy S7s S10s. You could do more than you can with like, you know, I've got the Galaxy Fold here and you can do almost none of that on here. That it's not good. Sweet though. Yeah, I love this phone. But like I said, I went away from doing all that A, because it was work. B, because I'm not working in national security anymore. And I'm not, you know, I haven't written in exploit in years. I don't do this type of work anymore and I need to sell a product. And it just, you know, working with other employees like that, run my Instagram or, you know, assistant going through my email and all those other types of things. It just wasn't pragmatic anymore for me to keep doing that and I didn't get that part of my story. Does the fart towards your app or run on graphene? Yeah. Well, it could. Yeah, it would. load the app. But again, a large language model could walk you through doing that. So we haven't gotten to that level of. Does it make sense here that this says it's easier because Google makes it easier? Yeah. He was just asking me why they make it easier. I don't know that answer. That's, I mean, so the process is officially supported in the Android settings under developer options, allowing users to toggle OEM locking, simple fast boot method pixels used standard fast boot commands that work consistently across all models to unlock the boot loader accessibility. Yeah. I was talking about it. So yeah, I don't know why they do it. It might be people can, well, the Android open source project exists. So it would stand a reason that you would want a way for someone because what you want is people interacting with that code and red teaming it and making the code better and then offering, you know, bug bounties so that you can tell Android like, hey, you've got a critical flaw in your system or architecture here and then they'll pay you 20 grand for that. I've got friends who do that. So you and I talked about Eric Prince's phone. Yes. That which is so the narrative is that that is an unhackable phone. Yeah. Just by virtue and look, Eric's a wonderful guy and he's the principles that he used for the first instantiation of phone are the correct principles, which is we need to get if you want, if you're security focused at all, you should get away from these big large conglomerates because none of your data is private. That's a correct principle. An incorrect principle and I'm going to get shit about this, but I told you the beginning I care about the truth and I do care about the truth is that when you're using a PKI subsystem that relies on Microsoft, then you're not control the PKI of certificate signing and Microsoft could cause a bunch of problems and they were using that. So the other thing being if you're building on the Android open source project that means the code that you're using as the engine, let's just call it that of your phone, is exammable by the public. So you're relying on Android to publish these updates to the phone and you're relying on those things to be as good as possible. Now you might harden it some more, but as long as the code is out there, it can always be mucked with as long as people have to interact with the device and type and you have to see what you're typing, a phone's going to be, it's going to have Swiss cheese. So when people say something is unhackable, as you said, that's just not true. Yeah, it didn't make sense to me. Which is right. Not true. Yeah, we talked about it quite a bit. I have, like I said, great guide and lots of great things for the country and it's just, if they had just said something along the lines of it's hackable as any phone is hackable because by virtue of you having to interact with it, it's hackable. Just like if I came up with an app that had a, you know, look at the TikTok terms of service on the first TikTok bonkers. With those terms of services, I will own your phone and I'm not saying you can install TikTok on his phone, but what I'm saying is by virtue that you have to interact with the phone and see what you're doing and type passwords and you've got those kinds of terms of service, I can easily put a key logger in that and now I know your signal password or your signal pin or, or, you know, I get you, you know, you're going to China so I stop you in secondary and while you're in secondary, I've got a CCTV on you and you unlock your phone. Now I know how to unlock your phone. Now I'm going to lock you up in second, secondary at, at Customs and China or in Canada and I'm going to separate you from your phone and I've seen you unlock it. Well, now I'm going to get in there with, in case, or I'm going to get in there with FTK or I'm going to get in there with, celebrate and I'm going to dump your phone and, and just by virtue of it being built on the Android open source project, that's a great thing. It's a good thing. Just don't call it totally unhackable because a guy like me, we, I don't need, but a week or two to tell you on this current build like here, here's the whole on this Swiss cheese. Now is it far better than having a Google phone with standard firmware, standard OS or an Apple phone? I don't know about Apple because, again, you asked me about Apple and I said, I don't know Apple. I don't know what's happening at the top of that company, but I know that they like to monetize people and that's pervasive in my mind. And using data that people don't know is getting used, even though it's in a 40 page terms of services document is pervasive. So I just don't know at that highest level of analysis. And that's why I said to answer your question about the safest phone, I would ask you what you're using it for, who you are and what are you doing in the world. That's the best way to answer that question. So me, like what would you recommend I use? I mean, I wouldn't want to, I mean, okay, I'll tell you generally what I would say because you might ask me that question one day because we go back and forth about a lot of tech. I know specifically what I would recommend for you to do and I'd even tell you to hire someone else to do it not me because that just that checks and balances is what I would want. For you, I would say you should take something like a raspberry pie and you should run wire guard on your phone and you should route all of your internet traffic through something like a home terminal at your house through a raspberry pie using something like wire guard, which is a VPN that I use that's very good. And everything should be routed through that. And if you trust Apple, continue using Apple. If you don't trust Apple, then use Android and you could use a pixel and do graphene and you could use signal on there and those other things, you're going to be relatively safe. But again, if I'm a nation state actor, I can create circumstances where I'm going to get access to your shit and I'm going to lock you down. And there are some of them are more expensive than other methods to do it, but I'm a pragmatist and you can always come up with a method to get a whole assembly shit. You can always create the circumstances, especially if you're a nation state actor, to get a hold of somebody's stuff. That would be the very high level of things that I would recommend to you just out the gate. Yeah, it's very concerning because it seems like these things keep getting stronger and more capable. Yes. Like the Pegasus too being a non-click exploit. Yes. So all they have to do essentially is just know your number. And that's, you know, you just make yourself a difficult target would be my best recommendation. When you're going to answer questions about password reset, don't answer them honestly, write down at a physical journal or something, how you answered those questions. Don't answer them honestly. All of these things we think are added for layers of protection. For instance, you used to get that pop up on your phone where it said, you know, there'd be like blocks of pictures. You know, all of these things we think are added for layers or protection. For instance, you used to get that pop up on your phone where it said, you know, there'd be like blocks of pictures. And it would say, click all of the pictures with the traffic light. And I was just going to say that a traffic light in it. Part of that might be for security. The other part of it is they're using the information of what you're clicking to train neural networks. You're a product at that point. You think you're getting security out of it, but you're a product at that point because you're helping to educate a neural network on what traffic lights look like and how they can look, and all those different instantiations of traffic lights. So and again, like we have to separate causality and intention and outcomes in that the companies might do this because they want to create the greatest AI ever. But when you're issuing someone a 40 page terms of service document on everything they can do with your thing that you paid $2,000 for, it's just, you know, we need more ethical people. At least what Eric Prince was trying to do was write, which was we need to offer him from some of these big things because the way that this government is going, I'm very worried about the rights of the individual now and going forward because we have an uneducated class of people for all of the reasons in the world. Like if you want to just focus on your family and not thinking about these things, I don't hate that for you. The idea of individual autonomy and rights has been so shit on in recent years that where this, when we get more uneducated and we rely largely with models are great, but they're not a foundation of learning. In other words, we have a lot of people with access to information but no wisdom. It's like when your parents would say learn how to do addition and subtraction on paper before you use a calculator, like understand how to do research and site sources and understand how to conduct really good analysis before you just use a neural network for everything. Because as we lose focus of our civics and what our founders are trying to do and the uniqueness of it, which is truly unique, which is when I joined the army, I joined the army to get out of North Dakota. When I really listed in the army, it's because I believe in the experiment and that's another five-hour podcast. The foundation of the experiment is good, but we've eroded it in so many ways over the years and given up so many individual rights in the name of security. I'm sure it's been said on here before, but Franklin said anybody who gives up their individual rights and the name of security deserves neither. Your freedoms in the name of security deserve neither. And it's some of the ways that they've done it have been really above the surface. Frankly, blows my mind that we let the government get away with some of these things that we let them get away with, where you even explain it to people and they're like, I don't see it. I don't see how that was a big deal on them. It was a total recalibration of the system that allowed the democratic party and the Republican party to usurp your rights in a way that if you knew any better, you'd probably be protesting. Some of the ways that they've done this, we can go with the easy stuff, like the Patriot right. And the name of security, we're going to start collecting on Americans. You know, and the Biden and Obama administration, I will say this at risk of, you know, getting in trouble because I used to have clearance. They had a massive vacuum cleaner and they knew what it was vacuuming up and they kept vacuuming it up any way in the name of security. I'm not saying they're going after American citizens, but they certainly knew they were and they just vacuumed shit up and collected it and stored it in a database. In case they need it, in case at some point we needed to, you know, come up with a narrative or get rid of somebody who's inconvenient or whatever else that just flies in the face of individual American rights and American autonomy and is really in my mind the anti-pattern to freedom. It's just really, really bad. I mean, I'll give you one that people always crap on me whenever I talk to them about it. One of them being like the 17th Amendment, do you know the 17th Amendment of the constitutional? So 17, so when the founders, when you read the Federalist Papers and the Federalist Papers, I really love reading the Federalist Papers. I love reading how they informed the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, the Declaration even, John J, James Madison wrote these documents explaining the framework and the 17th Amendment, essentially how the Senate, the Senate, right, the 50 people there that are supposed to be representing us was originally constructed, was a state would have legislatures and the state legislatures and the governor would appoint the Senator. The reason that the founders did that was because they, the state governments had to give power to the federal government to exist. Back with the articles of, what articles of confederation, confederation, is that right? Articles of, I think it's the articles of confederation, I'm blowing up, sorry, I'm going nuts. Before there was a strong centralized American government, we had problems with money, we had problems with interstate commerce and those types of things. And those articles, eventually turn into what is the Constitution. But the states had to grant that power and the signers of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution knew that the states needed to be those small projects that we talked about before where if California wanted to go nuts, let them go nuts. But it shouldn't impact what's happening in Texas, it shouldn't impact what's happening over in New England, it shouldn't impact what's happening in the Midwest. If that goes nuts and fails, it needs to fail. So the state senators, I'm sorry, the state legislatures would come together and they would vote for a Senator, they would elect a Senator. And that Senator's job was to go to the federal government and protect the rights of the state. Not to protect the rights of individuals per se and certainly not to embolden the federal government. But what the 17th Amendment, what happened was the House of Representatives function was to be the petulant children of government. So their job was to come up with crazy ideas, crazy laws, all of those things. The more liberal version of government jurisprudence would be the House of Representatives, or crazy ideas. And then you had state senators who were supposed to be between the House and the president who would say, well, here's a good idea, but the rest of this is retarded AOC, like we're not doing all of this, that's crazy, or whoever else named a Republican who's an ass hat as well. We're not doing these things. And that's because it would erode the state's rights and the state's constitution and what made this state great. Because what the legislators would do is say, hey Joe Rogan, you've made a lot of money and you've got a big podcast and a big voice and you've learned some lessons around the way and you're able to do that in Texas and you decided to come to Texas because we had all of these things that California didn't have. We need you to go to the Senate for three years or six years or seven years, whatever it was back then and represent those same principles. So when Obamacare comes through, you can say not only no but fuck no, like I'm not voting for this thing. And it was to protect the state. But what the 17th Amendment did was it was redundant with the House of Representatives, which was in the founder's eyes, the only popular vote part of the American government was the popular vote. And then you had the way the president gets elected through electors, but you had the state Senate, which was appointed by the states. So the legislators, and I'll use North Dakota where I'm from, you'll have one big city, two big cities, Fargo and Grand Forks, North Dakota. I'm sure the universities are, it's where your crazy kids are, crazy thought exists, hyper crazy ideas, but some of them are useful. The rest of the state's agriculture, right? So all of those legislators from all of those counties, those legislative districts, we would get together and say, we're going to put Bill Thompson, I've never happened, but in charge, or you can be at the Senate representing North Dakota. But he has to represent the whole state. In other words, you can't do things that will help Grand Forks or Fargo, because that's where the universities are, that's where all of the crazy politics are. You also need to be thinking about the guys out in the Western counties, the LaMoor County, North Dakota, or way out west. You have to protect agriculture. You have to protect small businesses. You have to protect families. What the 17th Amendment under Woodrow Wilson and how they really usurped the constitution and then made the Senate a redundant, they made it a redundant House of Representatives and using the popular vote. Now we use popular vote for that. If you want the popular vote North Dakota, 85% of the population is in Fargo and Grand Forks. So now you've got, if I want to run for Senate in North Dakota, I'm just going to spend all of my time in Fargo and Grand Forks. If I can repeat back to those people, all the ideas that they want to hear, I'm going to win that vote and I don't have to represent those people out in the rest of the state and anything. So they created a redundant House of Representatives, but another reason why it happened was they wanted popular vote because there is no amount of money that you could stick into a legislature out in the western part of North Dakota. You can't bribe these people, but the DNC and RNC now can say, look, there's two senators are running. We like this guy, so this guy will do whatever we tell him to do. And it has nothing to do with the state or representing the state's rights or the rest of those legislative districts. We're going to pick this senator and he's getting $300 million for his election bid. And this other guy, he's, you know, a slow removing constitutional conservative who might be a free, you know, market absolutist and a classical liberal. He's not being funded. But under the state architecture, you might have been a better representation of the state. And that's why the legislators had to vote for you to put you in as a senator. You had to represent the whole state. But now, all that someone who wants to be a senator and needs to do is go to the Republican National Committee or the Democrat National Committee and say, I'll do all the things you tell me to do. Fund my campaign and I'm going to go stump and Fargo and ground forx North Dakota and the hell with the rest of the state. It's very important, it's a very important slide of hand. And when that happened, you made it. We'd done it House of Representatives and the state no longer was protected at the federal level. And what happened was all of the power from all of these states and these legislators and these individuals got sucked up into the federal government. And then after that, you see all of these things that would never have been passed by a state getting passed, things like Obamacare, things like the Patriot Act, certain war resolutions, all kinds of things where it just further erodes the power of the state. And federal government wants that because it puts all of the power up in the federal government. And people always say, we need to get money out of politics. No, we need to get power out of politics. That power that they've taken over the last 130 years or so used to exist at the state and local levels because they wanted these thought experiments happening where we could pluck the best things out of them and forget the rest. But all of that power has now gone up to the federal government and the federal government won't ever release that power and they only want more budget and more spending to execute that power. And that's also because the interest groups that want to go, they don't want to have to go and convince a whole state of whether or not something is good that people are going to vote on. They just want to go take a lobby and go up to the federal government because they want all of the power up there as well. And the federal government wants all the power up there as well because they make $300,000 a year before they become a politician. And there were $30 million when they're done being a politician because all of the money has to go to the federal government because they're in charge of light bulbs we can use, computers we can use, flush toilets we can have, how our roads are going to look, what our medical care looks like. None of those powers are explicitly written in the Constitution of the United States and they use things like the commerce law and other things in order to create things like Obamacare where really we want competing states if Texas comes up with a great way to do health care and North Dakota isn't so great they can look at that experiment they can adopt the principles and they can have it at that level. But it's much easier to get change at the local level when the power is derived from the state and the individual because if I want to change the way that my state does health care have one of two options or three options I can run for office I can support someone who is going to go into office and do what I want or I can move. But when everything's centralized at the federal government and everything flows from the federal government all of the money power and gravity is up there and the individual the 300 million of us or so have real really no power now to exercise either states rights or individual rights at the higher level. I hope I'm elucidating this correctly but it's a real use or patient of individual and state autonomy that really got rid of state power which was if you read the federal papers was so important to the founders that there was the state that the states needs were organized because the state was where the founders wanted these thought experiments. You read Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan or John Locke or Montesquieu all of them talked about this great experiment that was being set up and how it was built on all of this western politics and everything that had came before it on how we could have a government that was forced to respect the rights of individuals and allowed for these competing think tanks of ideas that the power would never rest at the federal government but the 17 amendment was a way that a lot of that power went from the state level and the state legislatures and now to become the president they want to do a popular vote and under a popular vote you would just have to campaign in New York and LA. You would get the popular vote out of the likely voting people and now the rest of the country is not and that would be another you hear all these people saying we need a popular vote we can't have the electoral college we can't have all of these things everything needs to be pure democracy allows 51% to rule 49%. And that was another thing the founders were working fervently to get away from and that's why we had an electoral college and it's actually quite beautiful when you actually read about it and examine it. So why we had the state senate and state legislatures and this is why we had the house. We had all levels of the things of government that the founders cared about being represented in this body politic and it was a beautiful thing and I could go on for 15 more things about that I won't do it for the state could be listeners because I doubt this is what they wanted to do but similar things happened with the Supreme Court Marbury V. Madison and allowing the Supreme Court to have judicial review that was never a thing that was in the constitution and the Supreme Court. If you like the Supreme Court being able to have the power to describe everything is being either constitutional or unconstitutional then you're not ruled by a democracy you're ruled by an oligarchy. You've got eight people in robes that are going to tell you whether or not laws are good or bad and that's not the founding of this country is not how it was intended to work. That all started back in Marbury V. Madison with Thomas Jefferson and these rich and man Davis that were the Supreme Court long story short essentially granted itself the power to conduct judicial review under the old system or the system, the system that was ratified and that the founders approved was if a law was deemed unconstitutional it would go before the Supreme Court and they just went rule in favor of the person and then eventually the government would figure out oh this law doesn't work but it was never on the Supreme Court to say constitutional unconstitutional. You would get arrested for some law and it would get appealed to the Supreme Court the Supreme Court would say we're not punishing this person this is against the constitution but the government would have to keep arresting people and have to keep going in front of the federal government. So what I'm saying is I'm sorry to go off on this we can go back to tech but all I'm saying is the core of the American experiment in individual rights and what makes this country so great and why I was willing to die for it after my initial enlistment and why I have such love for this is because it was the only experiment where the value of the individual was held at the top of the hierarchy and that people could truly be allowed to flourish and in 250 years we did more that any society could have hoped to have achieved in tens of thousands of years not that it's been around that long but in thousands of years everything tends towards disorder and everything power always gets centralized and we had a framework to do that but we were willing participants in our own demise and now we're scratching our heads and wondering why there's no individual and why there's no individual autonomy why I can't smoke weed on the weekend or why I can't do x y or z because we have centralized the authority and the power and the decision making structure and we're allowing them to be there would be no problem with money and politics if the federal government had only the powers that were outlined to it in the constitution I think that's very well said and I could have never said it the way he said it and I think there's a lot to absorb here I'm sorry no that was great dude it was great I'm this is one of the things I love about you very thorough yeah there was one thing my friends always say Bill's Tism is starting to show you got to touch the Tism but I think that's good like I said they just like ADHD I think it's a superpower a lot to absorb so I think we're wrapping up right here but thank you this was an awesome conversation I really appreciate it was really great yeah we could do this again to I'm sure yeah I'm in 30 or 40 of these we didn't even get to AI I wanted to get to AI because I think I have a very anti pattern to AI and how you understand it but we if you want we can save that for another time yeah we'll do that for our next one because I think that's another four hours yeah probably yeah yeah sure and by then who knows where it's going to meet Jensen Jensen whoying from Nvidia recently declared that we've reached AGR yeah so I would I would yeah I could yeah I just couldn't disagree more and I think I could in the same way I just at least you're not the only one I'm just a lot of you people yeah yeah I mean it's consciousness projection and I'll sum it up in a minute at the end of the day neural networks are mathematical functions they rest in you know waiting neurons based on training data and applying power to train models it's all mathematical there's no sense of knowing there in that you know Penrose I've read a lot of on is or co-R if people can read about that I won't explain it or orchestrated objective reduction and how the mind works in these fleets of consciousness that we have these shimmers of consciousness that we have based around what you know he describes in the microtubule we get conscious thought and that conscious thought we project into things AI is very good conscious projection but well it will never have consciousness or knowing because it has no system of values and if we were to instill values and it would still be consciousness projection you saw my dad's cabin my dad died when I was five but I bought it back and was working on it and inside of his cabin I got to learn a lot about my father by working on the cabin that he built we would measure things cut things right on walls and that type of stuff that's all consciousness projection that allowed me to get to know him away I might not even even known him if you were alive but I got to re-experience some understand my father and his thoroughness through that cabin AI is consciousness projection is projected consciousness it's getting very good but on a calculator you could get the same thing out of a neural that you get out of a neural network if you had sufficient time I could present you a question just like you did on perplexity I could sit here with a rule book and I could type in a calculator it might take me a million years but I could do it and I could give you the same answer that a neural network would give you that doesn't mean consciousness or knowing or AGI's presence is present it relies on its training data it can only give you what the training data gives it it it needs human consciousness projection like we talked about with the captures or we talked about with uploading photos to Google Drive it needs that training data and to me it's just really fancy clever math and having trained these networks from dozens of years or dozen years now and working with them they're just really clever consciousness projection and so yeah that is four hours and we can do that next time we'll do that next time but if people we you mentioned the act of time we do it next time who knows what the fuck is going to be going on with AI too yeah but if people want to learn more about me or my company it's spark if I can say that yeah please it's part and forage.ai we're built on a rubric of individual freedom I want people outdoors I want people hunting I want people experiencing nature I want people providing for their families the best part of my days and my kids are eating a backstrap a renanable that I took and I want to enable people to go out and do that even though it's paradoxical through an app you can get lost you got a conserved time you got to desk out you got to learn things before go out there so we built this company under that it's one of my I've got three other companies that I'm doing but Spartan forages the one that I'm really awesome out really working on why I really appreciate that we've really got to work into it and we've got a lot more coming over the summer so if people want to support us or want to get out there and get some hunting done please check it out and I answer all the Instagram DM's so if you want have a question for me good luck with that now I tried to I spent about two hours every morning doing it but uh good luck thank you Jill for having thanks brother appreciate you very much yeah hi kids and all right you two bye everybody