And you can't say it. We just met, but when our relationship starts with a lie, it makes it tough to be friends. So let's pull that back. I'm happy to explain what I do today. You actually can't say it because I didn't say it. The whole point of your question was to be like, you're a scary racist. And my response is, no, I'm not. OK, well, how about no more lying in your questions than I'll answer it? This is the same theory, or as you say, idea that has inspired the New York Buffalo shooting where 11. Oh, God. Come on. Today, Julian Assange was released after 12 years, 12 years in custody. And your government did nothing. The UK made it possible. And the United States demanded it. You tell me how it's consistent with the rule of law or democracy. It's not. Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome to the stage the one and only from the United States. He just for us, Taka Kaulson. Thank you. I try not to listen to intros, but we got the most famous journalist in the world, I thought. Is that really a compliment? It's like being the hottest Supreme Court justice. The best restaurant in Waga Dugu, not sure it's a prize that means that much. I'm a little ashamed to be a journalist, but I'm grateful to be here. Thank you very much for having me. I've loved your country from afar, my entire life. I've idolized Australia. Actually, I haven't been here until a week ago, but I had this view of Australia in my mind. I've handsome brave men fighting off dangerous animals of beautiful women standing windblown in the surf. And it's all true. So I really have loved it. We've been, I think, to five cities and I've just been completely and utterly impressed. And really sort of the only downside is I've given speeches in a lot of them and I felt guilty during everyone because rule one of being in someone else's country is don't talk them about their politics or something awful about that overbearing. I lived in Washington, our capital city doesn't, it's actually not so different from Canberra, weirdly. I guess all capital cities are the same, but we would get this sort of continuous retinue of foreigners showing up to lecturers, Bono showing up. And I always think, go back to Dublin. You know, like, what do you know? You're not even an American. So with that caveat, my apologies for having anything to say about your politics, which I don't really understand except in the sort of grossest terms. But the Assange news today just had me thinking so much about Australia. Congratulations, by the way. That happened when I was on the plane and my jaw was open for the rest of the flight this morning from Perth. It's something that I think anyone who knows anything about the case and that would include most Australians is thrill to see. Anybody who knows anything about that case and believes that Assange should still be in prison is your enemy, by the way, in the enemy of human freedom and flourishing. It was monstrous that he spent 12 years locked away for exposing other people's crimes. Typically the way it works, I don't know if law enforcement is the same here, but the guy who discovers the crime doesn't go to jail. It's the guy who commits the crime goes to jail. And that's been inverted in his case. So I think it's wonderful news as you all know. He's in Guam dealing with one of our colonial magistrates. I didn't know even when he had those, but we do apparently in the United States. And then he'll be flying here where he was born. And my impression is I was texting with his wife this morning. My impression is he plans to stay here for a while. And so I think that's a huge net benefit to your country because he's a good man. I know him. I visited him a few months ago in Belmarsh prison and saw how they were effectively torturing him to death. And what I didn't realize until I got there, even though I've been steeped in the case, I know his relatives, I know his wife Stella, is that he was never charged with a crime and great Britain, never. He charged with no crime. So in the free world, we don't hold people who haven't been charged with a crime. And we don't hold them in my country beyond a year unless they've been convicted of a crime or they're on trial for a crime. That's just the most obvious abuse of human rights. And I went on for 12 years. And he's an Australian. And I'm sorry, I don't mean this is a criticism. Just I think it's a perspective providing observation. But like, why did anyone allow that? He was held in the UK on behalf of the United States, which by the way until it recently had to charge him the crime either. And when it did charge him the fake crime under an ancient statue that no one has ever charged under, the espionage act, which he pleaded guilty apparently. Finally, yesterday, he didn't violate it, but he just wanted to get out of prison before he died. But he wasn't charged in the US. He wasn't charged in the UK. He was an Australian. And those three countries are aligned more closely than countries typically are. They're three of the five eyes, as you know. And nobody did anything about it. And I kept thinking like when is Australia going to send a warship up the Thames to get their guy back? I mean, what is that? I don't know if you've, I mean, the outrage of it. I've been to London a lot recently, and now I've been in Australia for a week, and there's just absolutely no comparison. And I do think it's very important to update our files, which is to say our perceptions of things are very often way out of date, in some cases centuries out of date. And I think the perception, perhaps here I can't speak for you, but around the world is there's this, you know, the mothership, Great Britain, that gave birth to all these other successful countries, including the one that I live in, and that it somehow has like moral authority as a result of that. Well, if you haven't been to London recently, book a ticket. And then fly back here. In fact, why don't you just fly from London to Perth, assuming there are direct flights? And ask yourself, what do I notice? One city is crumbling, it's filthy, it's been so misruled by the people in charge that unless you're rich, you can't live there. And you come back to, and that's not an exaggeration, go to London, seriously. And you come back to Perth, and I know everyone makes fun of Perth in Western Australia. But as an outsider, I mean, it's like San Francisco without the junkies. It's one of the prettiest places I've ever seen in my life. And I thought, I don't even know who rules this. I don't understand the details of the politics. I'm a foreigner. But whoever is managing this place day to day is doing a remarkable job. They're very few cities in the world as pretty as your cities. And I know that you're so isolated. And just far away in this other hemisphere, you might not have perspective on that. But some of the capitals that you read about, and in some cases, genuflector, consider superior, take orders from, have no right to give you orders. Because they're in no sense superior to you. In fact, they're inferior to you by a lot. And London is at the top of that list. So I guess my bottom line advice and I mean this in this, you know, spirit of generosity and humility, but is, you know, understand how impressive Australia is in comparison to the rest of the world, particularly the English-speaking world. Australia has advantages that the rest of us, the other for the five eyes, can only dream about. You're sparsely populated. 26 million well-educated, decent people, law-abiding people. You have virtually no real poverty, no concentrations of poverty in this country. It's like the most middle-class English-speaking country left in the world, which is a huge component. That's what you want. It's basically egalitarian. Country egalitarian countries are stable countries. You know, Bolivia's not stable because it's, you know, pyramid-shaped. This is pretty flat. It's the last flat country economically in the English-speaking world. And it's natural resources, you know, dwarf everyone else's. I mean, I do think one of the great lies that we in the modern world have been told is that prosperity is generated by banks and real estate. And that's it. The money lending is the engine of prosperity. And in the short term, that of course can be true because it juices that, you know, that mysterious thing we call GDP, which is to measure of economic activity. But over time, it doesn't actually create wealth. That's a lie. So it creates wealth is productivity. And what's required for productivity are resources. And you have more resources than virtually anybody. Boxite coal or gas, nickel, copper, lead, uranium, more than almost anybody else in a country with almost no problems, except the ones that you allow your leaders to intentionally import. And pretty much nobody lives here. I just flew over, you know, most of your country this morning, there was nobody there. Sheep, dingos, desert. And I know, you know, a lot of it's in hospitable, but I mean, just people from crowded countries, which is most countries in the world. Look at this and they in envy. This should be one of the most powerful countries in the world. In fact, by its nature, it is because it has more than almost anybody else. And so to take orders from some disgusting, filthy fog soaked rock in the North Sea, holding one of your citizens hostage because they sent your ancestors here as a penalty. I mean, at a certain point, I think you need to say to them, I'm sorry, it's 2024. We're in charge. You're taking orders from us. And if it, you know, I mean it, actually. And I shouldn't say this because I know that there are members of Parliament present, but maybe you should take your refugee budget and buy a nuclear weapon or two so people take you seriously. I'm not joking. If you don't screw this country up on purpose through mass immigration, which is what the other four countries have done, that's the reason they're in decline. No one wants to say it's true. If you don't do that, Australia will lead the world because you have every advantage. And people are happy here. And so my strong advice to you is don't go the way of your cousins in our countries. I mean, Canada, of all countries in the world, I would say Canada is the closest in its sort of essential facts to Australia. It's huge. It's actually bigger than Australia. Second biggest land mass in the world. Amazing natural resources. An incredibly nice, polite population, well educated with a history of valiant war service. You know, sort of everything you would want. A little boring. That's good. Exiting countries are wildly overrated. Las Vegas is exciting. You wouldn't live there, right? There's something to be said about a country whose main forms of excitement are molesome and then sled dogs. That's not bad. And that country basically killed itself through bad leadership. They completely changed the population of the country in 10 years completely and made it poor. And now people get by houses there. The economy's in free fall. People who are born in Canada cannot buy house, period because there are just too many people. And I'm sure some of them are great people. Anyway, just to be completely clear, I'm utterly sympathetic to people who want to move to my country. For example, we led in 30 million people illegally in the last four years. That's a crime. But I'm not mad at them. I'm actually flattered by it. They want to move to my country, of course you, because it's the best country. That's how I feel. It's like someone saying your wife is hot. Yeah, I think so too. You can't have her, but I'm glad you appreciate it. I mean, honestly, that's how I feel. I don't encourage any immigrant from any country wanting to move to the United States because I love the United States above all. I am American. So it's not a question being mad at immigrants. I'm completely sympathetic. I can't wait to get back to my country. But that doesn't mean that the movement of millions of people, mostly with low skills and no native command of the language and no shared culture that people already live there, doesn't mean it's good for the country itself. It's not good, actually. It's bad. It's the most destructive thing you can do to a country. That's not racism. That's not hate. I'm not racist and I don't feel hate. I feel true compassion and empathy. But the purpose of running a government is to take care of the people who are citizens of that country. There's no other purpose. It's not to save the world or change the global climate or whatever. And it's certainly not to spend a huge percentage of your budget on refugee resettlement. It's to take care of the people who are born there. That's your job in the same way of father's job is to take care of his children, not the neighbor's kids. And there's something almost beyond dereliction of duty in not doing that. In other words, I've fortunate enough for example. And if a couple of them were in real trouble, as people in all of our countries are, the native born population in actual trouble, one of my kids says leukemia, for example, another one has a drug problem. And I say, that's tough. I'm really sorry, but the neighbor's kids literally have never been a Disney world ever. And that's just wrong. And so I'm going to take my retirement account and cash out and take the neighbor's kids to Disney World. Because everyone should have a chance to go to Disney World. See ya. And I leave. And what's the message I'm sending to my own children? I hate you. I'm ignoring your problems because I'm focused on the problems that people who aren't in our family. It's kind of that simple. A leader's sacred responsibilities take care of his own people. Period. Period. There is no other response, but that's why he's elected. That's why he's in charge. That's why your dad doesn't mean you don't like the neighbor's kids or think they should go to Disney World. Everyone should go to Disney World. But the priority has to be if your dad, your kids, because you're their father. So if you're the prime minister of a country and you find yourself spending all of your time worrying about the populations of other countries, you are not a legitimate leader. Period. By definition, we have someone in our country sort of said that out loud. I thought it was whatever, leaving aside any other quality, being orange or whatever, whatever qualities you think Trump has or doesn't have. That was his core pitch in 2016 and there was sort of no arguing against it. Like how was that wrong? How was a leader's job not to prioritize his own people? Of course it is. No one can make a rational argument against that. So they don't. They attack anybody who raises questions about it. And in the rest of those other countries, including mine, they're starting to criminalize complaining about it. In other words, this is a great thing. And if you say otherwise, we'll put you in jail. They're planning to do that here in case you don't know. They've absolutely done that in Canada in the UK. They put a lot of people in prison for complaining about it. Hey, I don't think you're taking care of the people who are born here. Shut up, racist, you're going to jail. Actually, every week people get a jail for that. Imagine that. Imagine that. And imagine the mindset that allows that. If you are telling people, human beings, adult citizens, that they don't have a right to express what they believe. What are you saying? Well, what you're saying is I don't think you're human. Because the right to say what you think pre-exists government, it's something that you're born with as a human being. It's what distinguishes you from animals and slaves. That's the core of your human autonomy. The right to say what you really believe, to express your conscience. And if you no longer possess that, you are not human anymore. You belong to someone else. You are an object. And so any leader who tells you, you don't have a right to say that. You don't have a right to criticize me or my policies. That person considers you subhuman. And that's a crime as far as I'm concerned. We shouldn't even have that. And by the way, my country, we have an explicit law against that. That is the first amendment to our Constitution, because ours is a revolutionary country. And so the framers of our founding documents were forced under gunfire, actually, to think this through. We're building a country from nothing. What do we want? But the founders of the other four countries, big countries in the Angles fear, you New Zealand, Great Britain and Canada, I honestly think they never imagined a world where leaders would strip from people their most fundamental right, the right to express their conscience. I don't think they imagined that possible. They were Christians. And sort of key tenon of Christianity is God created people. We didn't. Therefore, we're not capable of owning them. That's the abolitionist movement was based on that idea. Christians in the West ended slavery around the world. They haven't gotten a ton of credit for it in recent years, but they did. Of course, there still exists in parts of the world. But it does not exist in the West thanks to leaders who had a, I mean, I've been devout Christians and it wasn't a sectarian question. It was a more fundamental understanding of the world. You didn't create people. You didn't endow them with their rights. God did that. Therefore, you can't take them away. And if you try, then you are not treating them as human beings, but it's something less than that. And I honestly think that people who wrote your founding documents just assumed that and didn't think it would ever be challenged. Well, now it is being challenged. And my strong advice to you, and I said I wasn't going to weigh in on Australian politics, but my strong advice to you or any human being who wants to preserve the most secretive his human rights, would be to resist that up to and including being willing to go to jail for saying what you believe. Because if they can strip from you, you're right to say what you think. There's literally nothing they can't do to you. There's nothing they can't do to you. So in any case, I will stop there and take your hostile questions. But I just want to say, as an outsider and as someone who is seeing all of this fresh after spending literally 50 years dreaming about Australia, I don't know why. Every American's obsessed with Australia, do you know that? Any of you who are single looking for dating opportunities come to my country? Is that you? You can't imagine. You would just tear a swath. It's the accent. No, I'm serious. You're absolutely obsessed with Australia and it's not just crocodile Dundee in that horrible chain restaurant. I haven't seen a blue man onion since I've been here, by the way. I don't think that's a native food. Coming here really has shocked me. And I thought it was nice. I didn't know it was this nice. And I hope that you know how nice it is as compared to places that you think are great. I mean you just have amazing advantages. And if you want to know what can happen, if you take those for granted and allow your leaders to act against your interests, the interests of your children and of your nation, then go to San Francisco or New York City, previously great cities that led the world that are now pale limitations, sad, dangerous imitations of themselves. And ask yourself, especially in San Francisco, which does look like an Australian city, those of you who have been there, go there now. And remind yourself this could happen to us. Problems like that are actually pretty easy to avoid. You just need to make common sense decisions like, I don't know, put your own people first, enforce the laws already on the books. Don't put up with absolutely ridiculous behavior, like defecating on the sidewalk. You don't need to put up with that actually. That's not a human right. Just stick to those. The problem is that when you allow them to fester, they are pretty hard to fix. Actually, you can get into a vortex. I've traveled to an awful lot of countries around the world and met a lot of really nice people and smart people who live in awful countries, awful countries. We've been to Argentina. Everyone should go to Argentina. Because Argentina is a lot like the US and a lot like Australia and Canada for that matter. It's a beautiful country with great people, really smart, impressive people, a deep culture, natural resources that places like China, dream about. And as every advantage, and they got into a spiral of self-hatred and bad rule and allowed a series of leaders to just absolutely wreck the place and wreck their spirit. And when you wreck people's spirit, it's pretty hard to fix that. So if I were Australian, I kind of wish I was Australian, actually at this point. I love your language. I love your profanity. I love your sense of humor. I love the aplomb with what you deal with dangerous animals. It's also impressive and cool. But if I were an Australian, I'd wake up every single morning and say, I'm an Australian. Right? I'm an Australian. I'm way more impressive. And when Great Britain on whose behalf you fought from 1900 in the Boer War all the way through Afghanistan, the number of Australians who died at the command of corrupt leaders in Great Britain is unbelievable. Australia, I was just reading this because I've seen all the, the digger monuments around and I'm really interested in that. And I was reading yesterday that Australia in the first world war lost 1.2% of its entire population in that war. Its entire population. The casualties he rate among Australian troops in the first world was 68% killed or wounded, highest in the world. The United States by contrast, and we commemorate the first world war on this day, 0.1%. So you gave disproportionately to that in every subsequent effort on behalf of other countries, which is a selfless and kind thing to do and you should be lauded for it. But I think, especially with the Assange stuff, that's just a sign that it's time to act on your own behalf and defend your own country. And I hope that you will. Thank you. How good was that? Can we just give another round of applause to our special guest? We, we are going to do a few question and answers, but I'll start with the first one, Tucker. Obviously, you've interviewed many people. Who's the most challenging and why? People I've interviewed? Yes. Well, I've interviewed some true lunatics. I've interviewed a lot of drunk people, people who have anxiety attacks on camera live. I've interviewed an awful lot of politicians where you just feel like there's something so dark coming off them. You know, you get that feeling like I'm not really sure what you're into and I don't really want to know. And I'm pretty sure drinking human blood is part of it. You just, ooh, you get that feeling? I mean, honestly, if I'm being honest, I think Trump is one of the hardest to interview. And I love Trump personally, actually, and I agree with him on so many things that I'm certainly rooting for him. Now, the Department of Justice, Justice in the United States is trying to take him out of the presidential race on utterly fake charges. So I'm totally for Trump in those ways. But he's difficult to interview because he's what's the word discursive sort of goes off in other directions, which very often are hilarious. So you go in there with a set of questions like, you know, like, you do the full little dorky journalist. I got to ask him about this. I got to ask him about that. And you get to about midway through the first question, he's off. Wow, I did another thing. And you just sort of realize, oh, my job is not to get my questions answered. They won't be anyway. Just enjoy it. Sit back and think of England. So yeah, that's difficult. Unless you, sorry, I shouldn't have said that. Excuse me. Unless you approach it with the right cast of mind, which is just let it go. This is a kind of performance art. You're in the middle of the installation, you know what I mean? So I'm interviewing him soon again. And I'm really looking forward to it. I mean, I'll see one last thing. It is, I mean, I've been doing this for 33 years. It's the only job I've ever had. And my views on it have changed really dramatically. And my views about my coworkers who I despise have also changed dramatically, despise more than really anybody in the world. And that's a heartfelt sentiment too. I'm not just saying that I really mean it from the bottom of my soul. But my views on it have changed. And I think that one of the mistakes that journalists make, a lot of them are insecure and mediocre as people, which is why they're in the business in the first place. So they can suck up to power and feel strong when they're weak inside. But one of the mistakes they make when they go into an interview is they're thinking about the people back in the newsroom and they're trying to impress them. That's the real audience for the interview. And so you see them ask these questions, these inherently fruitless questions, all of which are designed not to elicit information from the person being interviewed, but to illustrate the journalist's moral superiority over the person he's talking to. Well, is it true, Mr. Putin and you eat children? I do not eat children, but you do. And he sort of asked for wonder like, does the guy expect Putin to be like, well, it's funny, you asked, I do eat children actually. And you caught me, you caught me. And I'm going to tell you now exclusively that I eat children, of course not. The whole point is to let all the other dummies back in the newsroom at ABC News or NBC or whatever, these ridiculous absurd totally discredited news outlets. To let them know that the journalist is brave. And I feel at my advanced age at 55, that's actually kind of not my role. That my role is to elicit information to the extent that I can for people watching. And in the case of interviewing someone like Putin about whom I do not have strong feelings, by the way, I should say, I still don't. I'm smart, interesting, very Russian, I'm very American. You know, my goal in that interview is not to let people know Putin's bad. They can decide for themselves. They're adults. Don't anybody tell you who you have to hate. I decide that. I'm an adult man. I pay my taxes all decide who I hate. What do you think? I'm your dog? No. You know, if I hate Putin, I can hate Putin. If I like Putin, I can like Putin. It's completely up to me, not up to you. Okay. So anyway, but my job is just to, they haven't heard him talk. It's even get him talking. Just get a corpus of information out there from which they can make up their own minds. And I took a lot of abuse for doing that. Oh, you're his puppet or what I will shut up. You know, the holy was completely ridiculous. And in point of fact, I mean, they've told me to hate Putin for the last four years. I've never figured out why. I mean, I don't want to live in Russia. I'm not Russian. They don't have the freedom of speech that we have in my country. Therefore, I don't want to live there. It's kind of that simple. But I don't know why I should be mad at Putin. Great Britain doesn't have freedom of speech. Do you know what I mean? So like, if you really think about it, I'm mad and should be mad at people who have hurt my family. People are like wrecking my country and driving inflation up to a point where my kids can afford houses and filling my neighborhood with people who aren't from there and who are hostile and making our country completely shattered the social fabric has gone. Who did that? No. Joe Biden did that. So if it's a question, if the question is, who is a greater threat to your family, Vladimir Putin or Joe Biden, would you ever call me a racist? What are you even talking about? I don't have any feelings about Vladimir Putin. This guy's a lunatic who's wrecking my country. So again, don't tell me how I'm supposed to feel. I reserve that right for myself because I'm a free man. It's that simple. Thanks, Taka. I saw a couple of our friends from the press gallery have a smile when you were getting into the free press. So I might ask Paul Sakhal from the Sydney Morning Herald to ask a question. Great. Thank you. You've almost thanks for your speech. Of course. Thank you. Thank you. The media can be extremely negative. So it's nice to hear our lifting comments about our country. It's an amazing country. It is. And I think we forget that in Australia oftentimes. I appreciate that. I just pre-empted my question on Putin Putin. Putin. I think you did strategically because you knew it's what we'd ask. Putin. He's so bad. And I also appreciate that. Did he make you take the COVID shot? Take the what? The COVID shot? No. He didn't. Sorry. Sorry, sorry, sorry. The COVID shot saved probably tens of millions of years. Oh, yeah. Yeah, definitely. I'm probably not really. I'm not. I'm not times more. I'm still here. It's like a time capsule. It's like you're like the last Japanese soldier on Okinawa. You think the worst still going. Sorry, I'm sorry. I'm being poor. I'm getting the full answering with that interruption. OK, I beg your pardon. I'm interested in your position on Putin. Many people in this crowd would adore conservative prime minister in this country, like John Howard, Tony Abbott. Mainstream right wingers, like Boris Johnson, Australian liberals, some of their MPs are in the crowd, vehemently anti-pooten. They believe he's a reprehensible figure who doesn't believe in the values of conservatism, such as the rule of law and democracy, which gives us the freedoms we have in our country. I'm interested. Do you feel any level of shame or regret that you were termed a useful idiot? And then post your interview, Vladimir Putin himself said in his Russian media that he was surprised at how weak your questions were. And he also said that you were wrong when you said that no other journalists had asked to interview him. He said, that's not true. We only thought Tucker was the only person to report fairly. I thought that you were describing Putin as a psychopathic liar, and yet now you're taking his word for things. Do you? I mean, let me just let me just quickly unpack your absurd saluliqui if I can. First, I'm stuck on the idea that Boris Johnson is a right winger. Do you know Boris Johnson? I do. Boris Johnson is a criminal buffoon who, like so many, who claim to love Ukraine, is single-handedly responsible for the decibel. Boris Johnson is a criminal buffoon who like so many Who claim to love Ukraine is single-handedly responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian men in this war that Ukraine cannot win and I would just I would refer you to Wikipedia How many how many more people does Russia have the new crane? Do you know? 100 million 100 million and in a land where that's a relevant number it is not possible for Ukraine to beat Russia the best they can do is Superpiece That's been known including by Zelensky who wanted that since the early days of this conflict and Boris Johnson on orders from the Biden administration shut down and this is not a disputed fact This is a fact admitted by everybody now shut down the peace negotiations almost two years ago And Ukraine has been completely destroyed and now Zelensky has passed a law allowing foreign corporations to own land there So you tell me what Ukraine is going to look like in 30 years When all of it is owned by black rock and multinational corporations and its population is not Ukrainian, okay? so so the tragedy of what's happened in Ukraine orchestrated by the Western powers including your government and I hope you do and Driven by my government. I feel shame about it. I hope you do too is really one of the great crimes of my lifetime So the idea that somehow if you're against that you're for a Putin Well, of course, that's absurd and by the way speaking of your friend Boris Johnson He attacked me of course at hominem and so I called him. He was a journalist not surprisingly a man of low character not shocking and So I called him and I said well you've called me all these names Why don't you sit down for a conversation? I happen to be in your rainy depressing slum London and We could have a conversation and he said I won't do that unless you pay me a million dollars That's a fact that's an non-dispreter. I have the text messages. So If that is the credible source of the slur that look if I were a tote of Putin or I loved Putin I would just say so because why do I care I won't even fired. I don't work for anybody I have no incentive and by the way, it's perfectly fine if people have Putin Well, I don't understand what that has to do with anything we are citizens of different countries We should judge first and foremost our own leaders. How's our country doing? How are my children doing? What's their future look like none of that is anything to do with Putin except to the extent that you all in this country Sit back your government allows the Biden administration to push us into nuclear war, which is where we are right now right in the Cusp of it and somehow that's not a story Yet is that Putin doesn't respect human rights or the rule of law Okay, well just today Julian Assange was released after 12 years 12 years in custody and your government did nothing the UK made it possible and the United States demanded it You tell me how that's consistent with the rule of law or democracy. It's not it's ruled by the intel agencies It's lawlessness and it's a crime so I'm not I mean I'm not saying that we're morally equivalent to Putin I'm not saying that what I'm saying is our concern should be first and foremost How are our countries run and we give our own leaders a past time and time again? Because they point to some other creep on the world's stage and say he's bad Kim Jong-un is bad. Well. Yeah, of course he's bad. That's why I don't live in North Korea It's why I don't live in Russia. I have no interest in living in Russia But the point is you're bad too and the fact that he's bad does not allow you to continue being bad What and the last thing I will say that I really feel deeply and I really resent on an emotional and you'll pardon my passion. I don't know you I'm sure it'd be very close friends if we did know each other But I I really resent what I have seen across the West in the past 15 years and it's a sea change from my youth and my father was a reporter This alignment between media organizations and the government. I find disgusting actually I think it's it's a perfect It's a perfect inversion of what you're supposed to do if you're a journalist Your job is to challenge power on behalf of the powerless It is not to align with the powerful against the powerless and that is precisely what you have done I watched your ABC this morning in my hotel room for about 20 minutes until I looked around for a vomit bag And I watched it was one of the most gross. I couldn't even believe it was real The first story this is unbelievable the first story was Assange God bless that that is the biggest story the second story was a family of four Found dead in a house I Think in a suburb of Sydney, but it may be my board. I beg your pardon before Australians found dead of what they suspected was a drug OD Apparently they've been taking a new synthetic opioid that has emerged in Australia and it's killing people now This is a huge problem where I live much bigger than here so I but I'm familiar with it and The reporter said it's probably the synthetic opioid and it's been seen in their dead onto the next story The next story was the Australian government's new law that will require a prescription to buy nicotine products and We were treated to a 15-minute lecture on ABC whatever the hell that is about how nicotine is dangerous and we need to keep it out of the Hands of Australians and I'm like wait a second nicotine first was not dangerous. That's not true. It's actually incorrect You know nothing about the science a be compared to what Compared to what oh we have this new synthetic opioid that's killing people the government not too concerned What they're really concerned about is that people might be using nicotine Which by the way has the byproduct of raising testosterone levels are making people a little harder to command? That's a massive threat So this is the point where the media gets involved and says wait a second Let's start the death toll from vaping versus fentanyl Maybe one's a little worse the other what exactly are you doing about it? Why don't you press your ministers and your prime story? What are you doing about it about drug use and the answer is nothing and Said they're hassling people who adults you want to use nicotine? Which I would highly recommend to every person in this room is a life-enhancing God-given chemical that's just my view But I'm like a media should be like holding these people to the fire on that I was fired over a year ago So I don't have to like worry about this or be defensive about it because I like don't have a job So there is a certain freedom in an unemployment and So I sympathize with you guys who work for these companies that are like truly corrupt and you sort of know that But you don't want to deal with it because you've got kids in a mortgage. I get it. I've been there But let's just be honest everybody else knows what it is everyone else knows how corrupt you are and so there's a reason they have contempt for you I'm just saying Thanks, Tucker On that on that on that note. I might chuck pass you over to Andrew Green from the ABC You're gonna take my nicotine it's dangerous Prescription for nicotine, okay, I miss that segment this morning It's shocking you watch the dumbest thing I've ever seen on television I do want to ask about a country you haven't mentioned today and that's China But before that I wanted your response to the former vice president Mike Pence who has tweeted in the past Our also that the Assange developments are a miscarriage of justice by the Biden administration and that Assange endangered the lives of our troops Can I just apologize for something that I said and I and I it is my fault when I ascribe sort of all badness to the Biden administration That's actually not true, you know the worst things that happen in our capital city or a bipartisan effort and They are that's just a fact and so I don't want to be partisan in claimants all the Democrats fault It's absolutely not on the worst things that are happening in America Immigration and pointless wars and covid policy. It was both parties guys like Mike Pence aligning with guys Well Joe Biden's not a person anymore, but the people around around Joe Biden and You know the truth is you one of the actual two I won't be bullish, but Mike Pompeo was Trump CIA director and It emerged and it's factual that as CIA director when Assange was locked in the Ecuador embassy for however many seven years or something that he plotted to murder him and Assange had never been charged with any crime in the United States at all in under our system and yours you can't just murder people because they embarrass you so Assange leaks CIA secrets and Pompeo was director of CIA plotted to murder him That's a fact and the remarkable thing is that no one arrested Mike Pompeo He's still walking free. There's a guy who plotted to murder. He's a federal bureaucrat in a democracy federal bureaucrats people just like appointed to a job as a political favor can't just kill other people They don't like that's not allowed speaking of Russia and Yet in my this is aimed at my country people are like no, that's totally reasonable like Pompeo's a upstanding guy No, he's not a criminal. He's a criminal and he tried to murder the guy who exposes crimes It's super simple. It's what the mafia used to do. It's why they won every jury trial killed two jurors the others acquit and He tried to do that and it's blows my mind and I think I think Mike Pence is a sad weekman, but I think that's an incredibly shameful tweet I read it and I was enraged by it and I'm just sorry that I didn't describe the problem in greater detail Previously, I'll get on to China now. You may or may not be aware of a Strategic partnership Australia is involved with with your country and the United Kingdom called August Where we will get nuclear power submarines. Can I get your assessment of that and it was largely in response to China? Do you think China poses a threat here? I think that You know, I think first of all, I think it's very complicated But I think the overview is this China has 1.4 billion people and not enough resources or land Australia has 26 million people and Asparsley populated continent that is brimming overflowing with resources that Countries with expanding economies need and I don't know how expensive your politicians are. I'm guessing not very so I don't think it'd be Too much of a lift for China to just buy them all and I assume they already are doing that I mean, obviously they are doing that and they're doing that in my country too. They bought the current president's son So I'm not mad at China for that. Well, they did they bought 100 Biden. I mean, that's the whole story and And it's proven okay, so I'm not mad at China about that just for the record. I'm not particularly anti China I don't want to live in China. It's not my system at all and I find a lot of parts of the culture Repug done on the other hand. I see China in China country acting in its own interest. So I'm not mad about that I'm mad about the countries like my own and possibly yours that allow themselves to be taken advantage of That's the truly shameful thing. So I don't hate again. I just don't hate China You know, I see a rapidly growing country that will do whatever it can to help itself And if it crushes people in the way it will okay So that that's pretty reasonable. That's kind of a you know time-tested model your job is not to be crushed and so I'd be very very Concern about I don't think you face an imminent invasion or anything I do think that the concerns about China just the the size differential The resource question population these are the fears that have pushed generations of Australian governments into a counterproductive alliance With the United States and Great Britain I think the view here is that the US will rescue us if we ever really have a problem And I don't think that's true. I'm sorry to say that and I and I'm just saying that is I just don't think it's true And I think you're unwise for believing it's true and I think a lot of people on Taiwan thought that was true It turns out not to be true. I think a lot of posh tunes in Afghanistan thought that was true A lot of Montanyards and Vietnam thought that was true You know a lot of Christian Iraqis thought that was true and all the more the hard way that is not true That in the end countries act in their own interest and in a democratic system leadership changes every four or eight years with different views expressing you know evolved opinions from the public so No democratic country can be launched to annoy reliable as a partner simply because its government changes so often That's just a fact. It's not an attack on the amount of tack in the United States. I'm not talking you I'm just saying if you think that Allowing the US government to stage you know foreign troops on your soil They didn't beat you in a war. Did they then why do they have foreign troops here? That's I mean, I'm sorry. I know I'm offending everybody. It's just fact and I don't know if that's like a huge part of your economy, but like rule one in my country We don't have foreign troops on our soil because we're a sovereign country and I don't understand why all these countries allow it I mean, I love the United States. I'm glad you know that we've got the whip hand I guess But I just I don't think any country should put up with that now you can have soldiers in my country and go away You know what I mean like we can be friends But having troops on my soil suggest not a friendship but a master slave relationship And I'm just not into it at all and I don't think you should be into it either Thanks, Dr. Go one final question from the press gallery cat Wong from my AP Hi, Taka. Thank you so much for your address today So you talked a little bit about immigration and in the past you've talked about how White Australians Americans Europeans are being replaced by non-white immigrants in what is often referred to as the great replacement theory This is the same advice said that Wait for being replaced well. I don't think I said that well, it's been mentioned on your show 4,000 times and really when did I say that On your I said whites are being replaced you have said that before really? Yeah, I would challenge you to cite that because I'm pretty sure I haven't said that I said I said native born Americans have are being replaced including blacks native born American Americans Americans who like black Americans have been African Americans have been in the United States for in many cases Our families over 400 years and their concerns are every bit as real and valid and alive to me as the Concerns of white people whose families have been there 400 years So I've never said that whites are being replaced not one time and you can't say it and show We just met but when our relationship starts with a lie it makes it tough to be friends So let's let's pull that back. I'm happy to explain what I do You actually can't say it because I didn't say it and I don't believe it and I'm telling you that to your face So why don't you just accept me at face value? My concern is that the people who are born in the country are in the main responsibility of its leaders and as noted earlier When those leaders shift their concern from the people whose responsibility it is to take care of To people around the world to put their priorities above that of their own citizens. That's immoral And they are being replaced in my country people who are born in the United States And the birth rate tells the whole story. They are not at replacement rate And so the US population is growing because we're importing people from other countries In my view is that happy people have children and a functioning economy allows them to do that And we don't have that and so you need to fix the economy and fix the culture and make it so that people who want to have kids can You don't just go for the quick sugar fix of importing new people like that's my position And if you think that's racist that's your problem I never called your racist But of course you but of course you are suggesting And I must say one of the reasons people don't like people like you in the media Is that you never say exactly what you mean? Your slurs are all by implication and you're about to tell me the great replacement theory is racist or anything Whatever I've said what I've said to you right now like a hundred times in public I hope to if I live long enough say a hundred more times I think it's completely honest and real Not racist or scary. It's factually true. It's not a theory. It's a fact And your the whole point of your question was to be like you're a scary racist Well, I have a How about no more lying in your questions and then I'll answer it. Okay. Well This is the same theory or as you say idea that has inspired the new buffalo shooting wearing 11 Come on Okay, it's not first of all it's inspired the worst One of the worst Australian guys. How do they get this stupid in the media? I guess it doesn't pay well Look, I I'm sorry. I've lived among people like you for too long And I I don't mean to I don't mean to call you call you stupid. Maybe you're just pretending to be but I've never I'm totally against violence. I'm totally against the war in Ukraine for example Which that was you support and like all beautiful liberals support more carnage. I don't I hate mass shootings actually Nothing I said what does it mean to inspire something my views are not bigoted against any group They're honest. They're factual. That's not hate. That's reality and my views derived from my deep concern for Americans Actually Americans aren't having kids because they can't afford to and nobody in charge cares And so that's my position. That doesn't inspire mass shootings. How dare you try to tie me to some lunatic who murdered people? How dare you actually and in fact Mean do you know what I mean? I'd be like, you know Hitler wore those shoes a lot of people are saying that you're like Hitler Can you explain those shoes Hitler were exactly the same shoes and you're like I'm gonna do with Hitler That's how I feel about your absurd disingenuous question Right so therefore you used to pull a gun control What I thought it could have done or she did no I don't support Disarming law-abiding people so they can't defend themselves so the government has a monopoly on violence I don't think so first of all in my country. That's illegal as you know But moreover, it should be illegal in every country a sovereign person has the right to defend himself in his family period and That said I'm totally Opposed to harming anyone anyone have you been calling are you concerned about the war in Ukraine and the countless innocents being murdered? They're every single I doubt you are probably Putin bad. I am I'm a Christian. I hate violence I hate mass shootings. I have guns at home and often on my person run in the United States I'm proud to say Because I want to defend myself and those I love against violence That's the point. I'm not perpetrating crimes. I'm not shooting strangers I'm defending what I love and if you're against that I guess I would ask why why would you be against that? Well, so you don't think you harbor any kind of responsibility for these hate crimes I'm sorry. I'm trying to be charitable. I'm trying to be charitable. I was like maybe you're just pretending to be dumb Now I don't think it's an act Talk up. Thank you for taking those questions. I'm sure you enjoyed Just feel sorry I mean because I got here in the country so unbelievably beautiful in the people are so cheerful and funny and cool and smart I'm like your media's got to be better than ours It can't just be a bunch of castrated robots reading questions from the boss And then it turns out it's exactly the same maybe even a tiny bit dumber Okay, I'll take your question. All right. Are you from ABC? I'll repeat the essence of your question. You can I can I can hear yes So thank you I would say two things for those you didn't hear at the question was it turns out a lot of things that have been derided as conspiracy theories actually bear You know more investigation actually and given that You know how do you feel about the prospects of a free and fair election in November in the United States? I think it's it is that a first mission So I would say first to the phrase conspiracy theorists, which I'm certain has got to be a staple of your news media given the selection of questions I just received That it's worth knowing the providence of that phrase it comes directly from the Central Intelligence Agency actually 1964 in the aftermath of the murder of our president John Kennedy in November 63 There was a very famous and Entirely fake investigation into a call the Warren Commission and people who are reading it critically noticed anomalies like they didn't want to investigate the guy who shot the lone gunpin and like what? And raise questions about it and that phrase conspiracy theorist entered the lexicon in my country and it was designed To shout down and shame people who ask legitimate questions now That said there are ton of wackos out there and a lot of them show up in my house and they're nice people But they're clearly a little touched by the great spirit. That's all right I mean there are crazy people for sure, but they're also far more people who just noticed like well that doesn't make any sense and That's kind of where I started like well, what is that shut up? racist or conspiracy theorist or whatever loan, you know, mass shooter or whatever this chick called me so I think the first step is recognizing that that's a control tool Those are not the responses of someone who seeks an honest adult conversation with you where you sort of share evidence and arrive at consensus That's someone who believes that he can make you shut up like you would by yelling at your dog So he can go do something awful without you interfering with him. That's the truth, okay So anyone who uses the term conspiracy theorist is by definition discredited in my view Why don't you address the specifics of the claim I'm making no matter what it is Second thing I would say is I've lived long enough and covered the news long enough to not discount anything It doesn't mean every theory is true right here some wacky theories But given what we now know about so many different things How can I in good faith just did miss something out of hand? I just can't at this point you have to stay curious stay rational I mean, I think people should always stay rational like where's the evidence for it. There's no evidence. It's probably not true Where you can't prove it but stay open mind it And ask the question of the election, you know, I'm very concerned very very very concerned and I don't Understand like I guess I do understand why the institution Republican Party in Washington hasn't done more to secure elections We have this problem electronic voting machines which are not more efficient They don't produce more precise answers than written ballots and they don't get us the tally quicker than written ballots So the question is why do we have them, okay? That's one area, but the much more significant fact? I would say is that the way Americans vote was changed completely Using the pretext of COVID and the idea was that Americans were so sick with this killer virus that emerged from a pangolin in a wet market They were selling mammals in a seafood market for some reason to move on They were so in capacity they couldn't actually make it to the polls and so they needed to have their ballots anonymously picked up in these drop boxes without using voter ID and then nothing with voter fraud or all it was purely a Medical response Well now COVID is of course still around hasn't gone anywhere once found she created it. It's gonna be her forever but we're not worried about COVID anymore for some reason and but the voting changes remain in place and it's very clear to me that the point of them was to a bed voter fraud obviously and I don't think that you okay That's fine to voter fraud around the world, but you can't simultaneously claim that you're here to defend democracy and a bed voter fraud at the same time because voter fraud undermines democracy Very obviously more than anything else right people can't trust election outcomes. You don't have a democracy and Americans can and I'm very distressed about it and I don't really know but there seems to be no appetite to do anything about it I mean one of the things, you know, and I won't go on it's lasting all say but The question of voter ID is not a question in most civilized countries France for example You don't have an idea you can vote Because I don't know who you are and we take election seriously even in France Primitive stinky France Takes elections so much more seriously than we do it's it's shameful to me as an American and so what we're told you can't do that because African Americans don't have ideas Really is there evidence for that so in my country you can't do anything without a government ID? You can't cash a check you can't have a bank account You can't buy a pack of cigarettes. You can't check into a hotel. You can't cut on an airplane You can't get on a gray on bus you can't do anything without a government issued ID of course you can't drive a car and so Some enter a prize saying independent you're gonna listen out and try to get the numbers on this and turns out Nobody doesn't have a government ID if you don't have a government ID in the United States That means you could have no contact with government you get nothing from government You don't exist in the eyes of the government without a government ID so the adult population of Americans of any color who don't have Government issue that uses like approximately zero Okay, it's like someone in nursing home and yet nobody in the media noted this and to this day We don't have voter ID laws in state after state because it's considered racist and yet another example of the way that ruthless people With I think evil intent Leverage the inherent decency of the citizens of our country to get their way If they said we're just gonna commit voter fraud and if you don't like we're gonna shoot you the people of the United States would rise up Is one and put them down, but instead they say you are a bad Ask questions your racist well no decent person wants to be a racist including me That's awful. I think God created every person with a denticle moral value the denticle We are all creations. That's my view So racism is like abhorrent to me. So I don't want to be called racist and not there's anyone else in my in my sweet country Because Americans are really decent people so that claim right there is enough to shut down the opposition sufficient to roll over it and that is exactly what's happened and I and I hope we're at a point where we just stopped taking them seriously These are people who don't care about the meaning of words who will accuse you of abetting a mass shooting Because you think your country has too many illegal aliens like it's in freaking insane So obviously they don't really mean it. They don't really care. They just want you to be quiet because you're inconvenient And my strong advice to you is don't be quiet because if you're quiet Thanks for watching our YouTube channel We hope you'll subscribe to it and by the way you can hit the little bell on there and get notifications every time we produce a video We hope you'll do that also