Boom, and we're live. What's up, man? How are you? Cheers. Salut. Hey, cheers, brother. Nice to meet you. Good to meet you too. By the way, congrats on the mustache. The mustache, lower-piece combo. That's the anarchist guy that guy that was the mask. Oh, the guy Fox. That's right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I was going more for a kind of doc holiday. Valkilmer is a doc holiday. I'm your huckleberry. How good was he in that role? He was fantastic. Many people have played doc hallway, but he's the best. So are you a prepper yourself? Because you do have one of them GPS watches on. So either you're like a hardcore hiker, or you just don't want to get lost. You were waiting to see the paracord bracelet. I had to say, I always have that, right? Is that ever come up? When do you ever unravel that thing? Yeah, that always seems to me like someone who preps at, you know, you just try a little's you hard. If you have a paracord bracelet, no, it's a kind of virtue signaling. You never know, though. I guess it's better to have it not to need it. Not to have it. I mean, it's kind of funny when I, so I've been hanging out with preppers for about three years now. And inevitably you start drifting towards the culture, right? As you're talking to people. But every once in a while, I'll see someone in a grocery store or whatever. And I'm like, OK, they got the bowie knife. They got the like, you know, walkie talkie, strapped to him like, wow, you are really paranoid. Really? Yeah. People walk around with their radios on the internet. Because they want to be ready for action at any moment. You live in the mountains. Wilderness type area. I live in, I live in Big Bear. Do you, did you live there before you got obsessed with prepping? No. So did you move there to a custom yourself or to acclimate yourself to the culture? Like, so here's the deal. I, one of the communities that I worked with while I was writing this book, Bunker, was a community in South Dakota, where there's 575 sort of semi subterranean concrete bunkers that were built during World War II. And they used to store weapons in there. Right? So these are bunkers to protect ordinance. James, you know, turn this towards you there. OK, cool. Thanks. I think I've seen this one that now they drive, they drive like RVs in there and stuff. Is that the same? Yeah, exactly. So now you've got like 30 or 40 families that are moving into those bunkers. And those families, super cool people, very generous, very kind. I spent a lot of time with them. And they told me if it ever hits the fan, come visit us. Well, we've got space for you. You're going to be safe. You're going to find you. Yeah, maybe. But so when the pandemic hit, of course, I thought, well, is this it? Is this the moment we've been waiting for? So I send everyone messages and sure enough, they're packing up. And they're going to the bunker field. And then I thought, the obvious thing, well, what about my family? What about my elderly parents? What about who else? You know what I mean? The list starts growing up. People that you have to abandon to save yourself. And so I didn't go, obviously. Good for you. But all my family lives in Southern California, my immediate family. And I started thinking about what is the appropriate bug out plan? And I think this is a good one. So basically, big bears within an hour and a half of all my family members. And I bought a cabin out there. It's got a quarter acre. It's relatively remote. I can store some supplies. We can also use that as a family vacation home. So in the meantime, we can just enjoy it. But if we ever needed to all sort of leave together at the same time, we could go to the cabin. It's kind of crazy that you could be at the beach and then you could drive two hours and you're in the snow. That's one of the weirdest things about California. I mean, we have some really interesting terrain. I will grow up here. I never took it for granted right now. Now I've lived in four countries and visited maybe 40. And every time I come back to California, I think, damn, this place is unique. You know, I wanted to take it to the valley. To get to the, right here. Oh, to here? Two hours? That's not them. Yeah. It's not about all. But check this out. The really cool thing is that if you go off the backside a big bear mountain, you can just drop down into the Mojave Desert. So you can go from Big Bear to Joshua Tree in like 30 minutes. And if you really, if you can take dirt roads in a four by four, you can get there in 20. Wow. Yeah. So if you want to do mushrooms, it's a good spot to live. It's a very good spot to live. Now you decided to write this book and then you moved there? Was that the idea or did you, had you been thinking about living in a place like that first? Or no, I never really thought about a plan. To be honest with you, I've been living in cities for 15 years now. I lived in London and then in Sydney. So I've been in Sydney for the past three years. And you know, cities just suck the money out of you. So I never, I never had any money. I never had any way to think about it. And I know that the pandemic has been tragic, unfortunate, terrible for a lot of people. But for me, it was like one of the best things that were happening to me. I came back to California. Check this out. I came back to California to take care of my mom because she was having spinal surgery. I had just finished my three year research fellowship at the University of Sydney that enabled me to write this book with the Doomsday Preppers. And I was going to New Job at University College Dublin in Ireland. And so I landed LA to take care of my mom for six weeks while she gets her spinal surgery bang. As like, I'm wheeling her out of the hospital and they're putting in the tents in the parking garage towards Memorial Hospital for the overflow of COVID patients. Oh, Jesus. So what time, when was this? I guess this was February, early February. So it was just when it was starting to pick up. Yeah. And so with my partner Amanda, we just moved from Sydney and we take my mom home. We just lock ourselves inside for a couple of months and kind of wait for this all to unfold. So I actually finished this book, like the final proofs of this book I finished in lockdown in the early days of the pandemic. You feel relatively safe when you're in a place like Big Bear because it's woods and just like by the time the virus gets up here and has it going to get to you? You know what I mean? It's not like you're in these crowded areas. Well, the virus doesn't give a shit. It moves wherever it wants to be. That's true. You have all these people driving from LA up there for the weekend and you know. You were also sending people pretty cavalier up there. Oh, yeah. Yeah, they certainly are. Did you, does it feel good to be tested? You were tested today. Did you feel good? I feel like a weight lifted off of you. It actually, yeah. Yeah, right? Yeah. It's nice. It's great. But I was actually kind of disappointed to see I didn't have the antibodies. Everybody thinks they have them. Everybody does. Everybody in here is like, I think in January, I think back in January I had this cough. I'm pretty sure I haven't beat it. But I have to say, I guess my, you know, my anxiety about coming here was kind of ramped up by the possibility that they were going to say, you've tested positive. You're like, drag me out by my hair. You know, we would do that. No, if you were positive, I would just back up a little and put a mask on, I guess. What would we do? Would you feel comfortable doing a podcast with someone who's in the room is positive? I think it's a bad move. We probably would be, we're doing a parking lot. We could do that. Just we would figure it out. If you were positive, we'd figure it out. We'd do it in a parking lot with masks on or something. But here's the thing about Big Bear, right, is that when we were in lockdown in LA, in the early days of it, like, again, I'm speaking from a space of privilege here, you know, because my paychecks were still coming in and whatever, but like, I almost experienced a sense of euphoria. Like all my talks were canceled, my plane ticket. I canceled like four plane tickets. The pressure was relieved. Oh yeah, and I was like, I just came out with my mom. This is great. You know, but you get, you know, you get through that initial phase and then you get into the stamina phase, right? And like that's something we should really talk about. Because if you're thinking about locking yourself in a bunker, you know, stamina is gonna be really important. And when they shut down the beaches and the trails in Los Angeles and I couldn't get outside anymore, I mean, that had devastating mental effect on me. Do they do that in Big Bear as well? They shut down the trails up there? No, so when we moved out to Big Bear, immediately we could go trail running again, we could be outside and, you know. Is that San Bernardino County? So they're allowed, they have different rules, lower population on that chest. Yeah, a lot more space. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, the trail thing was a real bummer. The locking off the beaches too. It's like, you know, there was, in the beginning, there was so much scrambling because they weren't really sure how it was transmitted or when it was dangerous, when it wasn't dangerous. Now they're pretty sure there was a study done that shows that it dies almost instantly in sunlight. So when you're outside at the beach there's probably very little chance of spreading. So a lot of people took this, that when the protests were happening, it's very little chance that it's gonna spread during the protests, which is probably true during the day. But the thing is the protests don't end during the day. People were jammed on top of each other all throughout the night and it easily could have gotten you then. Yeah. They're showing that also even simulated UV light. There's a study done that showed that artificial sunlight would simulate its sunlight also kills it. I was out in Joshua Tree yesterday and I went for a seven mile trail run. Damn, did you bring some water? How hot is it up there? I went through four bottles of water. That's scary. I actually forgot my, I usually have my camelback that I run with and I forgot it. So I just, I stocked up on water and anyway, I was slamming water. But I was on the trail like, I mean way out, way out in the middle of the national park, right? Totally open space. And I run up on this hiker and she like puts your backpack on the ground and she pulls the mask out and puts the mask on. Whatever. And I'm like, the trail's pretty wide. Yeah. I didn't say anything, but it's kind of like, people scared. I know, people are scared. If you want to really be scared, I'm in the middle of a book right now. My buddy Matt Stacks recommended this. I want to tell people about this because this is fucking excellent. Now I want to say before I say this, do not get this book if you have anxiety. Just don't. It's called Survivor Song. It's a novel by Paul Tremblay. I guess that's how you say his name. Paul Tremblay, it's fucking excellent, but it is terrifying. And it is about a pandemic. It's about a pandemic that hits the East Coast. It's a fake pandemic, like a type of rabies that has easily spread to people. There's got to be loads of people writing books about pandemic. Well, this obviously was written a long time with you. For sure, for sure. I think I don't know what year it came out. I don't know what it says here. I got the audio book. But I just wonder if we're going to reach a saturation point on the topic where people are like, I'm not touching a book that has anything to do with the pandemic. After thinking about it for years. Some people. Yeah, but that's just, some people are just, they're angry. You know, like I had a friend who was across my friend, Bridget Fettucey. She was across the street from someone without a mask. No one around her. Someone on the other side of the street starts screaming at her. Put on your fucking mask. Put your fucking mask on. No one anywhere near them across the street. Yeah. People are losing their marbles. I know. Well, it's a classic Foucault, right? We all start policing each other. Yeah. Well, it's also people's anxiety and insecurity and people that are emotionally and mentally unstable now's their time to shine. Because this is like, this is like what they've been, what people like in preppers, I would imagine. What preppers, I'm not saying all preppers are emotionally unstable, but what preppers have been looking for is this moment where all of their anxiety and all of this paranoia actually comes to fruition. Like, see, I told you so. Yeah, right. No, the justification for the prepping. But I think a lot of that comes from feeling belittled, right? Like they've been mocked, they've been made fun of. Sure. And people were prior to the pandemic and embarrassed to admit that they were prepping. Yeah. Which is odd. Yeah. In fact, I've been working on this book for three years and about a month into the pandemic, I get this email from my brother who's here with me right now. And he's like, oh, yeah. Just so you know, I've got a storage unit, it was some masks and some food. And I'm like, what? You didn't think you might mention that to me. You know? But I mean, it's almost deemed pathological, right? Like people are great prepping to hoarding. Like, what do you need all that stuff? Yeah. But the thing is, in order to not stockpile in that way, you have to have so much faith in capitalism. You have to have so much faith in our social systems. You have to have faith that everything is going to hold together roughly in the way that it is right now. And of course, the world that we built, the society that we built, is incredibly new. You only have to go back a few hundred years. And it's like, if you weren't stockpiling, you were effectively committing suicide. You couldn't make it through winter. Because people are growing their own food, raising their own animals. Now it's like, we have this expectation that you're going to be able to order your take out or go to the grocery store and stock up. Think about this. Imagine this scenario. Imagine that the lethality rate on this virus was like 10%. What do you have to do to convince those grocery store workers to come to work at that point? No one's coming to work. No one's driving the trucks. No one's going to deliver anything. And then what Preppers would say is we're 72 hours to anarchy. Or 72 hours to animal. It's like, once you shut down those kind of supply lines, our entire mentality starts to shift into a different mode. And it doesn't take long before you think, I'm going to take something from my neighbor at this point. I'm hungry. My family's hungry. Sure. Yeah. It gets real scary or cooperate with your neighbor, hopefully. I hunt. So I have a lot of meat. And so one of the things that happened during the pandemic when it hit, I had a lot of people come over. And I gave them meat because I have three commercial freezers here at the studio. If you shoot an elk, elk's 400 pounds of meat. A lot of meat. The great thing is as long as the power stays on, and I have electricity, I have frozen meat. So I can give a lot of it out. So you got it back up, Jim Heter? I do. But I'm not a prepper, but I'm prepared some ways. And then when all this came down, basically all I did is I stockpiled on a lot of dried stuff, like rice, pasta, things that you could cook easily. Well, that's the thing is people get fixated on prepping as this kind of, I built a multimillion dollar bunker, whatever spectacular stories that people hear, which I'm happy to verify if you want to get into those. But prepping on a practical level, like everyday prepping, it's just common sense. Just having enough food to last a few days. And thinking through what might happen, in a blackout or the tap's not working or whatever. These things do happen. Yeah, they do happen. And I wanted to get into the psychology of prepping, because it seems to be conflated with conspiracy theorists in some way. Preppers, or it's the tin foil hat brigade. It's like those type of folks who think 5G is causing COVID. You know what I mean? Like, there's, for whatever reason, prepping, which should be just prudence, common sense, preparing, having something that can purify your water if everything goes weird. Going camping every once in a while just to get a sense of what it's like to be outdoors in popular water over river. And it's great to have those practical skills. Yeah. Camping is fun, as long as you know it's not permanent. Isn't that weird? Well, so I mean, and this is the thing about disaster, right? Is that if it has an end point, it's something that we can cope with, right? You know, so take nuclear war, for example, right? Like, let's say we get a text message on our phone. Remember in Hawaii in 2018, everyone got that message. The ballistic missile was incoming, right? So imagine we get that message right now. And you're like, well, Brad, we actually have a bunker underneath this studio, right? So you go into the bunker, but we know after LA's nuked, right, and it's gone, that if we stay in this bunker for 14 days, the radiation levels are going to be a fraction of what they were when that new kit, right? So you have an end point there. We have to make it to day 14. And that's why people are able to psychologically cope with it. Whereas, you know, the situation we're in right now, like when is the end point? Like that's why people are cracking. Like they can't see the end of it. Right. Well, they're cracking for a bunch of reasons. Yeah. First of all, they're cracking because the economic stability is non-existent. It's gone. 50% of all restaurants are dead. You know, I mean, how many retail shops are dead? It's terrible. Ralph Yelp had some statistic the other day that I was reading online about all the different businesses that have been impacted. We don't even know what's happening with comedy clubs. It's just guesswork right now. But I think in Los Angeles, a lot of them are probably going to wind up going under. across the country. A lot of them are going to wind up going under. Restaurants, I had the owners of Felix and the head chef, Evan and the owner Janet on the podcast recently. And they were explaining how Felix is a really great restaurant in Venice that almost every restaurant operates with a very small amount of profit. You know, their profit margin. What did she say, like, 15%, 14% something like that? Yeah, that's something. Sounds great. I think something. So imagine all of a sudden that's cut to zero for several months and then you're asked to occupy 50% of your restaurant, which is obviously going to diminish your profits radically as well. So it gets just a survival game. And there's no end in sight, right? So here we are in July. No one anticipated this in March. We thought, you know, by the time June rolls around, everything's going to be up and running. No. Here we are, July. Everything's locked down again. And there's even talk of another stay at home order in Los Angeles, which is even scarier. So let's get back to your conspiracy theories. OK. If someone told you that we would be in the situation a year ago, would you have believed him? Sure. You would have. I would have. Yeah. Because the pandemic seemed like a real estate experience. Well, because I've been the center for disease control. Right. I went to Galveston, Texas for the center of disease control for a show that I did with my friend Duncan. And Duncan Tresslin, I went down there and we talked to these doctors that work with these viruses. And they scared the shit out of us. We went down there for a television show that we were doing for sci-fi. And it was basically on the idea of weaponized viruses. The basic premise of the show was it would have someone engineered a virus and released it on the country, like a weaponized virus. And they said, that's not what we have to worry about. We have to worry about it's nature. That's what we have to worry about. Turns out, both. Because this virus most likely had been leaked from a lab. What we're dealing with with COVID-19, according to my friend Brett Weinstein, who is a biologist. And he detailed on a podcast that I did with him. All of the different points of evidence that lead to what he believes is a very likely scenario that it was released from accidentally released from a lab and not actually from a wet market that the wet markets to cover up. It's like the disease is too advanced. It has too many hallmarks and indicators of a virus that have been tampered with for study in the lab and for the examinations and all the different tests that they would run. And so you've got both those things, right? You have the possibility of something just morphing in nature. Like many other pandemics that have happened in the past. And then what we have now, which is this weird virus. It doesn't make any sense. We were talking about all the different symptoms that people get from it. Neurological problems, blood clotting. It was reading this article where they were saying that. The people that have died from COVID when they've done autopsies on them. They've found blood clots in every major organ. And they're like, this is astonishing. Like this is so weird. Yeah, it does seem very uncomfortable. And long-lived. And it's a big deal of living or kidney, but just blood clots everywhere. It's like people are hemorrhaging. It's very strange. It's a strange fucking virus. And the transmissibility, is that a word? The ease of transmission is terrifying. It's so contagious. It's a ridiculously contagious virus. So once we went to that Center for Disease Control, I saw it again scared. I saw the 2015 Bill Gates TED Talk on pandemics about the possibility of a pandemic. And I got scared of it too. So I would have thought it's possible. I would never would have thought it's impossible. So here's the thing, regardless of where this virus came from, you have to imagine that there are governments and individuals who are now keyed into how effective this virus was at crippling capitalist economies. Sure. Because the thing is, we created COVID's pathways. I mean, it's international flights. It's international trade. It's people moving around. The neoliberal global capitalist system that we built over the past 30 years that created the pathways that took the virus everywhere at once. So if this were to be a test run, it's now proven to be extremely effective. And so you have to imagine that governments around the world, probably including the United States, are thinking, well, how could we weaponize this potentially? And this is the thing that states are thinking that. But I don't know either. But the thing is, the threats existential threats that we face now have been multiplied exponentially. In the past, post-World War II, we had, I mean, this is the first global catastrophe, world wars. But then once we develop nuclear weapons, and we're just past the 75th anniversary of the Trinity test now, once we create that ability to destroy ourselves and potentially the entire world, we have to live with the possibility of that happening. Now, stack on top of that artificial intelligence, climate change, you know, synthetic biotech, all of these threats that we face are something that we have to kind of hold in our heads all the time. And I think it's cracking us mentally to think about these possibilities. So yeah, I mean, some of the preppers are conspiracy theorists, right? And they're spinning some really outlandish scenarios. But a lot of them are just trying to work through these things, right? And rather than get caught in this kind of perpetual future tense, like, you know, thinking about something terrible happening, they're trying to take action now in the present, and that gives them some sense of peace, right? Like it gives them a sense of like, it gives them some solid footing in the present. And a lot of the preppers I talk to were, are not actually very anxious or paranoid at all, right? Because they have a plan. It's those of us who don't have a plan that are anxious. Well, you've talked to them post post, yeah. Do they feel vindicated? No, not really. No? What most of them have told me is that this was a mid-level crisis. Well, they're right about that, right? I mean, if Yellowstone blows, this is going to look like a cakewalk. Yeah, exactly. If we get hit by the nastroid, I mean, it's a wrap for humanity. If there's a solar flare that takes out the power grid, we've got real problems. This is minor in comparison. When you look at the actual fatality rate for healthy people, it's very, very low. You know, it's less than 1% much less than half of 1% for most healthy people. So when you look at what could happen if Yellowstone blows, that's a continent killer. Oh, yeah. I mean, we're talking about volcanic ash clouding the sky. nuclear winter killing crops all over the United States. All over the world. Yeah. Maybe you got to have a jet and go to New Zealand, like instantly. It's like, I don't even know if that's New Zealand is in a volcanic zone. I mean, this is one of the great red herrings of our time that all of these wealthy people are going to flee New Zealand and find safety there. I mean, I also find it totally ironic that a lot of them are sort of, you know, libertarian free market capitalists that are quite happy to make money off of this system. But when shit goes wrong, they want to really strong government to clamp down and take care of it. You know, is that what they want? I think they just want to remote place to escape with a small amount of people and a lot of wildlife resources and real natural beauty. Look, New Zealand's gorgeous. New Zealand's fantastic. I have friends who go there every year. Yeah, I've spent a lot of time there. Matt Lauer bought a crazy farm out there. He's got like a giant ranch. Well, that's, you know, it's got the quality. It's got the clean water. It's got English speaking. It's got a stable government, you know, all of that. Abundance of wildlife and no predators. They got a, it's a weird situation over there. It's a hunters paradise, apparently, because, well, sort of. It's really, it's, it depends on your philosophy. But most hunters that are, I would say that if you look at like what, what the idea of hunting is, the idea of hunting is supposed to be, you get your, your resources, your meat from the natural world. I want there to be a balance in the natural world. There's no balance in New Zealand. In New Zealand, they have to helicopter over these stags and gun them down because they're overpopulated because they, they literally get to the point where they worry about diseases and there's no predators there. What, do you know the whole, the whole history of how it's populated with animals? No, I don't. It was, they were brought over there by the Europeans in 1800s as a, like a hunting sanctuary. They brought over stag and all these animals that don't exist in their red deer, all these, these, these invasive animals. But then they don't have any way to control their population. So they have these like fucking huge herds of these animals roaming over the fields. Luckily, there's not a lot of people, but there's a lot of controversy behind it. Like, there's one recently that's going on right now, I should tell people about, there's an animal called a tar. Have you ever heard of a tar? No. T-A-H-R. It's a fascinating animal because it looks like it's straight out of Star Wars. I was going to say it sounds like it's from Star Wars. I think it's an asiatic animal. I think, I think it's native to like the Alps or some sh- I forget where it's from. Here, Himalayan, yeah, there it is. Okay. It's a large, it's fucking weird looking man. It's this crazy, hairy looking, taking that picture right there. Yeah, bam. Go large with that. Look at that fucking thing. What? Yes. Look at that thing. It's amazing. Well, one of the best, first of all, it's a delicious animal and they are in New Zealand and they're very difficult to hunt because they live in these like really high altitude, rocky areas that are very difficult to traverse, very hard for hunters to get to them. It's extremely dangerous. A good buddy of mine, Adam Greentree, was hunting one and he fell and got really badly injured and he had to get helicopter out of there and he was by himself, really hard animal to get to. Well, they've decided recently it's a very controversial decision to eradicate them. So they're going to, even though there's this really thriving industry where all of these people's livelihood depends on this animal. These people in these rural communities, these people hunting guides, all these different people that live off of these animals, they've decided for whatever reason, I'm not exactly sure what the reason is, but the New Zealand government has decided to eradicate these animals. It's got to be this fantasy of getting back to the kind of pre-colonial past, right? If you eradicate all the animals that were brought in with colonization and you can get back to some kind of indigenous stasis or whatever. No, even anything. They would have to bring back the hostile eagle. There's an enormous eagle that used to hunt humans that lived on New Zealand. They're the largest eagle that ever lived, lived in New Zealand and they believe that the Polynesian people wound up killing them all. Well, you've got to go, you've got to go Jurassic Park and get the DNA and resurrects that Polynesian people who the fuck lived and it's not Polynesian people. Who are the original settlers of New Zealand? The Maori. The Maori. Are they considered Polynesian? I think they were, yeah, I think they were Polynesian sailors that landed there. We're so white. We don't know. We don't know. We don't know. Polynesians are fucking incredible though. If you think about the fact those people figured out how to get in a boat and go to literally the most remote spot in the world, which is Hawaii. Dude, have you ever seen their maps that are made out of sticks? No. So they're 3D maps. go to literally the most remote spot in the world with which is why dude have you ever seen their maps that are made up sticks No, do they have so they're these uh they're 3d maps that are made from like sticks put together and they can tell wind and air currents And they can read the stars with them. That's how they navigated really yeah Whoa, yeah, they're fantastic. Where did you see one? I don't know. Well actually it might my I did my master's degree in maritime archaeology So I probably picked that up during that degree at some point so you you did Some of your studies were in sitting right yeah, I started I started here At the University of California. I did anthropology and history I went to Australia to do a degree in maritime archaeology and then I went to London to do a PhD in cultural geography Oh, wow, so I've hopped four disciplines Did you get anything Jamie? Let me see what this way. Yeah, look at this shit. They're sweet right wow What is obviously I have absolutely no idea how to oh my how to read those things that's so weird See this is how do they tie them together with twine or like what is yeah? I think it's twin and what are those images supposed to represent It's like it's the wind the tides and the stars. I think what is that word hold on scroll up Micronesian Whoa micronesians you ever heard of words? Yeah micronesians so that micronesians like uh Chook with those four islands truck lagoon that's in chook and I can't remember the other islands, but How crazy that is yeah, God I love learning new shit So here's the thing right is that is that one of the things that preppers are into is like Recovering these kinds of skills So you know trying to learn how these things work and building them again When I was at the University of California. I did two years of lithic technology where I I would you know I can make arrowheads stone tools Little darts axes yeah, I spent years doing that. You know how to make an out of ladder. Yeah, really? Yeah Can you throw one? Yeah, yeah, do we threw an at at UC Riverside? Yeah I was studying yeah, we made this at little dart and then we sort of like you know cleared out the the the kind of alleyway in The experimental archaeology lab. We were working. We were checking this at little turt Yeah, the doors are outdoors. We probably couldn't get away with that now that yeah, I don't know Outdoor outdoor now when they taught you how to do all this stuff when when they're talking about like building ancient arrowheads is the Technology behind creating those the craftsmanship is it theoretical or are they getting it down from the people that were the knowledge has been handed down Oh, it's definitely the case that the knowledge is being handed down And what's really interesting is that is that I know you talked to Graham Hancock, but like the so the earliest Spear points that we think are the our evidence of the earliest occupation of the Americas these are Clovis so he talked about Clovis cultures, right? Those Clovis points are so hard to make dude They're making these like 12 13,000 years ago. So it's essentially You take you get a piece of rock right and you have to flatten the rock first Right, so you've got to send flakes with a hammerstone across the rock and create like a ridge down the middle And then in one strike you take that whole ridge off And you create this flat expanse down the middle of the spear point We won strong Yeah, and that's what you that's what you have to the shaft to with some sinu or whatever But the thing is that that one strike you have to do it on both sides Right you have to make a flat edge on both sides down the middle of the spear point It almost always cracks the thing in half and what is the material that you're using for the striker and what is the material using for the arrowhead? So if the the easiest stone To flint nap with zib cityon It's got a really really high Silica value in it and it's it's highly heated so it's it's like glass right and that's what the Aztecs were We're making their weapons out of two so you can see you can see obsidian weapons all up and down North central and South America But you can also work with like flint or chirp the things are a little trickier They're all over Texas the command she left so many arrowheads go to Gary Clark Jr's Instagram page he has a fucking perfect arrowhead that they found on a friend of his ranch It's it's amazing when you you look at this and you go, okay, this is probably hundreds of years ago Some guys sent this and look at that Perfect. Oh, that's gorgeous. Look how perfect it is. It's perfect. Did I make you one? I would appreciate that But I really I found one once I was hunting in Nevada I was doing a high-country meal deer hunt and I found one that fucking lost it I don't know what happened, but it was just it was a chunk it had broken but that one go back to that one again real quick That's perfect Look at the it's really nice. It's not damaged at all So what you think that's made out of? I think it's church So church often has this kind of chalky Exterior that you got to get off of it before you hurt. Yeah, I've never been heard of that. Yeah How old do you think that is? You got to guess? 7800 years Think so check this out man one of the one of the coolest experiences I ever had so I did archaeology for about five years I excavated in in Mexico and the Yucatan Peninsula and Hawaii in Australia and in southern and northern California and When I was in Mexico, we were we were working on this old village site. It's a post-classic Myocyte and we're digging up like there's just loads of pottery Right because think about if you're you know, you make a pot Inevitably, you're gonna drop and break that thing and what do you do? You sweep it out the front door, you know, and so we'd find these huge um Pits that are just full of pottery shirts and you know after a while you just become totally desensitized to it You're just chucking them in a bag and on here's where I found 10 more or whatever and then I went for my pulled out and it had a fingerprint in it Oh, dude And I'm looking at the thing and it's like Sudden the southerly. Yeah suddenly I've traveled through time, right? I've gone back 1200 years and I'm sitting there with you know sitting there with this person in their house with their thumbprint pressed into the thing It really unnerved me. Wow. I mean, you know in in archaeological terms You know it doesn't actually tell us that much we got we got 10,000 pieces of those pots But on a personal level that you know experiencing that visceral connection to the history of humankind is Unparallel right because you know someone made the pottery, but it's almost abstract until you see that fingerprint. Yeah That's fucking awesome God Yeah, we also one time I found this we were walking through the jungle. We were actually surveying we found a temple in in the yukatan that Like the local people knew about but no one from the University had seen it and so this guy's like oh you want a temple Yeah, the temple over there You know, it's so we're like hacking through the bushes with our with through the vines with our machete's and And we come up on this temple and I was like oh man, this is this is crazy like how many people have seen this thing in in the past You know 300 years and then there were kind of some central stairs going up the middle of the temple And I went there and looked on the ground and there was this like a there was this figurine there And it had it had eyes and like a kind of a little hat But it was like somebody had made this thing out of clay and pressed it together I never figured out how old that was. I mean it could have been made more recently. Did you take it kind of weird We we bagged it and tagged it as they say in archaeology It went back to the lab. What are the rules on that? Like if you if you go to a temple they take you to a temple and you find something That's there. What are you allowed to say? I'm a scientist well, okay, so I Became really uncomfortable with the idea that you know because I had a degree I had some kind of authority over other people's culture right. That's why my house can yeah And I always felt like well that you know that village that's there that's their shit. Why are we taking it? You know And obviously it's for the advancement of knowledge and maybe it brings some benefit to their village, but we don't know right so This is eventually what drove me out of archaeology From my my master's thesis. I went up to Northern California and I worked with this tribe called the win-win-win-to and They it's it's a pretty tragic story up there man. They they had been there for thousands of years and You know we we Americans decided that they were going to Build a giant dam so they could have a reservoir up there and they and they inundated all of their ancestral homeland It's like all of their spiritual sites all of their graveyards. I mean all this stuff went underwater So I'd spent two years Doing a degree American maritime archaeology. I've been diving shipwrecks all over the world And I and I went up there and I said let me let me dive let me dive in the in the reservoir and You know, I've got my underwater camera and then you know I said I'll take some photos. I'll bring them back. We can have a chat about it And the spiritual leader of the tribe Kaleen she says All right, well, why don't you just hang out for a bit and then maybe we can do that later So like days turn into weeks and then you know a couple months and I'm getting nervous I'm like I have to write my thesis. I have no. I don't have I don't have my data These months you're hanging out. I'm just yeah, I'm just hanging out there Yeah, yeah, exactly. I'm good. How do you have all this time? Yeah, we actually went Well, it's but it's the degree right like that's what I'm there to do I'm doing my field work and you can just hang out for months Yeah, but I'm supposed to be like doing research and writing at this And so like I after a while I press her I'm like look I've got a I've got to do something And she said you know what the problem with you white people is you're obsessed with stuff You just want to get your hands on the things You know and she said if you want to know about our culture You've been hanging out with this this whole time What can you tell me about our culture? Like why do you need to get that stuff that all that stuff that's you know Underwater out there. Why do you need that? You know you can just talk to us So that was sort of my bridge from moving from archaeology into cultural geography Which is much more about you know thinking about people's relationships with places and landscapes and their culture is documented In what way like how are they maintaining their historical records? Well, that's what this was actually my one of my first academic articles is I wrote about how a lot of their religious ceremonies had changed because the places that they used to go were now underwater right so in so in one case there was this there was a rock um The young women went to as part of a puberty ceremony and it used to be Above water and they had that ceremony in the spring but now when the That's when the The waters are high right so now they do it in sort of drought season so that they can still get to the rock and so they had they had changed the whole kind of You know Cultural their cultural fabric had been altered by that inundation event And basically you know the point that she was trying to get across to me was like that didn't break us Like we're still us even though these things have had to change you know and that it was an education for me as an archaeologist because You know when you when you go into a place with that very kind of like data-driven empirical mindset You know you want you want hard facts that that makes sense that you know that you can you can write up clearly and what she was telling me was something that was a little bit more It was more nuanced that you know it was difficult to pin down. It was more you know qualitative right and so I had to I had to grapple with that And that was a that was a big learning lesson for me so in this but When you're dealing with things that are more nuanced You you still need to kind of know what happened and when it happened So how were they keeping records of what happened and when it happened well they had oral histories, but I could oral history. Yeah, but I could also go to The Bureau of Reclamation the forest service. You know, I was actually working for the Bureau of Land Management at that time But I mean in general agencies have records of what happened right? I mean you know with the building of the dam and what was recorded beforehand and all of that which is kind of fucked that they did that right? Yeah, but the but I mean internally. I mean in the tribe Everything is oraling Yeah, I think you know, it's probably more people writing things down now these days But you know, they've got oral histories that go back a long time when I was in Australia get this man. I I was uh talking to an Aboriginal clan out there and they were telling me that in the Sydney Harbor They can actually tell like they can draw you a map of what is underwater in the Sydney Harbor because they have a Cultural memory of when that wasn't underwater that goes back Tens of thousands of years and they have passed that down. They actually retain that memory So they have a pre ice age memory when the Oceans were less deep. Yeah, I don't know if it's pre ice age, but the the water levels were Right. Yeah, so the water levels a little lower. It has to be pre ice age. It was before 10,000 years Yeah, right so these people had this idea of what was going on and they just kept passing it down generation to generation and This how accurate is there their their memory of it. I don't know. I mean, I'm sure I'm sure people are doing research on that But you know if you look at those those The dot drawings, you know those like traditional paintings that you see That are often paintings of landscapes. Uh-huh some of those have been mapped on to You know Aerial imagery and they're startlingly accurate Right and so you have to wonder it like how How did people who didn't have those aerial views get that view down on the landscape right? I mean Yeah Yeah, do you stitch that together by just knowing the place so well that you kind you can kind of depict it in that way Or is there some kind of I mean you can get all hippie-dippy about it and it's about astral projection or people were like taking hallucinogenics and flying across the landscape You know, yeah, it's when you look at ancient maps that are really accurate It really is kind of amazing that they did all the stuff from a land level They did it looking down. They figured out from traversing going around the circumference of a continent You know when they when they when they would do that if they would go around the outside of a continent and market and then you look at it and it's stunningly Similar to what we take today with satellite imagery that really is amazing It is amazing and you know, we spend a lot of time talking about how how advanced we are now right how We've done with technology, but we don't talk a lot about all these skills that we've lost sure So that's what I like going out into the landscape I love going out for a couple of days just hike you know hiking through the woods with a compass You know figuring it out leave turn the phone off leave it at home I mean give someone a sextant and tell them figure your way across the ocean. Right. Yeah, good luck right I mean just looking at one of those things or how about that Ancient Greek computer thing. What is that called? Oh, the apic. No, no, no. That's accounting thing the the that that there's a device that they found that consists of A myriad of moving gears that took forever for them to try to understand it's it's called the anti Who I'm gonna fuck up the word. You know I'm talking about Jamie. Yeah, Jamie knows what I'm talking about There's this this thing that they found that's intensely complex and it's thousands of years old and they found it in a shipwreck and They had to try to back engineer what this fucking thing is and how it worked But get drolly That's thing right I don't think The celestial sphere that's that's really cool. That's cool. That's cool. That is a different thing though. I mean it is really cool Pretty amazing The original smartphone. That's funny, but no there's it's uh it's a an ancient Greek essentially It's an ancient computer just pull up ancient computer Ant-e-th That's what I mean I typed an ancient Greek ocean exploration tool no no, but it's not that it's not an ocean explanation Exploration tool. It's actually like a computer. It's an god damn it. I wish I wrote it down It's um the word is anti. That's it. That's it. That's it. He's theo. Yeah That's it so click on that thing They found that and they're like okay, what in the fuck is this and This anti go so I could read it and anti Kytheora mechanism a two thousand year old computer and they found this and They had to try to figure out what this is and see how they've kind of 3d mapped it and reimagined yeah, I mean I don't even know what they used it for Let's let's let's click on that. What is the ante that the article to write and Dale expressed? Yeah, that's what it says Google Doodle marks the discovery of the ancient Greek computer So this is Okay, there's an instance on a planet as well as predict the dates and colors of colors Yeah in some way, but all it's a computer right so this thing is two thousand year old device was even capable of adding multiplying dividing and subtracting so they found it in May 17th 1902 and It was discovered in a Roman cargo shipwreck For years they were baffled by the purpose of the mysterious object and initially assumed the mechanism was a gear or wheel But the archeologist soon discovered that the device was a complex machine capable of various fact factions the anti Kytheora mechanism gathered interest in 1950s Its complexity function and computational powers has led it to be dubbed the first ever computer Fucking crazy. Do you don't you wonder how much stuff we have lost? Oh, yeah, you know or how much stuff is still in the ground Oh, yeah, kind of haunts me. I could you know you could go crazy thinking about Just start digging up everything and try and unveil all these ancient mysteries. Well, you really could You know particularly when you think about um, you know I don't know if you're familiar with you said you know about Randall or Graham Hancock But you know about Graham Hancock and Randall Carlson the two of them sort of combined Their their data and their research and Randall Carlson is an expert in astrological or Excuse me. I asked to Royal or meteorological impacts. Would you say meteor impacts right? asteroid impacts I think once it hits the earth. It's an asteroid. Yeah and he is Proponent of this theory that is gaining a lot of traction that the ice age ended abruptly because of an impact and it's a coincides with soil samples with These samples they've shown that show a lot of that and tried it was called trit night nuclear glass Yeah, that's really tight. Trent. I thank you that from the Trinity Project right? Yeah They they found this stuff when they do core samples Somewhere in that neighborhood of 12,000 years, which is the neighborhood where the ice age ended scattered all throughout Europe and United States and they believe that something happened some sort of an impact multiple impacts around 12,000 years ago It ended the ice age abruptly and probably caused a lot of flooding and probably was the the origin of the epic of Gilgamesh flood story you know as arc flood story and also why there seems to be some sort of a reset of civilization There's a pretty 12,000 years ago technology and then there's sort of a dead zone of several thousand years and then things reignite again after that. Well, it it lends credence to that kind of oral memory too right? Yeah Like if like if that memory has been passed down and it's what's left is this kind of kernel Right, there's like there's something there that we're attaching stories to to make sense of it Yeah, and this is where the conspiracy theories come from too, right? Like one of the preppers that I spoke to He's actually here in California Um, the first time I met him he started talking about planet X Niberu Niberu Yeah, and he was he saw Zechariah's kitchen. You ever read his stuff? No Fastening weirdo stuff. Well, he's so he so he told me You know Niberu is Niberu is is hiding behind the sun and it's going to emerge and the last time it emerged was 4,000 years ago And that's where the that's where the flood story comes from because it's going to create a pole shift So the north and south pole are going to flip and that's what creates The tidal wave event and so he told me that he was building his bunkers to be submerged in 200 feet of water Well, he might be adding to the story Well, no, I mean, but what's that's part of the problem What's interesting there is you kind of you know, there's a there with these conspiracy theories There's always a kernel of truth, right? There's always a kernel of something that you can hold on to but then it just gets spin in a slightly weird way And I think what some of it is kind of displaced anxiety, right? Because we like these disasters have happened. We know they have happened. We know that they will happen We don't quite want to admit it, but it's a lot easier to pin it on some kind of you know Impossible event than just to decide that like the world is chaos and we have to deal with it. Yeah, there's many many many points of chaos It's not just aliens Exactly Zacharias kitchen is fascinating. You should I mean, I'm not saying I buy into any of his theories But what I am saying is what he did expose that is undeniable was the rich history of illustrations from Sumer That are really fascinating particularly the origin of the the Cadusius the origin of the double helix DNA that seems to be it's When you look at that that sign that that symbolizes medicine, you know the two snakes crossing together that originated in ancient Sumer and it originated with a lot of these ancient clay tablets that showed what could be It's it really is open to interpretation, right? But what he interpreted the way he interpreted it and he's got a very extraordinarily unusual interpretation of the Sumerian text and his interpretation of Sumerian text is that it is a historical record of These beings that came from another planet and genetically manipulated human beings and the crazy thing is when you look at these Clay tablets and the illustrations you see these strange things like you see these god-like creatures Holding these humanoid creatures that are much smaller than them with tails They have tails like monkeys you see the entire solar system. We're talking about 6,000 year old clay tablets, right? Back then the the general consensus was that the world was flat if you if you would talk to you know many You know many people from many different cultures. They did not Think that the the solar system had a sun in the center and that there was planets that were orbiting it Well, they had a depiction of the solar system not just a depiction but all of the planets in the proper order Like pull up the image of the Sumerian Solar system. This is 6,000 years ago. Look at this picture So these gods look at that the Sun the Center all the planets no extra planets all the planets is Pluto in there um, I think it was How many we got there 1 2 3 4 5 6 79 10 11 well they the count of the moon is a planet which is odd and Then they counted Nibiru Nibiru is this planet that they claim that's it right there That's on this 3,600 year elliptical orbit right now There's no evidence in the Nibiru right there's no evidence that that's true But who knows how much of this you know We're getting from these people that are interpreting this language that's essentially a dead language no one can even speak it So how much fuckery is involved in that? I don't know. I mean, I'm a moron. I'm not a religious scholar I'm not a linguist. I don't really understand this stuff But I do know that the epic of Gilgamesh Which is also Sumerian tail shares a lot of similarities with the Bible including the similarities between the flood stories the origin stories You know, there's there's just a lot of weirdness to that stuff But the fact that these people had this story of the Anunnaki and the Anunnaki According to sichon that the literal translation is those from heaven to earth came And that they had come here and that they had you know done some and this is his interpretation They'd done and by the way, there's a website called sichon is wrong dot com and you can go there and this is another Scholar of Sumerian history that refutes all of his claims. Who's right who's wrong? I don't know, but it's it's really weird just the stuff that you can't get away from is really weird And that's the the solar system the fact that they had it is detailed map of the solar system Again, you're talking about when I say detailed they scrawled it on clay tablet six thousand years ago But clearly the center is the sun it even looks like the sun It's much larger than anything else the sun's a million times larger than earth And it's just this big thing and then you see all these things around it that are supposedly representative of Jupiter Neptune The Venus it's it really does look like Mars earth like there really does look like this is their drawing On clay of the solar system. Like how the fuck did they do that? What are they doing? Yeah, I know it's fascinating and I think it's certainly worth you know wherever we fall on these debates Yeah, and it's certainly worth talking about right and it's worth investigating and when I When I started working with with these do you say preppers? I had I took a lot of heat from some of my my friends in academia What are they saying what's saying? Well, you know, they're right wingers They've got disgusting political views. They're racist. They're misogynists. They're they're buying into conspiracy theories Why would you give them airtime basic? Let me stop right there Why would you generalize an entire group of weirdos? Well exactly like that. That's so crazy exactly And what do you think that is though? What is the the motivation to do that? Well, it's it's it's it's people tribalizing right? It's part of this part partisan divide that we're experiencing particular To demonstrate particularly in this country. Yeah, or right and left or whatever whatever binary you want to pick You know and and for you know, I mean we can go over the reasons why we've ended up in this situation but we are You know, we're running headlong into into a very partisan age. Yeah And you know, I feel like the solution to that is Actually, you know, it's it's going in spending time with people that you disagree with right It's extending some empathy, right and it's not necessarily about giving people voice But it is about giving people space and time. Yeah, right and so I have to be honest, you know a lot of these preppers I hung out with it was it was hard to hang out with them You know, so now this is one of the guys You know did this thing where every time we were meeting he would he would rate women as they walked by She was a seven she's a nine she's a one, you know, and it was it was really hard not to interject and say man She's grocery shopping leave her alone. Yeah You know the conspiracy theories were were constant, but there's also a kind of We can think about about like people who are prepping on the everyday like the you know The person who's just cares about taking care of themselves and their family and maybe they're interested in building community Right, but then there are the people who are selling the antidote to their fears I in the book I call these people the dread merchants, right? The people who are gonna sell you the bunker, you know Jim Baker and his oh, yeah, Jim bass food and his survival water How how amazing are those buckets of food that you could use as the base of a table? Do you know I love those any any talks about using them as porta John's and Yeah, he sells the Bible buckets as well Have you ever some buckets? What's a Bible book? It's just a bucket full of Bibles, you know Just in case right even more than one Bible. I know yeah Well, maybe you got a big family. Maybe you go on the old testament of shit. It's really weird Have you ever seen the the Vic burger remixes of the gym? Yes, I have man. They are so much fun Yes, I got really addicted to those when I was working on this project. It was kind of my it became a must like a Mantra, you know, it's running in the background It's so strange that he was the guy that was attached to the Jessica Hahn Controversy back in the 1980s. I mean I remember that. Yeah, do you remember the gym Baker? that he was the guy that was attached to the Jessica Hahn controversy back in the 1980s. I mean, I remember that? Yeah. Do you remember the Jim Baker? Like he had had an affair with this woman and it became, for whatever reason, this big news was like the same guy because it was because then we still expected people to be guided by their moral compass. You know, everyone's a hypocrite now. Right. Then there was Jimmy Swagger, got caught with a hooker and he was crying, I have soon. Do you remember that? Do you remember that? That was good. Yeah. No one confesses anything anymore. No one admits any work anymore. He's a bristle. Any Bible bucket. Yes. I love that one. Oh, bucket of Bibles. Why not? That's only 50 bucks. That's a pretty good deal. How many Bibles you get? 24. I think it says, should we get a bucket of Bibles? I feel like we should have one at the studio. I feel like we should have one at the studio. I don't want to feed the beast, but you should get one. I think it's 50 bucks for me. What the fuck do you know? We did at least a table worth. A table worth of Bibles. Six buckets. How many buckets makes a table? Shouldn't we get the food? Should we just get the Bibles? Well, one bucket of Bibles and five buckets of food. But his fucking food. I love watching him feed the audience. You're going to get from the giant trough. You can get real good freeze-dried food that will last forever. Hell yeah, he can. He's bullshit. Yeah. So what the fuck? Cremie potato soup. Oh my God. Look at that sloth. Yeah. And they do a big thing of rice. And they mix it all together. The bucket of sloth is poured on top of it. Googlepeakrefuel.com. This is my friend Chad Mendez has a really delicious company that they make. actual. I think is it freeze-dried? I think his stuff is freeze-dried or dehydrated. I'm not sure. But people are doing it now. Freeze-dried. Yeah. People are doing it now where you can keep this stuff forever. This is my buddy Chad's stuff. This is really good for you. It's actually delicious and healthy. Yeah, he's doing mylar bags. That's much better than doing bucket. Yeah. And he's a Chad is a former UFC fighter. He's a great guy who's actually a hunter. And he makes everything zarganic and really healthy. And when you reconstitute it, it actually tastes good. So you don't have to buy that gym-big or bull-shit. You can actually buy that. Check this out. I went to a community in just outside of Dallas. And they were, this is a budding prepper community. And they had built this 50-foot fountain, ringed by the four horses of the apocalypse. Oh, of course. Oh, of course. I mean, it's like in a rural county, in a town with like 300 people. They bought all this land. It was a square mile of land. And it had these green lagoons in there that were dredged out for grazing cows at some point. And they were going to revitalize these into these kind of like crystal blue lagoons with white beach sand. And they were going to build a bunker community in there called Trident Lakes. So the lakes or the blue lagoons. And he told me that their plan was to do a kind of outer perimeter wall around this that was going to be a giant berm around shipping containers. So essentially the wall would be hollow. And he said he was going to fill it with buckets of food and whatever. And I kept imagining, you know, Jim Baker's Bible buckets just lined up down the walls of this thing, you know, to keep intruders out. Just a fucking 12 foot high wall of Bible buckets. But they had this X Navy seal working for them. And I'm waiting to meet with the CEO. He's like, he put, he's kept me there for about three days, you know, and trying to interview this guy. And in the meantime, they put me on the phone with this X Navy seal. And he's going to go over their security plan with me. So he tells me about the wall. And then they're going to put up a chain link fence with bar wire. And they're going to have dogs and CCTV cameras. And they've got to kind of no man's land between the fence and the shipping containers, right? And he told me, as a geographer, you've got to understand you've got to control the geospase, you know, the geospase. What's the geospice? I don't know, man. I guess it's just space, you know, you've got to count control of it. But he said, don't you love when people use extra words? I know. Yeah. But then he, but then he started going down this rabbit hole where he's like, you know, we did some, we did some Googling. Oh, there's, there's Muslim groups in Texas. Oh, my goodness. And I was like, Oh, okay. And he, and he goes, and you know, it's, it's not just Muslim groups. It's not just, just black lives matter. There's white nationalists. There's people, we don't like any of those extremist views. And I'm thinking, well, this is, this is kind of extreme. Like what you, you guys are playing in here. We don't like any extremist, we don't like white nationalists. That's hilarious. Yeah. I met, I met some really interesting people on this project. Um, you know, there were, there were people who were kind of on the deep end of things. I met this. Well, I met one guy in Kansas. I'm sure, I'm sure a lot of your, your listeners will have run into this place. Is survival condo in Kansas. No, never heard about. Dude, it's awesome. So there's survival condo. Survival condos. It was actually a condo. It's a condo. So that one condo. This guy, listen to this, this guy. So there's, there's two kinds of, um, nuclear missile silos from the Cold War that are in the Midwest. The first kind is a kind of a horizontal one where they would lift the missile up to fire it. And then the later ones they build, the Atlas F silos are vertical. So they're 200 feet deep. And they had a, you know, nuclear tipped ICBM intercontinental ballistic mission. Yeah. Yeah. So, so I'm going home with a price tag of two million. Oh my God. Well, it's 1 and a half million for a half floor inside this thing or 3 million for a full floor. But dude, this guy converted the entire missile silo into a subterranean condo complex. So those are like LCD screens that make it look like you're outside. Yeah. Oh my God. That's so nuts. So, and the only thing he told me, hold on. Oh, he's got a pool. Yeah, he's got a pool with a waterfall. Actually, it's pretty dope. Dude, there's a rock wall. It's fantastic. It's got a theater. Yeah, we'll watch it. We watched double in there. Wow. What is that? That's where they melt the bodies. That's where they're raising fish in their telepia. Oh my goodness. Yeah, they've got an FDA certified growing facility in there. Duncan went to one of these places. When I was telling you, I did that television show where we went to the CDC. Duncan met with these people. I don't know if it was this group, but it was real similar. St. Penthouse. He's got a drinklifts. Right? He's got a, some ballers probably have some sort of crazy set up there. So, get this. The guy, he bought this. Oh, that's pretty nice. He bought this thing for $300,000. The missile silo. Does he sound on these? Yeah. And he dumped, I think, 10 million. Four and a half million. Yeah. Jesus. That's the penthouse. That's a fat house. Would you live there? Yeah, totally. If you did, would you have like a velvet robe and invite people over with a, like a, a kovacier in a sniffter? Come over. Sit there and smoke my, yeah. I bought top of my bivalrous. Cigars. Don't you want cigars? I'm going to play like that. You're a baller. You have time for a fucking cigar. Cigars, you have to, or a pipe rather. Pipes, you have to relight. It's annoying. It's a strum over in a shaker. You're going to condo. That's $4 and a half million under the ground. Protecting, predicting you from bombs. Well, so I, so I'm down there, like we're a hundred feet underground. How do they get their air? And I'm inside. And he's, he's got a redundant filtration systems, pulling air from the outside. I mean, pulling air with a mechanism, like, he's got nuclear biological and chemical air filtration systems. He's also got a volcanic ash scrubber. So if the caldera does blow, he can actually scrub the ash out of the calm. Yeah, no serious. So Larry Hall told me that the guy who built this, Larry Hall told me they could stay in there for five years. But then you know, you know, with Larry for five years, smelling his farts. He does. And then there was stupid jokes. He does have a condo in there. So he's not going to escape. Four and a half million bucks. And where is this again exactly? And it's in the middle of Kansas. It's in the middle of a bunch of corn fields. There's nothing out there at all. I have a body who lives in Iowa right now and I'm trying to get him to move. I mean, there's issues out there, man. Yeah. I mean, one of the problems is how do you get to it, right? You're going to have to hike. Yeah. Well, it could be weeks. But it depends on what kind of disaster you've got. Right. Yeah. He's got a, if you buy into one of his packages, he's got a like, SWAT style bulletproof vehicle. Oh, great. And you pick you up, you know, that. Great. Then you hang out with Larry in a bulletproof vehicle. You got to have to thank him for saving your life. You know what I asked him about the security guards, right? Because he's got these camouflage security guards with ARs standing at the gates. And you know, they roll the gate open when you get there. And they lay it through. And I said, do what keeps the security guards here after the call there are? They're a blows or whatever. And, you know, I asked if they had space in the bunker and they didn't. So I mean, I guess you just lose your exterior security when they don't have a fucking security condo? Larry, stop being such a greedy fuck. You need someone like you around to like give him like sort of a peripheral view or an objective view, rather of the outside. Like, hey, Larry, you're missing this. You got to, you got to hold in your theory. So in my in my previous life, all those security people, they're like a shitty fucking action movie. Look at these people. That's how I'm hearing the people. That's how I buddy Adam. Look at them closing on that guy in the middle with a black vest. That's fucking how to carry. That's how to. Is that how to carry? That's the pod father. He's going to do his, his podcast, no agenda from the condo. That's what he's doing. So pretty sweet trucks. They are sweet. Yeah. Not going to lie. They're not going to struggle. They're real deal. Those are pretty dope. I went to another place in Utah called plan B supply. And they're, this is all they do is they build these kind of bullet proof, armored, uh, four-wheel drive, sometimes six-wheel drive trucks. Like they're crazy rigs. So they buy them a lot of them. They buy from the government, you know, the government retires equipment. And they'll just buy, you know, 30 humvies or whatever and have them delivered to the shop. And then they'll put bullet proof plating on it. Yeah. They tune them up. Look at that. Yeah. These guys are super cool. Uh, how little does your dick have to be before that become an option? Oh, that looks dope though. But so that what they told me is they said you're never going to get to the bunker in a serious event. Right. So what you need is a vehicle needs to be your bunker. That one right there. You're never going to get to the bunker? Yeah. No. They said just turn the vehicle into your bunker. Wow. So I drove that one there. Maybe you don't want to live. You ever thought about that? Yeah. This is what I say. If there's an asteroid impact, I want it to hit me in the fucking face. I really do. I don't want to do this man. You know, I watched that movie. What is that movie with a Vigo Mortenson the road? I watched that for five minutes. When he was teaching his kid on a shoot himself in the mouth and like, check, I have kids. I'm not doing this. No, I had a couple of preppers tell me. You know, how you prep depends on what you're prepping for, right? And a lot of them told me if we're talking about it, an extinction level event, the cold air out nuclear war, whatever, right? They just would run into it. You know, like there's absolutely no point in trying to survive that. Yeah, that's the move. Yeah. They're thinking more about, you know, you got to restart evolution. That's what it is. Whatever is underground, moles and shit. They just have to start all over again. You know? Well, think. Yeah. I mean, things that shruze things that we came from, right? Yeah, things that were underground survived. What are the previous catastrophes? That does look dope, though. You know what you like to do? If you ever got divorced and you just were like seven years old, and you had some money in the bank, and you like to do ecstasy, you take that to Burning Man. Oh, yeah. Fuck yeah. Now we're talking. Yeah. We need one of those. You pick people up and you bug out. We need an air stream, right? We need a dope like an air stream. Air stream. Pull it with a, get a, get a raptor. Pull the air stream. Yeah. I like it. Anyway, those guys are doing well. They're working overtime. Are they, though? Yeah. Yeah. They're pretty cool. They're, they're, they're Mormons. You know what they, you know what they told me? So I asked them what, you know, what, what is the plan to escape the disaster when it hits in this vehicle, like layout the logistics for me? And they said, Oh, no, you misunderstand. We're not building these vehicles to escape the disaster. We're building these vehicles to assist. And actually they've got a, they call it a disaster relief crew. And they've been going into disasters like, he was Hurricane Harvey. They actually drove the vehicles down and they were, they were rescuing people from the flood waters. And they told me a couple of stories about, you know, people who were waiting for FEMA to show up basically waiting for FEMA to get their act together and plan be went down there with their vehicles and essentially just drove past them as FEMA saying, you know, you're not welcome here. We've gone under control and they just drove past them and rescued people and got them out of there. But that's awesome. Yeah, it's pretty cool. I mean, you know, they probably have some ulterior motives there as Mormons, you know, maybe they're thinking, hey, if we're the ones that rescue these people, I mean, certainly their aid programs are aimed at conversion, right? Sure. You know, if you send all of this food, I mean, you know, and missionaries, yeah, they're missionaries. So yeah, I started to think of these as rescue rigs with missionary zeal, you know, you're building these as a kind of, you know, you've got like, Mormons, you could, someone could come in, someone who's like very influential and logical could come in and talk to Mormons and go listen. Like if a shit hits the fan and you're around a lot of Mormons, you go listen. You guys got a lot of things right, a lot of things. You're the nicest cult members ever. Like Mormons are so nice. I lived next to a Mormon for 10 years. He was so nice. He was a great guy. But out of his fucking mind, you know, he was out of his fucking mind. He really believed that Joseph Smith found golden tablets that contained the lost work of Jesus. But like as a human, wonderful, there's some of the nicest cult members. We all believe weird shit, you know, but that's a weird issue. I know, it is weird. Because the problem is they got, they know who the guy was. It's like Elrod Hubbard and Scientology. You know who the guy is. We're not talking about like some mythology. It's not talking about like some scrolls they found in Kuma Ron and Clay Jars. No, this isn't the Dead Sea Scrolls. This is a fucking book written by a liar who was 14. He was a liar and they caught him lying and he's like the angels came and took it away. That's what he said. Like when you read the Joseph Smith story and then he was murdered. Because he was a piece of shit. Like it's a crazy story. The Joseph Smith story is no, he had a seer stone and only he could read it. Like it is like a 14 year old lie. And the fact that it's prevalent today in 2020. Not only that, but there's literally gigantic groups of them that live in Mexico so they could still have 10 wives, which is nuts. And that Mitt Romney, a guy who fucking ran for president, his family comes from that. Mitt Romney's dad could run for president because he was born in Mexico. Do you know that? No. I can't hear that. Mitt Romney's whole tribe is from the people who escaped America back in the fucking wagon train days because they told me, hey, you can't have 10 wives asshole. And they're like, we're going to just go over here. Because Mexico was not that different to be in Mexico or America back when there was no cars or buildings. You know what I mean? Like you have a house over there. You have a house over here. You have a house over there. You can have your eight wives. So they stayed over there. And then the Industrial Revolution kicked in and buildings and electricity and air travel. And these motherfuckers are still stuck in Mexico. Now I'm sure you know the story about those, the groups of Mormons down there that had a run in with the cartel. And the families are murdered and the children and the wives. That's what that is. Those are the Mormons that fucking Mitt Romney came from. Well, you know, when I actually looked back at the history of Mormons and prepping, because I mean, they're the most prepared people on earth. There's no doubt about it. Do they have massive stockpiles? And as you say, like when I went, I mean, a lot of the work that I did for this book was really difficult to get access to these places. Like preppers don't want to talk about what they're doing, right? But when I went to Salt Lake City, they were like, come on in. And you want to bring people into the phone. Oh, yeah. And they wanted me to volunteer at their factories and with the opposite of Jews. Jews make it really hard to join. Mormons are like, you can join anytime you want. Come on in right now. We'll not be on your door. Yeah. They brought me to the factory and they were showing me all the 25 year cans of, you know, oats and spaghetti bites and, you know, all this stuff. A lot of flour that they're producing and they were like, you can volunteer anytime. That's why they have so many wives. But preppers. Yeah. Well, who's one? You have eight more laying around. But I went to go. I went to a conference in Salt Lake City. And there was this guy there, Dave Jones, who was giving a talk about EMPs. And he says, yeah, just out of curiosity, how many of you people have basements? Like 80% of the audience. What are the key? That's the lecture. Electromagnetic pulse. Right. That would wipe out the electronics. Yeah. So he was doing kind of a workshop on how you could like turn your basement into a Faraday cage that would protect it from the EMP. And I swear, like 80% of the audience had basements because they're Mormons. And they've got food storage down there. So then I started doing research on this. And it turns out that there was a guy called Ezra Taft Benson during sort of the height of the Cold War or the beginning of the Cold War that was, he was served on the, the core of the 12 Apostles. So he's like, he was high up in the Mormon church. But he also worked for the Eisenhower administration. And he was, he was advising the president on how to prepare for nuclear war. And so he was taught, he was, you know, one of the people pouring honey in the president here about like you've got to have fallout shelters. You've got to have food preparation. So all of those Cold War shelters, you know, you think back to, to, um, the civil defense administration and the construction of all of those shelters and stalking them with those, those disgusting biscuits and stuff. A lot of that actually came from the Mormon church. So there's a long history of them being wrapped up with the government. Have you ever seen the television show, the unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt? No. It's fucking hilarious. It's a Tina Fey produced it. It's a really, really funny show that's on Netflix. But it's based on a girl and her friends that were kidnapped into an underground bunker cult. And she lived in this cult for 15 years. And then they rescued her. And now she has to exist in modern society in New York City. It's really, really funny. Right. I mean, but it's based on that. I mean, they're in a bunker. And they think the end of the, they think the world above them is gone. And, you know, they were living with this crazy guy who is, what the fuck's his name? Ham? What's that guy's name? John Ham. Yeah. He's the main guy. He's the main cult leader guy. So there's a, there's a science fiction novel by this guy, Hugh Howie. Will you ever read that? No. So this, it's kind of a similar plot where these people are born inside of a silo. It's very much like Larry Hollis-Sylo. It actually freaked me out when I read this thing. And they wake up in there and they, you know, their whole lives exist within here. And there's a kind of social hierarchy, you know, like on the mechanical levels. You've got people doing grunt work. But at the top of this silo, there's, there are these screens that are showing you the outside, right? And of course what you see is this sort of blast, stricken landscape and red sand and, you know, I mean, it's impossible. You know, it's, it's the post-apocalyptic world out there. And of course people after a while start having discussions about, you know, how do we know that that's a window? Like what if it's, you know what I mean? Like because it's cameras that are filming from outside and they're projecting down to the window. And when I was, when I was down there with Larry Holl in the survival condo, he, you know, he turned on the, the quote unquote windows. And we're, we're looking at the security guard standing out there and I can see my rental car and I see his truck. And I'm like, okay. And then he says, oh, you know, most people want to see the outside. But you know, I can, I can show you like a beach in San Francisco or whatever. Like he's just flipping through these feeds, right? That are your reality. So it could be like terminator. It could show you a scene from terminator. You have no idea whether what you're seeing is real. And so, and so he flips back to that, thank you. So he flips back to that feed of the security guard standing there and I'm thinking to myself, hey, cheers, Brent. He, and I'm thinking to myself, what if that is a recording of when I got here, right? And I have, I have no idea whether that's a live feed. So he, I mean, imagine the power that this man wields with the 70, the 57 people that have space in the bunker, right? That once he shuts the blast door, he could tell him absolutely anything. That literally the plot of unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt. There you go. Well, it's real. And so here's the, here's the really weird thing. I met Hugh how the guy that wrote that book, he was like, he's actually sailing around the world right now. He's a fucking awesome guy. You should have him on the podcast. Sounds good. Dude, he's really fascinating. But he was in, he was in the Sydney Harbor and I was living there. And I actually, I just sent him a message on Twitter and I'm like, hey, I'm at the library right now. I think you're in the harbor. You know, you want to hang out. And he goes, yeah, sure, I'll pick you up in the dinghy. Me and my girlfriend jump in there and he takes us out to his catamaran. And, you know, the first thing I asked him, I said, look, I, I went to this, this, this bunker in Kansas and it, there's a remarkable similarity between this and the fiction that you wrote. And he said, I've never heard of it. Right. I later email Larry Hall and I said, have you ever read this book? And he said, never heard of it. It turns out, though, that Hall was building the bunker at the same time that how he was writing the novel. Who? I just, one of those weird kind of moments you're like, you know, is it kind of of like, more thick residue? Yeah, yeah, the collective consciousness. Yeah, that's that thing where like if a rat learns a maze on one side of the planet, other rats on the other side of the planet can learn it quicker. Yeah. And I mean, it's kind of concerning in the context of prepping, right? Yeah. If you've got a lot of people thinking about this way, thinking in this way about about a post-apocalyptic world and whether that's fiction or whether it's video games, whether it's novels or whether it's people actually building spaces, you know, the concern is that it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. And that comes back to, you know, your question about, well, if you, if you spend all this time prepping, you kind of, you kind of want the disaster to happen, right? Like you want to, you want to test your prep. Especially as you get older and you want to be vindicated. Yeah, if you're like 70. Yeah. Like in your fucking hips going. Yeah. Probably, let's get this party started. Exactly. Let's hit the reset button and see what happens next. Isn't that the problem with having a president who's that old too? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, it's the likelihood of them, you know, just hitting the button and starting the, you know, fabled mutually assured destruction. Well, that's what everybody was worried about with Reagan, you know, and we should probably be, we concern, especially if Trump gets a second term. Absolutely. I mean, you started to become nihilistic in your old age and thinking. Plus you're on speed, right? Yeah, speed. You're not a nihilistic. Yeah. It's, I mean, prepping also is something that starts to happen in middle age, right? Because you become aware of your own mortality. Yeah. When you're young, you're like, I'm invincible. I can do anything. And then at some point, you're like, actually, I need a bit of armor here, because I'm not, I'm not able to do the things I was able to do before. And I can, you can feel yourself declining. I think you probably have a more comprehensive audit of the variability or the, the variables, although the different things that are happening at the same time, all over the world, all the different possibilities, all the, the different vulnerabilities that we all have. There's so many things going on. Your own body, the coronavirus pandemic, other diseases that are still here, you know, there's a, a new swine flu that they're concerned with that's, emanating out of China. Perfect. And the kinds of things can happen. Then China hates us now. You know, we're all, everyone's mad at each other. Iran hates us. I mean, this North Korea is pretty pissed off too. There's so much shit going on simultaneously. Plus natural disasters. And it's hard to know whether there are more disasters or whether there's more awareness of disasters, right? Like, does our awareness of all these things happening all the time and our obsession with knowing about them and ingesting all of that information constantly? You know, again, does it start to manifest because it becomes part of our consciousness? Like we think, yeah, the world is in constant chaos. These disasters are unfolding. And then of course they unfold because, you know, we're all thinking, we're all expecting them. Well, I think that's certainly the issue with social media and the interpretation of the world around us. Because the only things again, again, any traction or things that are bad, you know, we have in many ways this ancient tribal mind that focuses on threats. And the threats of imminent danger that are specific to where you're living are valid. Right? If you're living in a small tribe and you know that there's another tribe that's about to attack, well, that's very dangerous. If you know that there's a storm coming in that's going to wipe out your island, that's very dangerous. But if you're in the middle of fucking Kansas and you're multi-million dollar bunker condo and some shits going down in North Korea, like how is it even affecting you? But if you're on Google, it's going to affect you. If you're looking at your Google newsfeed every day, if you're on Twitter and you're reading about the riots in Portland, you're like, oh my god, the world's ending. But then you're like, it's like that old Bill Hicks bit. There was a Bill Hicks bit about CNN from, I mean, this is like Bill Hicks wrote this. He did this in like the early 90s. He's like AIDS, war, pit bulls, like all these different things. He goes in, you open up your window. Chirp, chirp, chirp, chirp, chirp. He goes, where the fuck is all this happening? Like Ted Cruz was in Ted Cruz. Who's the guy who owns CNN? Ted, the guy who owns the buffaloes. The fucking Jane Fondis husband. I know the right- The fuck's his name, man. How do we not know his name? Oh, wow. No, CNN. Ted Turner. Ted Turner. He's like Ted Turner's making the shit up. Jane Fondis won't fuck him. Now he wants everybody to die. It was a great Hicks bit from the early 90s. But it's kind of the same thing. It's true. We're not designed to take in the threats of seven billion people. The idea of the internet, the idea of this rapid and instantaneous distribution of information we get all of the bad news first because you need the bad news. If you said, if I came over your house and I said, hey, man, what's going on? You say everything's good. I got a birthday cake. We're celebrating. We got this cool craft beer. I got some friends coming over. Oh, and there's a bunch of guys that are plotting to murder us. Why didn't you tell me that first? We got to get out of here. We can't drink the craft brew and eat the cake. We got the proper business. That's localized, right? I mean, think about it in the context of the Cold War, right? Yeah. So the nuclear threat never manifested. I mean, we had some nuclear emergencies at three mile island in Chernobyl. But the nuclear threat of attack, it's a perfect example because it brought the world together in an instantaneous fashion. Not instantaneous, but you know, a couple minutes. If they launched from Soviet Union, they launched nuclear weapons on us. How much time did we have? We had a couple minutes. And so there was this threat. I mean, I'm 52. How old are you? Oh, hell of the night now. You don't even know how old are you? 39. Jesus Christ. When I was in high school, we were really worried. There was this constant threat of nuclear war with Russia. The Cold War was real. Yeah. I didn't go to the lived threats. I didn't, you know, we would read stuff or we would see something on the news and go to bed. And I remember being a kid, like 12, 13 years old thinking, oh my God, we're going to go to war with Russia. They're going to blow us up. We would watch those videos of the fucking experiments with the atomic bombs and the ocean. But we're going to die. We're going to die. We're going to go to war with Russia. And this is going to be the end of humanity as we know. We know they already did it with Chernobyl, or with Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That wasn't that long ago. When I was in high school, that was 30 years ago. Like, that's not that long, you know? Yeah. I get you. Did you ever see the photo of Bikini Atoll where they do the nuclear explosion? And the ocean? And the battleship is being sucked into the mushroom cloud. Oh my God. It's terrifying. They didn't know what that was going to be like either. They thought those battleships were far enough away. They would be OK. Yeah. But imagine the collective psychological damage that did everyone on the planet living with that sphere. And we don't know whether having that fear and still within us prevented the nuclear war from happening. Right? Yeah. to everyone on the planet, living with that. Yeah. And we don't know whether having that fear and still within us prevented the nuclear war from happening, right? I mean, that's the catch-22. Well, I think we're in this stage as human beings where we have this incredible ability to send and receive information, but we haven't quite caught up yet in terms of our ability to manage that. Like we have this insane unprecedented ability to access and send information. It's never existed like this before, whether it's and also for everybody, right? You could make a YouTube video to... You could have 400 fucking YouTube subscribers and make a YouTube video tonight that reaches millions of people. For whatever reason, you send it to me, I go, holy shit. I send it to Jamie, Jamie sends it to his friends. I put it up on Twitter. Some famous person puts it up on their Twitter, and boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Next thing you know, it's gigantic. It reaches the whole world. But we don't have an equivalent ability to manage that type of information. So it's this new thing, but we don't have the tools in terms of like the understanding and the psychological preparedness. We don't have the ability to go, okay, so let's look at this in terms... Let's have a perspective that's honest or environment. Let's have an objective view of this. Let's have a balanced version of this information. Let's look at in terms of like how we communicate with each other. Instead of going into full-blown panic, let's treat each individual person as a friend and a neighbor and collectively let's manage this. Because that's what's not happening today. When you look at the riots in Portland or Seattle or anything like that, what's not happening is the one-on-one communication of people care about each other. What's instead happening is this massive tribal outburst. One tribe wants to take down the government and defund the police and to break into the courthouse and prove that they won. And the other tribe wants law and order and they're mason each other and fucking launching bombs and spray patent things. And it's like there's very little real communication. There's a lot of screaming and shouting and a lot of tribal behavior. But there's very little one-on-one recognition of each other's humanity. No, I think you're right. And I think it's because we're all living with dread. Yeah. You know, we're just saturated with dread. You know, I was thinking a lot in this book about the differences between dread and anxiety. Right? Like if you're anxious about something, it's specific. You're anxious about a particular thing. Right? But if you feel dread, it's more of rather than like an emotion, it's more of an affect. It's just kind of a sense of unease that you live with. And I think we're dreadful about so much right now that we're experiencing a sort of collective psychotic break. And so the inevitable result of that is tribalization. And you're like, I need to find my community that I can hang with that's going to protect me. You know, and we're going to come up with answers to solve this problem. So the preppers are one manifestation of that. Right? They're like, we're all going to move into our bunker community and we've got our guns. We've got our supplies. And you know, we're going to ride this thing out. And then these riders are another community. They're like, we're going to burn this shit down. We're going to start over. You know? And so that tribalization is extremely problematic because as you know, you're right, the conversation we need to be having is a collective conversation about like, what are the threats and how do we address them? And there seems to be a breakdown in our ability to have those conversations. And I have a theory here that I'll try out on you. OK. And I think this actually goes back to the Cold War. Prior to the Cold War, we always had a sense that our government was there to protect us. That there are government would protect us. Right? But once we developed nuclear weapons, I mean, it was impossible to shelter everyone from this disaster. I mean, I think the early estimates that were given to the Truman administration was that it would be like the GDP of the country for an entire year to build blast shelters for everyone. So instead of doing that, what we know now, and this was a conspiracy theory in the past, what we know now is that the government built bunkers for themselves, but not for us. Right? And a lot of the, if there's a through line there, that if you move from the Cold War into the age of survivalists, like the 80s, when you had Ted Kuzinski, the Unabomor, and his cabin, he stands as a kind of symbol of this lone wolf survivalist. It's kind of anti-government. Right? There are other examples. Bo Grights, the guy who ran for president on the, I think it was on the libertarian ticket. He built a community called almost heaven, where they were, you know, he called it a constitutional community where like they were going to stop paying taxes and go off-grid, they were going to become self-sustaining whatever. What you can see with a lot of those survivalists is a sense of betrayal that's manifesting in them, wanting to break away from the government and build a new tribe, right? Because they're like, if you can't protect us, we'll protect ourselves, right? Okay. And so now we get to today and we've got 3.7 million Americans identify as preppers now. So they self-identify as preppers, right? And what you hear from a lot of them is this kind of, what we now interpret is a kind of libertarian narrative. It's like, well, I'm just going to take care of myself and my family, you know, it's like I'm just going it on my own. I don't trust the government. Is that 1%? It's basically in the neighborhood of 1%. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's a significant amount of people. I hung out with probably I went to half a dozen countries. I interviewed maybe 100 people and I was just, I mean, I just got to the tip of this thing. You know, I mean, do we have the most? Oh, for sure. Without a doubt. Without a doubt. But countries never do. Okay, but look, if you contrast this to Switzerland, for instance, where they did build the bunkers for the entire population. Right. For 110% of the population just in case visitors are in town. Wow. The whole country can go underground. Right now? Right now. Still functional? Yeah, totally. Well, I don't know. Is it funny that they're neutral? I don't know. I mean, well, let's work on that. But that's to, I mean, you know, but once you've prepared yourself, you've built your defenses, you're able to do that because you're like, yeah, go ahead and attack. Good luck. Yeah, we should have known from their knives. They're carrying things. They're getting pretty good. They're making knife with scissors on it and a screwdriver. What are you planning? Yeah. But North Korea is another example. I mean, that country is essentially underground. They have fleets of aircraft inside mountains. I mean, they got like, it would actually be incredibly difficult to attack that country because after the Korean war, it was essentially flattened, right? And they learned from that experience, like we've got to go underground if we're going to survive. The next war. Do we have an accurate account of what they have? No. Not at all. Really? But there's a lot of, there's a place here in California, an institute called the Nautilus Institute. And they do a lot of that research where they're just like, scrolling around on Google Earth and trying to figure out, you know, is that event shaft to a bunker? And can we estimate the size of that thing? Wow. And it's kind of fun to dig through their website. Because most of it was constructed pre-satellite, is that what it is? Yeah. Yeah. But there are telltale signs of a bunker. Can you go Google Earth over North Korea? Parts of it, I think. Huh. That's interesting. Yeah. I think parts of it, you can look at. Ultimately, the entire surface of the Earth is going to be, it's going to be mapped out, right? Yeah. I've actually got a friend who's been, he gave a paper at a conference I hosted where he was talking about measuring gravity from space. And basically you could, you could measure the mass or the density of subterranean infrastructures. And essentially you could see inside the Earth. Whoa. And so he was actually developing a theory for spoofing the gravity measurements. You know, so like you could build a bunker to look like a subterranean river, right? Oh. So you look at it from space and you're like, oh no, that's a geological structure. Yeah, formation. But because obviously a bunker is pretty obvious. You know, if you see a giant square hole. Would it be possible to spoof it by doing something that would offset whatever signal that's giving off? Definitely. Yeah. I think he had three theories for spoofing. And that was another one. And the third one. But the Earth is already Swiss cheese. There's so much stuff underground. Yeah. Before I worked with Prepper, it was my previous project was working with urban explorers. I spent 10 years in London breaking into abandoned buildings, construction sites, and subterranean infrastructure. And we started by opening manholes and getting into the London sewer system, which is quite cool. It's, you know, 250 years old. You open a manhole and you climb down a ladder. And then you're suddenly in this Victorian infrastructure, where there's, I think, 318 million hand-laid bricks. Right? And these beautiful tunnels that stretch down their gravity fed. And that's how they're cleaned as well. And they're a combined system. So it's freshwater and sewage. How old are you? These are 18, 1850s. So we went down there because a lot of these used to be subterranean rivers. And we were curious, like what they'll happen to the rivers. Well, they were all turning to the sewers. So I know, but the sewers are actually, they're not as bad as they sound. What does that mean? They're beautiful. They're beautiful. They're beautiful poop streams. I've got photos on my flicker page and Instagram, whatever. You can go see the sewer to London. That's my photo, actually. So that is the sewer in London. How's the smell down there? That's actually, that's the sewer in Paris. Oh. But that is my photo. There's me climbing a train. What are you doing? Why are you doing that? I'm in a construction crane. That's terrifying. Do you have a harness honoreting though? Fuck bro, don't die. Dude, this thing, so look at this thing right here. This is a, you know, remember the Concord Jets? Uh-huh. This is a Concord Jet Engine testing facility. And we found this giant abandoned factory where they're producing the Concord engines and snuck in there. And they later turned that into a set for Stargate. Wow. And we found like the gate for the Stargate. Really? It's a slit open. Wow. So that's London. That's a London sewer, but that's a newer one. That's a sewer? Yeah. How's that smell? That's fine. What does that mean? You have a T-shirt on this, that's a duepic shit. Yeah. That's over Chicago. Wow. No, it's a cool photography. Thanks. What are you using for these photographs? Uh, at the time I was shooting on a Canon 5D Mark III, but you know, yeah, basically I had a big DSLR. Now I've got a mirrorless camera, but they're all tripod shots. Wow. That's a queen Mary. That's amazing. These are crazy pictures. Is this in one of those books that you gave me? Yeah. So I gave you two books. I gave you subterranean London and London rising. Mm-hmm. And basically that's a span of 10 years from like 2008 to 2018, something like that. Um, where we were sneaking into all of these places. We were trespassing and taking photos. That was like, so these urban explorers. Uh, they're interested in like they see the city as kind of like an operating system, right? Like it's supposed to function in a certain way. Mm-hmm. And they were interested in disrupting that operating system and trying to sort of like get to the code behind the city. Like we want to see the wires. We want to see the tunnels. Right. We want to see the construction sites. We want to see how all this shit is functioning. How's the sewage work? Yeah, exactly. Yeah. When you flush your toilet, where does it go? Right. And we figured it out. You know, like I went underneath my own house and followed the pipe that came from my house into a sewer that went to an interceptor sewer that went to a pumping station. I walked the whole thing. It was super fascinating to actually figure out how it functioned, right? So after 10 years of doing this, I now have this map of London in my head that isn't three dimensions, right? So underneath the sewers, you had, um, utility tunnels. So gas, electricity, uh, telecommunications. What is happening there? Watering from a bore? That's me coming out of a manhole into into an electricity tunnel. Oh. Yeah. That's electricity tunnel under London. Yeah. Well, there's, there's tons of them. So you could just get in there and just fucking chop at those wires if you wanted to. Oh, well. You could do some damage. Isn't that weird? It's really weird. Like someone could just leave a bomb there. Yeah. Right. So it was hard to me over and over again as we were sneaking into these places is that it was really easy. Yeah. And so we're again, we're all saturated by these narratives about terrorism and people are out to get us and they're all in our cities and they're sleeper cells and we're all in danger. And then, you know, we're going out like, you know, a bunch of 20 year olds with some with some keys that we bought on Amazon and just opening everything up and going into it, right? And I don't know. I just, it made me feel like I was being lied to. When you talk about that, it wasn't what was promised. When you talk about all these prepper folks, how concerned are they about the power grid and how many of them believe that the future is going to be being autonomous having some sort of autonomous power supply, whether it's wind or solar or. Well, that's, that's a, I mean, that's a strong narrative, right? Yeah. That like the way we prep now, we couldn't have prepped 10 years ago because technology is facilitating it, right? We've got solar panels, we've got battery backup systems, you know, we've got ways of creating, of going off grid, becoming self sufficient that we didn't have before. A lot of preppers that I talked to are really concerned about a, a, a, a CME, a coronal mass ejection, a plasma burp from the sun. Which happens. It sends us, it happens all the time. Yeah. The, the northern light, Sierra or Borealis is, you know, coming from the sun, it's hitting the magnetic field around the earth and it's creating those lights. So in 1898, there was a, there was an event called the Carrington event where there was a massive solar burp. And this CME burned out telegraph lines in Canada and people in the Caribbean were seeing the Borealis. Well, yeah. In New York City, apparently people were reading the newspaper in the middle of the night by the lights that were in the sky. So what, what the preppers were telling me and actually what I, what I end up reading later in, in both Ted Cople's book lights out. And also in this book by Toby Orred at the University of Oxford called the prep, the precipice is that if we had a Carrington size event today, we'd be fucked. It would burn out all of our transformers, right? We could lose electricity, gas pumps, ATMs, refrigeration, medical equipment, and our vehicles. I mean, there's a long list of things that could get totally torched by one of these things. And the most concerning of, of that list are the transformers because they take a couple of years to build. And actually, yeah, they're really complicated. And of course, like everything else, we've, we've offshored their production. So, you know, when, when we get hit with that CME and all the transformers are burned out and then we call China on what we telegraph them or whatever. You know, however we get in touch and we say, hey, we're going to need 20,000 transformers and they say, well, actually, we kind of like you being in the dark ages over there. We might just not ship those. That's also medical supplies as well. When we found out how much of our medicine is actually being produced in China, that was terrifying. Yeah. Can you give a lot of it you couldn't get in the beginning of the pandemic because it was supply chain problem. But that's what I was talking about with, you know, we created COVID pathways, right? Right. Like we are creating our own vulnerabilities. And this is something that we've always done since the advent of nuclear weapons, right? Like we're creating these threats for ourselves. And it's usually in the name of economics. Right. It's like, well, we have to make this more efficient. We've got to make it cheaper. We've got to offshore it. And we need to go the other way. And I think this is, it's strangely one of the few things that Trump and Biden both agree on, right? Yeah. The resistance of it is the worry that people are going to be xenophobic, right? That's the resistance. The resistance is, hey, we should trade with these other communities and these other cultures and countries. But the reality is if there's something happens and we can't get a hold of anybody that's on the other side of the ocean. We need medicine. We need a lot of electronic supplies. Like how about the fact that we all have phones? Everyone in this country has a phone. None of them are made here. That is crazy. It is crazy. I mean, we obviously have a good supply of them here. I mean, if the shit hit the fan, we would probably hold up for a year or two. But how long would it take before we can manufacture our own cell phone here in the United States and be self-sustaining? Do we even have the minerals? Do we even have the essential minerals that you need to lithium ion, all the shit that you need to make cell phones? I mean, all the different coal chain, all the different things that they need to make a lot of the electronics that we find essential for our daily lives. Do we have those here? Can we get them out of the ground? What are the things that we are doing in Afghanistan as extracting lithium and many valuable minerals? It is one of the things they are doing in the Congo right now as well. That's a vices covered that. The coal chain, right? Isn't that what it is called? That shit, they are literally... I've seen those lines of miners going down into the pits and passing down the food buckets up. What is fucked is they are doing it with sticks in a lot of places. You are going from sticks digging into the ground, pulling out these minerals, pulling out these elements. And then it goes into the most complicated electronics of the world's ever known. You are carrying these things around in your pocket and if you could trace it back, that would be a fascinating documentary. Like, if someone... even a short one, like a 10 minute documentary from the moment a stick goes into the ground, breaks off the mineral, where the mineral goes. You are taking these guys in Africa that essentially... they are not slaves, but they don't have a lot of other options. I mean, they are kind of in a slavery-like situation that those minerals go. Eventually they go to China. They get brought to these places like Foxconn where they are manufactured into this... put into these cell phones in these buildings where these people are working. 16, 17 hours a day, living in dormitories where it is so fucked up, they have nets around the building to keep people from committing suicide. Because it is so common. And then it goes from there to Tim Cook and he is doing this presentation smiling and then it goes to like Palo Alto, with these kids like, oh my god, you have the iPhone 12. It is amazing, the new Zoom, the nighttime feature. And like, this is where we are. What is that? Oh, there is a documentary. Blood in the mobile. Blood in the mobile. 74% like this movie, the other 26% were shitting their pants. Filmmaker directly connects cell phone purchases to the Civil War in the Congo through conflict minerals. They go. Oh my god, 10 years old. It is on YouTube too. It is on YouTube too. It is from Denmark. Blood in the mobile. Well, there you go. A lot of my ideas. They are not bad ideas, but they are ready to do it. But let's go to the other end of it. Have you ever been to 35th Street Manhattan? Yes. Were they breaking down all the electronics? So there is a, on this one street, there is a whole bunch of warehouses that are sort of back to back where people are getting all this stuff. TV, cell phones, whatever. And they are taking it all apart and trying to get those minerals out of them. Right. So it is like a kind of, not recycling, but reuse of some of these things. Decuestructures. I met this amazing artist James Bothor a couple of years back. And he had this crazy idea. He said, he said, I want to go to 35th Street and just gather shit from the street and build a boat from it. Like, whatever he could just call, you know, and then he wanted to take it to the source of the Hudson at Lake Tier of the Clouds and paddled the boat back to 35th Street and then put it in a dumpster and fly back to England. So dude, he is better hobby. He did it. He did it, dude. He did it, dude. He was always the time. Well, like, you know, paddling. It was, you know, about engines. It was a, it was a commentary, you know, and reuse and recycling and waste. And I, well, why would he put it in a dumpster after he was done? It's a perfectly good boat. It's true. Yeah. Confusion was left in there. But I went with him for the last week of the thing and it was fucking hilarious. He was just constantly sinking. Like at first we were, at first we were trying to bail out his boat. We had like, I was in the safety boat and we're going alongside him and I'm trying to like bail out his boat with a cup because everything everything that we were using had to be found. So I like found this like broken big gulp cup from 7-11. I was like trying to bail his boat out. I couldn't seal it properly. Well, he tried, but it just, he got tired, you know. He was paddling all day and then he would get out at night and then he had to find the shit to fix the boat. All right. So you had to go find some kind of seal and or find a piece of styrofoam to keep it floating or whatever. It was going to be there. There it, yeah. Oh no, that's not it. That's, that's, I think, I think that often is home to the boat from Red Hook. I think that was a previous, I think that was a previous iteration of the project and then he was kind of kind of refined it. That's a weird project, man. Yeah, it was a really weird project and what's even weirder is he decided to do it in the middle of winter. So in the beginning he was like breaking through the ice at the source of the Hudson to get to get this homemade boat through the thing. But I can't like we had some hairy moments in that week. What's going on that guy's personal life? Well, now he has a kid and his partner's like you're never doing anything like that again. Yeah, that seems like there's probably a distraction element there in his actions. Yeah, it's probably distracting himself from some other things. But I really admire his ability to take on that notion of kind of reuse and waste and what should be done with all these materials. I mean, it's, yeah. Well, we certainly have an issue with that. I mean, we certainly have an issue with landfills. Our solution is stuff those things into the ground. And the real problem with landfills is, you know, we talk about the release of greenhouse gases into the environment and the negative effect it has. One of the biggest sources of greenhouse gases is landfills. I mean, they're finding when they did this, they did sort of a survey of that, like, I forget how they did it. But they did it with, I believe it was a satellite where they looked at the earth from the sky and tried to say, okay, where these gases coming from and what's the primary source of these gases? And they thought they would be cattle ranches, you know, that these cattle were giving off methane. And they found a no, it doesn't even compare to landfills. Like landfills are just a disaster because it's all this biodegradable shit that's stacked on top of each other. And it's just rotting. So it's rotting in this one area concentrated. And it just goes up into the sky. Yeah, we've got a family member that actually works, he does environmental monitoring for landfills. And he, yeah, he was telling me that they got a call at some point on this one landfill that there was a, it was smoking. And so he drives a landfill and sure enough, like all of the all of the crap at the bottom of the landfill that had been compressed to compress over time had turned into a liquid and then had turned into a gas and it sort of ignited somehow. And so he had to inject something into the landfill to basically put out this subterranean fire. Right. And if there, I mean, if there's any better indication of how we fucked everything up, it's a, it's a, it's a subterranean fire of waste. Yeah. Well, waste is a, is a great method of destruction. And it actually you can take that back to the Native Americans. Um, they would do buffalo jumps, you know, buffalo jumps. Yeah. And when they would, they would corral these buffalo and chase them off the side of a cliff. And when they would land in these great big piles, they were rot. And then they would, they would combust. They would just burst into flames. It's, I don't understand the, the whole mechanism behind it, but it's really common that they would find these buffalo jumps. And because of the fact that they were all rotting together in this great big pile, something would ignite. And they would burst into flames. And so a lot of these cliff sides where these buffalo jumps are scarred and charred with just blackened, uh, soot and everything from these buffalo just eventually catching on fire because they, you know, they have no preservation back then other than drying it. And, you know, when you're talking about hundreds and hundreds of buffalo, it's really, there's not much they can do to preserve all the meat. So there's a tremendous amount of waste involved in this method of hunting. Yeah. But no, it's, it's definitely a myth that, you know, Native Americans were at one with their environment and they weren't having, I mean, they were, you know, when you, when you need to eat, you're going to, you're going to drive a whole buffalo off a cliff, you know, and you might only use three of them, but just two ways of looking at that though. There's, you could say, oh, it's very wasteful, but also animals have to eat too. Coyotes have to eat, uh, bacteria has to eat. Nothing really goes to waste. Yeah, you think if coyotes couldn't figure out how to, how to corral those buffalo. Love the cliff. Yeah, they wouldn't do it. They certainly would, but the thing is that it is wasteful in terms of the human being killing the animal, do they use all that animal. No, they don't, but I think Native Americans look at it very differently than we did. I think they had a greater understanding of this whole cycle of life and even if you leave, if they shot a buffalo and they took whatever meat that they could carry and left the, the rest of it there, it means hundreds of pounds of meat, that meat would feed so many different animals, so bacteria, it would eventually go into the ground and feed the soil. It's, it's only wasteful in terms of the direct relationship between the person that killed the buffalo and did they consume that buffalo. But any animal that gets killed in the wild does not go to waste. Like if someone shoots a deer and they, uh, maybe they hit it and it only hits one long and this deer can go a mile and then dies and they can't find it. Well, that did, they wasted that deer. Well, the person who shot that deer does not get to eat that deer. That is a problem, but it's not a problem in terms of the wild. The wild will consume that deer 100%. There is no question whatsoever. There is no waste. It will find a way to not only that the soil will absorb it, animals will find it, crows will circle. That's one of the ways people find carcasses is like birds circling over carcasses. You know, that's how you felt like if someone's looking for someone that like went missing, it's one of the things they look for. They look for buzzards or crows or birds flying in the air. So these American Indians that did this in our eyes, they wasted all those animals. But in their eyes, probably not. They probably looked at it like work staying alive and the great earth has a use for all this. It's going to figure out a way to make all this. It's going to feed something. Yeah, that makes sense. No. I think we just have this idea that like if you shoot an animal, you should eat that whole animal and you definitely should. But their idea was this. I mean, we have to think, I mean, I got really, really obsessed with Native Americans over the last like year. And I read seven or eight books on them. And what the world was like before the European settlers came was this spectacular, but incredibly brutal environment. And these tribes, what they did to each other was fucking horrific. And there was no, there was no quarter given. There was no surrender. No one ever surrendered. These tribes, what they did to each other, was fucking horrific. And there was no, there was no court or given. There was no surrender. No one ever surrendered. That's the thing about the tribes Indians that the Europeans couldn't understand. There was, they fought to that death because they knew that if they were captured in their world, if a tribe was captured, they were tortured to death in the most horrific way. So they knew that that was coming and they wanted, they gave no quarter and asked for no quarter. They fought to the death. And it was something that the, the early American pioneers and soldiers found incredibly remarkable. They're like these people, there's no, there's no give up in them at all. Like they thought of these encounters as a fight to the death always, either they retreated or they fought to the death. There was never surrender, there was no white flags. They didn't even understand the concept of it. Cannibalism was rampant. I mean, it was multiple tribes, different tribes all across the country, whether it was, I mean, there's different tribes, the Nez purse had a history of this, a bunch of different tribes who ate each other. They would kill, they would kill other tribes and eat them. I mean, it was, it wasn't, what they primarily ate, but it wasn't uncommon. Yeah, because there was a sense that if you ingested somebody's body, you would also ingest some of their power, right? Yeah, there was a lot of craziness to that. There was one story about this guy who was in love with this woman and he killed her husband and then ate her and then married her and then married her. And then married her. Wow. I mean, it's interesting to think about, like here's a thought experiment, right? We know that we know that that war wasn't won by soldierly techniques, right? It was won by disease. Some of it was, but they, I mean, the, up until the command tubes, it was catastrophic from Native Americans, right? The disease that ravaged all these communities. I mean, you can actually see it. There was something on the BBC recently that you can actually see a change in the climate based on how many people were exterminated mostly by disease when, when Europeans arrived in North American. Like, 90%? Yeah, 90% of the population. Yeah. So I mean, it's an interesting thought experiment to imagine what would have happened if the disease wasn't a factor, right? If that, would that war have just raged on for, you know, forever, you know, perhaps they have carved out. I mean, but I don't know. What really changed it though was the cult revolver and then the repeating rifle. There was two things changed it incredibly because the barrier between Western settlers and conquering the West was the command sheet because they were the first tribe that really understood warfare on horseback, which is kind of ironic because they didn't like the horses were introduced into North America by the Europeans. But they used to be native to North America. Horses were actually, they originated in North America. And then they were exterminated here, right? Yes. Yeah. We don't know why. We don't know what happened. And this is part of the hypothesis that goes along with the extinction event that happens somewhere around where these core samples indicate that there's astroital impacts. It's really fascinating stuff. And there's a great, well, there's a bunch of great books on it. But there's a guy named Dan Flores who wrote about all these different, he wrote a great book about the coyotes, too, called coyote America. But he wrote about how all these native American horses were eventually, they found their way to Europe. They found their way to Asia. And so like all the Mongols, the steppe tribes, all the ones that the road horseback, those horses originated from Native America. But then they were exterminated here. Some way, they don't exactly know how, but then reintroduced by the Europeans, then the Native Americans started taking over the horses and figuring out how to do combat on horses and they figured out how to do it far better than the Europeans. An independent of the European, independent of even the Asians, like the Mongols and the 1200s had spectacular horse riding abilities and the ability to fight off horseback. But Native Americans appear to have figured out how to do it independently because the people who introduced the horses here, the Europeans didn't know how to do it. So they didn't know how to fight off horses. They would get off their horse to shoot their musket. And the Native Americans would run up on them and fill in full arrows because they figured out how to shoot literally an arrow a second. They had this spectacular technique of holding their arrows in their fingers. So they would have their left hand where they were holding the bow and they would hold their arrows in their fingers and just one after they had like a fistful of arrows and just go one arrow, two hours, three hours, four hours. And they would just shoot like an arrow a second while these poor bastards from, you know, Spain or France were trying to pump their muskets and put a lead ball in there and they just fill them up full of arrows. It's really crazy shit. Can you imagine the panic as you're trying to stuff them out? Oh my God. No, get the ball. Yeah. You know, they're going to scalp you too. So they killed, they literally, they couldn't get past the command cheese because the command cheese were the ones who figured out how to do this. And they were a nomadic, really primitive tribe with very little artwork, no songs, no stories. They only ate meat. They only, they lived off a buffalo and they took over a giant chunk of the west all through Texas, Oklahoma. That was all the command cheese and everyone was terrified of them. What's really crazy is Mexico set up the settles. It's a fantastic book about it called Empire the Summer Moon. But Mexico set up the settlers. They said, Hey, my friend, come live over here. We'll give you plenty of land. They wanted a buffer between them and the command sheet. So they allowed all these people to think it was okay to build these settlements. And they built these settlements and the command cheese slaughtered everybody. And then they had to figure it out like, Oh, fuck, this is a dangerous goddamn place because they were used to these East Coast agrarian Native Americans. These, these ones who like they had set up agriculture and they, they didn't ride on horseback. They didn't do battle on horseback. They did everything on foot. And the command sheet were doing everything off a horseback and they had thousands of horses. And all of their wealth was determined by how many horses you had. And so they were this incredibly warlike tribe that everyone was terrified of. All the other tribes are terrified of them. And they dominated this one chunk of the country. And no one can get past them. They literally couldn't get through them. It's amazing history. Yeah, it's, I mean, it's incredible to think about what we, what we never really perceive are all of the political factions, right? And the nuances and all the difficulties because we tend to think about it in, in these kind of, again, these binary terms. Right. It's like, oh, the settlers are coming in and they have opposition from Native Americans. But of course, they were all at war with each other and they had different alliances and, you know, things were shifting. I mean, I think that's where the, that's where the, the archaeological, archaeological record is really interesting because it starts to reveal these things. Yeah. But it also reveals more mystery, right? Like, like there are things that we dig up that we can't explain, right? And there's, there's no oral history for, why I'm thinking of, um, I, I went to this site in, in the, in the Yucatan to loom. Oh, have you been there? I've been a Yucatan. Yeah. I've been to Chichinica. Oh, cool. So to loom is on the coast, like just, you know, just over from Chichinica. And what you find are these like incredibly elaborate structures that are built there. But then, um, uh, just at the end of this, whatever, whatever this place was and this, this, this, uh, my settlement, they started building this really janky wall around the the thing. You know, and it's, it's like it doesn't, it doesn't conform to everything else that's happening on that site. We don't know, these, these people disappeared. We don't know what happened to them, right? But one of the theories that I heard is that it was a, it was a virus, right? That the, it was, it was, it was disease, right? And if you don't know what it is, what do you do? You're like, well, it's some things attacking us. We're building a wall, you know, these people showed up and we're not, you know, um, and so that's one interpretation. But I thought about this with the bunker builders too, right? That like all of these factions and nuances and people with different ideas about how to combat the dread that we're all feeling right now. And then if you were like, if you were an archaeologist in a hundred years and you excavated some of these bunker sites, you would find these, I mean, incredibly different sites, you know, places where people are growing, where they're, um, uh, building kind of off grid communities, places with sniper posts and then you would find these subterranean condominiums and then you would find, you know, the, the, the shipping containers filled with Bible buckets, whatever, right? You'd have all these different iterations of people responding to the current situation. And I guess that's like I always kind of held this in my mind as I was touring all of these doomsday communities, right? Is that there's like, there's a future interpretation of these that I'm elucidating now, right? Because a lot of these communities don't like let people in, you know, they don't want people telling these stories, right? So it did feel like I was riding through a historical moment and that, and that's before the pandemic, right? Like I started this book in 2017. By the time the pandemic hit, I mean, some of the, some of the quotes in the book were utterly prophetic. I mean, actually disturbing. I had, I interviewed this guy in West Virginia at a place called Fortitude Ranch, Drew Miller. He's got a PhD from Harvard, super smart guy. And his plan is that he's going to build a kind of a bunch of retreats around the country. And so you buy into the idea of fortitude rants, like a time share. And then if a crisis hits, you can retreat to any of his sort of campuses, you know? And I sat down with him to have lunch at one point and he said to me, you know, what people don't understand is that we're overdue for a pandemic. And when I was editing the book, I had forgotten this quote, right? And I saw it again. I went, oh, shit. And then I met this other woman in Tennessee, that runs a survivalist store out there. And they've got like space in the, in Smoky Mountains National Park that they would retreat to you, where they're planting secret groves in the forests out there. So they can like retreat to their fruit trees if things go wrong. And not so secret now. And she told me, I know all the park rangers are going to be out there, that hell's that orange tree. But she told me, at one point, she said, you know, 2020 is going to be a wild ride buckle up. Wow. You know what I kept reading these quotes, I was editing the book. And I was like, God, this is so weird. It feels like I've never, I've studied history, I've studied archaeology. I've never had a sense of living through a historical moment quite in this way. Right. A lot of this are experiencing this in the midst of the pandemic. Like we know people are going to be, I mean, if we still exist in 100 years, we're going to be writing about this and thinking about this and interpreting it. It more ways than one, right? Yeah. But imagine the remains of one rest. Oh, yeah. There's so much going on. The Pentagon saying they've recovered UFOs. Oh, God. Do you read up? That's terrifying. They've recovered crafts in quotes, not of this world. Yep. What? Yeah. Which is, that's a long time. That's where we're going next. That is what we're going next. I mean, I wonder if why they're saying that to us. I wonder if they're preparing us for some inevitable encounter. And they want to give us like a slow drip of information to get us accustomed to the idea so that we don't go into full shock. Because obviously this pandemic has thrown us into a lot of shock. George Floyd's murder brought us into a higher level of shock. It appears because a civil unrest and this demand for a change in our culture and the way we communicate with each other and the way law enforcement works and the way government works. There's so much chaos right now. There's so much, so much division. Then boom aliens. I mean, it just seems like the nuttiest fucking year of all time. Yeah. I mean, we're all, we were all sort of preparing for the election before that happened. Popcorn mechanics. Pentagon has off world vehicles not made on this earth. That is a quote from the Pentagon. That is fucking bananas. I spoke to Commander Freaver on this podcast who was the Air Force pilot, Air Force and Navy. I think he's Air Force pilot that fighter pilot who chased this tick tack UFO that went through it. The weather was moving erratically. It went from 60,000 feet to one feet above the surface of the ocean in a second. They have no idea what the fuck it is. The US Navy pilot. He came on the podcast and described it. This rock solid individual military man, lifelong, totally trustworthy, has no other history of crazy stories. This was, they tracked it on their weapon systems. They found this thing doing things that defied the laws of physics and their understanding of propulsion systems. They're like, what is this? And then the people in the Navy were saying, we've been seeing these things like every couple of weeks. We don't know what they are. So when they scrambled this jet and these other jets came back to support him, they were all trying to decipher this. They're like, what is this? What are we dealing with? And this was, what is it, 2007? Would that happen? Four? 2004. So he's been holding on to this information, trying to figure it out for 16 years. And people kind of laughed and made fun of him, but there was no other stories like this from him. And there was some stories from the East Coast. And then a couple of years ago, the New York Times released a story about these things, these credible accounts of UFOs. And now finally, the Pentagon's like, yep. I don't know what to tell you. Well, check this out. Larry Hall, the guy that was building that, that underground condo in Kansas, he's now building a second one, by the way. I asked him how he made the decision to dump $10 million into this thing. What, you know, is that just a business plan? You know, did he model that out? And he said, oh no, he, he, it turns out he used to be a contractor for the Department of Defense. And he was working on projects for them. And he said, I saw some things when I was working there that made me very uncomfortable. And that's why I'm building the bunker. And I heard that from more than one, Prepper. I mean, there were a few, there were a lot of people that I encountered who had worked for the government, either directly or as contractors, who had seen things that disturbed them that caused them to start prepping. And so, you know, I did want, I mean, at the beginning of this project, it's like, you know, it seemed like it just seemed interesting. Culture, culturally, like they're kind of kooky to wear them. And you know, I want to get to know these people and know what makes them tick. And by the end of it, I was severely disturbed. I got a good job. Because they do seem credible to me. And it forces you to reinterpret what they're doing as rational, right? And like these are, I kept saying to people, these are rational people responding to an irrational world. Like the problem is not them and what they're doing. The problem is the context in which it's driving them to it. Well, the problem is our interpretation of them, right? The problem is this knee-jerk reaction where we want to generalize and put people in this category. Oh, you're a prepper. Oh, I know what you are. Well, you're not just a human being, you're not nuanced. You're not a unique individual with your own ideas and life experiences. No, you're a prepper. Put you in that box. Oh, you're a Trump supporter. Put you in that box. You know, oh, you're, oh, you think Biden should be president no matter what? Let me put you in that box. Like there's things that we do with people because it's too hard to really have an open mind and not take into account all the various possibilities of behavior. And ideas that you could expect from a person. So it's this really normal thing that we do when we generalize and we like to do that. It makes the world simpler for us. It makes it, we like things binary one or zero. We like good or bad. We like that. Prepper. Oh, look at this dummy. Meanwhile, they're right about a lot of shit. And if that guy really did work for the department of defense and really did see some things and when it comes to UFOs like Bob Lazar, who's another guy who's been on this podcast, he's the guy that in 1989 did this story with George Norrie in Las Vegas where it was an investigative report. We said, listen, I work for area S4. I was back engineering UFOs. I was a nuclear physicist for Los Alamos labs and they hired me to go to Nevada. They flew me out to the middle of the fucking desert to work on something that's not from this planet. And they were like, oh, you're so crazy. That's so crazy. That's so ridiculous. Meanwhile, 30 years later, Bob Lazar just put up a post on his Instagram, go to United Nuclear Bob, his Instagram. This guy has been dealing with this story and this, this ridicule of this story for 30 plus years. And people said he's crazy. Like there's, the government does not have UFOs. They don't have something that came from another planet. That's crazy. How would you keep that a secret? But this guy's been talking about it forever. There he is right there. Finally, after waiting 30 years, the government admits to possessing alien craft. Time will tell what happens next. Personally, I'll doubt that would disclose much more and wouldn't be surprised if they issue a correction and say their statement was an error. In any case, I never thought I'd see this day. Thanks so much to all of you that supported me throughout these years on another note. Because the only social media account I have, no Facebook, Twitter, etc. There are apparently lots of imposters out there. So he's United Nuclear Bob on Instagram. And I went to dinner with him and then I had him on my podcast. I talked to him for three hours and I found him eerily credible. His story has never changed over 30 years. I've been telling the exact same story. I can't say that. I know things that have happened for true that out 100% know lies at all that I was a part of that I can't tell you 30 years ago. I can't. I'm not good at it. I'll fuck it up. Oh yeah, Mike said that. Oh yeah, I forgot that happened first. I go to fuck up the order of events. He's been insanely consistent and he's legitimately really intelligent. When you talk to him, he's an absolute comprehensive understanding of science and of elements. One of the things he talked about in 1989 was this thing called element 115 that back then was really only theoretical. They didn't even know element 113 or 115 rather was real until 2013. 2013 a particle collider detected it. So they proved that it's an actual real thing. When he was talking about a stable version of element 115 that they used to bend gravity and propel these vehicles, he described how the tick tack UFO that Frever saw in 2014 worked. He said it would turn sideways and then jut off at insane rates of speed. That's exactly what Frever said. That's what they have video of these things doing this. The tracking systems of these fighter jets trying to explain what these things are and why they move the way they move. Well this guy's been talking about it since 1989. It's bonkers man. It is bonkers. And that the Pentagon comes out in 2020 and tells us that this is real, that they really have crafts that they've recovered that are not of this world. That was their statement. Like maybe they're fucking with us. Maybe they said that because they want to influence the election. Maybe they said that because they want to take our attention. Maybe like, hey, what's the best way to stop all this fucking chaos and all this global unrest, all this civil unrest that you're seeing or people trying to burn down court houses? How about we tell them the aliens are coming? Yeah, that's classic Orwell. Right? Like you create the other over here and then everyone consolidates to confront that thing. I would be lying if I said I understood any of how they operate or how they disseminate information or why they do it and why they do it in the order they do it. But if I was in charge, if I was Trump, I'd make a fucking press conference about the aliens. I tell everybody, please settle down. They're coming baby. I mean, he did a thing with his son. It's really weird. It's like one of those weird interview shows. It's clunky. It's clunky in a few ways. His son interviewed him on YouTube and it's clunky because his son's not that good at it. It's clunky because they have this strange relationship where, you know, his dad's the president and he clearly has a great reverence and respect for his dad. So there's not a balance conversation. But when they're talking about UFOs, he says I've seen some very interesting things, but he wouldn't talk about it. Have you ever read the black swan? No. It's a great book by, I think his name's Talib. And he basically is theories that human beings spend all of our time justifying things that have already happened and sort of explaining them away. But those things before they happened were totally unexpected. And so he calls him black swan events. Is this an esteemed teleb? Yeah, that's right. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, I know who that drives. Yeah, so mathematician, right? Yeah, he's a mathematician. So he has this theory that, you know, we kind of unexpected events are inevitable. Right? When they happen, we're all shocked by them, cue the pandemic, for instance, right? And then afterwards we say, actually, we knew this was coming. We can totally explain this. And then we always make the mistake of preparing for the disaster that's already happened. Yeah. I mean, that's just human nature. Right. How do we fix the thing we just dealt with, right? Rather than thinking about how do we prepare for the impossible thing that's coming next? I don't know how we get people to do that collectively or even push the government in that direction, you know, to think about the possibility of an EMP and these transformers being burned out or to think about like what the social political economic fallout is from alien contact. So how do you even start to work through those things? And when you do, inevitably people say you're a conspiracy theorist, you're crazy, you can't talk about, you can't go down that road, right? But what's the harm in just running the thought experiment? The harm is just modeling it out. People are scared of ridicule because they can be devastating to your career. I mean, if you're not self-sustaining, if you're not autonomous, right? If you have some real connection to institution and your reputation relies on the respect and trust of your peers and you say something that's really outside the norm and you can just, if there's some sort of conflict and additional conflict regarding your work, they can just dismiss you based on that. It's very dangerous. It's very dangerous to say things. If you have any other, if you have a job where maybe you work for university but you don't have tenure, if you write for a newspaper and there's a lot of woke people that also write for that newspaper and they're very critical of the way you dismiss certain things that are taken into just the part of the cultural zeitgeist today. It's real dangerous because in this day and age, everybody's fucking scared and people will turn on you and if they turn on you, it can be devastating to your career. Sometimes people will say certain things that are controversial or that would be the end, that would be the end of all their hard work and there's other people that relish in that. They relish in dismissing you by one particular misstep or one controversial perspective, whether it's about aliens or viruses or masks or the immune system or politics or anything, or fake news, whatever the fuck it is. People are always looking to step on the other person's climbing up, it's crabs in a bucket instead of uniting and working it out together and embracing the ethic of community and of understanding and of compassion and companionship and the fact that we should be very rarely attacking and almost always trying to understand each individual perspective and we don't do that right now. We're scared. There's just social media that's put us into this weird position where it's so easy to attack, so easy to be attacked and so attractive to pile on. And one of the reasons why people pile on is because you want to identify yourself as the tribe that's in the good on the right side and therefore you stand up and jump in, jump into the fray when you see anybody stepping out of line. Even if they're stepping out of line with something that will in history in the future point to like a rat, an actual perspective that's pretty reasonable and in the time it's not. In the time reasonable perspectives right now are very dangerous if they are not in the norm. If they're not what we consider to be this conglomeration of opinions that you have to have and you have to project and so there's a lot of people right now that are terrified and because of these newfound tools and this newfound, this is the real downside of cancel culture right. There's a lot of people that will secretly talk to you and they'll say look and I can't say this publicly but I completely agree with you and you may very brave telling the truth but I have to protect myself, have a family, I have this, I have that, my job at this and that and once I'm free then I'm going to be honest but right now I can't jump in. We're dealing with a lot of that right now. No you're absolutely right and I'm an academic, I deal with this. I'm based at University College Dublin. I have to be careful about what I say but at the same time because I do ethnographic research because from the Greek I'm a culture writer. I'm writing about other people's perspectives fundamentally and that does act as an effective shield to be able to spend time with people to be empathetic to their views. Anthropologists have a long history of this, of hanging out with people that are committing in fantasy or murder or cannibalism or whatever and saying look this is their culture, this is what's happening. If you don't agree with it that's fine but I'm just I'm passing on the information and we can debate it in a different form. The work that I've done in the past particularly with the urban explorer has got me into a lot of trouble. I mean I got arrested. All of the people that I worked with ended up getting arrested because the police got my fucking notes and I mean it was a terrible situation. How the police get your nose? No it was a terrible situation. Well I was going out with these urban explorers into all of this subterranean infrastructure underneath London and after we went into those sewer systems then we got into electricity tunnels then we started getting into bunkers. So these are like layers under the city. So imagine there's like you know five layers under the city right so we go from those sewers to the electricity tunnels to the infrastructural systems to the bunkers and then we started getting into what are called deep level systems. They're very similar to the bunkers that the US government is building here that they called they called DUM, steep underground military bases right. We started getting into like serious critical infrastructure like at some point how easy was it to get into those? It took us years. It took us years. There's quite a lot of research but I mean at some point we got into what are called the BT deep level tunnels British telecommunications deep level tunnels and we were like inside the telecommunications trunk for all of the United Kingdom. And at this point we're like you know a hundred feet underground, 120 feet underground. We were actually we were walking through this tunnel about you know about a hundred feet underground and one of the explorers I was with like there's a there's a manhole above us. It was like what do you mean there's a manhole above us you know we're like we're in the deepest level right now and we pop this manhole in a camera swivels you know and stares at us like oh god you know and then we realized we were into some critical shit. So what was it? It was just it was just telecommunications hubs right it's God. And then we realized we were into some critical shit. So what was it? Well, it was just telecommunication hubs, right? It's just like the trunk of all of the infrastructure for fiber optics and phone lines. And they just have an exposed manhole cover and a tunnel that you can get to. Dude, we wiggled through like, we wiggled from tunnel to tunnel, like through tiny crevices. We were getting into like the deep underbelly of the city. I mean, it was not, it was not easy to get to. But here's the thing, at the same time, we had been cracking all of the, the abandoned tube stations, metro stations in London, right? So we took a, we took a map of the tube from 1932 and we set a map from 2008 on top of it. And what you see are a bunch of stations that are no longer on the map, right? That's your first clue. So they were like 40 some. Then we, then we started doing research and we figured out that there, there's gotta be at least 14 stations that still have like ticket offices or platforms or they're, like there's something there that you could find. So we started sneaking into the tube to go and find these places. Like we would wait till the train stopped at two in the morning and then we would like climb up a bridge and get onto the tracks and we'd run through the tunnels. And we, and we were finding these stations one after another incredible time capsules. You know, where there were artifacts left behind posters. Like we'd find tickets on the ground from 40, 40 years old. You know, I mean, really cool stuff. Some of the, a lot of these stations were, were bombed out during World War II. But finding these is like, again, this kind of like, like here's the archaeologist semi, right? Like we were having this visceral connection to history. We were finding this stuff that was giving us like a real sense of being inside history and material terms. So we're, we're posting every time we crack one of these stations, we posted on our blogs like, oh, we've, you know, we've cracked Mark Lane. We've cracked down street. We've cracked whatever. And we're all excited about it and we end like the windows narrowing. And we get, we get towards the end of the 14 stations. And we're starting to think, you know, like the cops are surely watching what we're doing, right? Police and kind of know where we're going to go next because there's only a few stations left. So we stop posting stuff. And on Christmas of 2012, we cracked the last station underneath the British Museum, uh, which like there's all sorts of cool stories about like there was, there was a ghost in here. It's a haunted station and whatever. But we did it. We never got caught. So for me, this is the end of the research project. Is there like a year of being like retroactively we'll get, we'll get there. Oh. So I'm done with my research project. I've written my PhD. I published my first book, explore everything about all of our, or I hadn't published the book yet actually. And I fly to Cambodia to work on a totally different research project, right? Like I'm switching gears. I'm going to go do some mills. And I fly back from Cambodia via Singapore and the plane lands at Heathrow. And you know, the thing goes off ding and you stand up and you get your bags. And then nothing's happening. And they say, can everyone please sit down again? I sit down. I look out the plane and there's cop cars everywhere. And I'm like, oh shit. You know, I came from Singapore or someone brought drugs. I don't know. There's a terrorist and look like who I have no idea what's going on. And the cops get on the plane and they're like 42K, 42K doctor Garrett. Yeah. You're coming with us. Okay. So they cuff me. They have me like retrieve my bag from the baggage claim and they take me through, through passport control in handcuffs. And obviously the UK government's like, yeah, we'll go ahead and keep that passport. Thank you. So they eventually charge me with conspiracy to commit criminal damage. Now what's weird about England is that trespass isn't a criminal offense. So you can't, you can't charge people with trespass unless you're in very specific circumstances. So they tried out this charge of conspiracy to commit criminal damage because it's about intention. It's a thought crime. Like if I text you and I'm like, hey, dude, you know, the bar is closed right now because it COVID, you want to break in and just like pour ourselves a beer and you're like, yeah, let's do it. Like we've committed conspiracy to commit criminal damage. Like we've committed to the crime. So anyway, we for years were dragged through the British legal system. And I got trapped in the UK for three years. Wow. I was, they kept my passport, dude. I was trapped there. And here's where it's, it's really weird is that when the plane landed at Singapore, there was a journalist from GQ who was supposed to meet us because we were going to take him into some of this subterranean infrastructure and show him all these spaces. And he's like, you know, by the time I got out of jail, like 48 hours later, I had, I had all these messages from like, you asshole. I came, I showed up at the airport and you weren't there and whatever, you know, and I finally find this guy Matthew Power. And he's like, are you serious? Like you got, because we had timed it to land at the same time. Yeah. And he's like, you serious. You got arrested at that moment. And he said, what about your house? I said, I have no idea. So we go to my house and we unlock the door with these keys that the police had given me because they took down my door or the battering ram, right? And then, you know, like put some padlocks on there that they drilled into the door in the door frame. And I opened it up and my apartment has just been ravaged, right? Like stuff ever the mattress is flipped over. All the cupboards are torn apart. There's like pieces of the door all over the floor. And underneath all of it, there was a job contract from the University of Oxford to do a postdoc after I, because I just finished my PhD. And the journalist from GQ is like, dude, I can go home right now. I've got this story. I don't need to explore anything I've done. And how did it resolve? Well, by the time we got to court, I mean, the prosecution was just in shambles. I mean, it was a total debacle because there was no evidence that we had broken anything. Because of the laws you had just trespassed, which isn't a law. We just trespassed, yeah. But they spent 300,000 pounds, I don't know, $400,000 of taxpayer money to run this prosecution. So they were going to see it to the end. And essentially, they confiscated my computers, my hard drives, my notebooks. And that was a central component of the evidence that was used to prosecute everyone. So essentially, I just made a deal with them. I was like, look, I'll take a hit. If everyone else can just get off, I'll take the hit for it. So I pled guilty to, I think it was four counts of criminal damage, which included damage to a screw from a board that I had taken off and put back on to a vent shaft. Oh, I know. Sliding open a window. Oh, that was aiding in a bedding. So I had opened a window for someone to crawl through. And it was just like a list of ridiculous things, but they didn't care because they needed their... They needed a win. They needed a win, you know. So I gave them that. But now I've got this criminal record in England. So when you land, you get pulled aside if you go to England. I used to. I actually filed a complaint with the government and they would like severely harass me. And then when I moved to Australia, I had the same problem. They had put flags in my passport. And you filed a complaint and did it go through? And I filed a complaint and they fixed it. They took the flags off the passport. Yeah. Essentially saying, I did my thing. You know, yeah, like why do I have to keep paying for this over and over again? So it was really funny when they originally gave me my passport back. So like I go to court and then the judge is like Dr. Gary, very naughty or whatever. You know, here's here. Take your passport back. Do they have wigs on? Yes. The wigs are fantastic. Really? Yeah. They still do that. They're really good. Wow. That's real. Yeah. Yeah, the barristers all have their wigs and they can take a shake carry them around. Like a cat, you know. And then they have to put it on when they're doing to dance and bonkers. But so they gave me my passport back and I and the next day I was supposed to fly to Sydney to go speak at the festival of dangerous ideas. I was the obvious speaker. Right. And I go to the airport and the guy swipes it and he's like, oh, yeah, you don't want to use this. I was like, what does it say? What is the screen saying? He's like, I can't relay that, but you should probably go. It gives me a passport back and then I you should probably leave the country. No, like you should not get on a plane with this. Like you're going to have a problem on the other side. You know, whatever he's like, well, how else can you travel? Well, exactly. So then so then I missed my flight and I had to go back. I had to go to the US embassy and I'm like, you know, I've just tried to fly with my passport and it doesn't work. And the guy at the embassy swipes it and he says, Oh, wow. And then he gets out a whole puncher and he goes, don't, don't, don't write through my passport and he says, you shouldn't use that. And then like three hours later, they gave me another passport and I flew out the next day. And the passport's good. The new one's good. It's fine. But then I started getting stopped again. So they like, I don't know, tack the flags on their later. I mean, it was a real ordeal. But the, you know, the thing, I mean, it was, it was traumatic for me of course of like stuck in a foreign country and you know, like you get worried about your income. I was worried about being, they did try to deport me at some point because once you have a criminal offense, they could try to deport. So anyway, I beat that down. Do they find you like what it was the ultimate judgment? Yeah, it was, I think it was two, 2000 pounds, about $3,000 I got fined. Not, not too bad. It's not a big deal. Sure. Made some money off the book. If not, you're going to make some now. You know what, dude? I made, I made all the money that I made on my first book, explore everything, went to my lawyers. Oh, I have to say we're phenomenal. Like they did a great job. But it was like every time I get a royalty check, I just, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I get a royalty check. I just signed it over to him. You know? And it did seem like karma. It was like, well, I broke in all this shit and then I wrote a book and then the money went to the lawyers and the lawyers got me off and it all kind of worked out. Well, tell everybody again, the names, the books. Let's sell some books for you here. Sweet. Because the book really has some amazing images, particularly the underground shit. Yeah, okay. So the first book that is all about my time with the urban explorers and our trespasses into the underground and also into skyscrapers and abandoned buildings. That was called Explore Everything. I wrote that and that was published in 2013 and that's got it. Yeah, that's got the whole story of the court place. Bradley Garrett not to be confused with the giant person from everybody loves Raymond. I will topple his Google rankings today, I promise. You're getting me closer. Subterranean London, that's your second book. Yeah, subterranean London is the second book. So those are all of our photographs over 10 years. Amazing photographs too, subterranean layers of London. Just spectacular shit. And then London Rising is the third book. Oh, actually scroll up there. See, scroll up in the image. See at the top there, that's us climbing into an abandoned tube station. Up left. This one right here. So we're like actually one. Yeah, that's climbing into the new cross rail. It's just so weird that all that stuff is open. It's not. It's not any more kind of kind of. Do they do anything to tighten it down after your books? They try. Okay, we got really good at breaking into things. I mean, you know, this is a skill you build. Bradley, thank you very much, man. This was a lot of fun. We just went through three hours if you can believe it. Are you serious? Yeah, it's 340. Wow. It's a time warp in here, right? It's crazy. People always say that like, what the fuck? That is so weird. Yeah, it was a fascinating conversation, man. Very thrilling. I really enjoyed it. Thank you very much. Thanks for being here, man. Thanks for being here, man. Thanks for sharing it. I really enjoyed it. A great invitation. Bye, everybody.