I honestly can barely believe that you're sitting across from me. Last time I talked to you, you were days away from when a prison then you disappeared into the Gulag. For reasons I never quite figured out why, why, why were you going to prison? The first place, what didn't think I was going to see you for seven years and here you are. Peekaboo. So congratulations. Thank you. So start the beginning. What was it like you you pull up? What were you held? Okay, so I was held at FCI Faritan in South Jersey. South Jersey. Not a nice place to be. It's New Jersey first. Yeah, let's start with that. Sorry, Tony. He's from New Jersey. Let's try it. Not a nice place to be South Jersey. So I pull up to South Jersey at Faritan FCI and it starts with a this is a medium facility with a satellite camp. Now the medium facility is a very violent prison. I mean, very violent prison. Ex-King members, gang, bangers, child, molasses, rapists, you name it, murderers who've worked themselves down from a penitentiary with good behaviors throughout the years. And now they they have this cozy little spot and just this array of like the worst human beings on earth all sitting in this medium. How many former congressmen facing seven years for campaign finance finally? I was the first one. rhetorical question. And I reckon I'll be the only one. I hope so. I think I'll be the only one. And regardless of party, I will probably be the only one to ever face. Yes. So in saying, so I pull up, it's I go to the camp across the street from the facility, which is a satellite camp. Now imagine a warehouse not too different from where we're sitting now, but bare bones. And then you have this entire dormitory bed, cubby, little lockers, bed, cubby, bed, cubby, and it's rows of that, right? And that's how you lift. Those are your living quarters. And then there's an adjacent room that has a cafeteria. There's five TVs in there. Even that segregated because it's the black TV, the white TV, the Hispanic TV. And then there's a sports TV. And then literally what they call the CNN TV because the TV stays on CNN the whole day. So this sounds like used to find hell. It's it's racially segregated though. TV is yes. The remote controls are operated by people according to their race. And God have mercy on your soul. If you're a white guy and you go near the remote for the black people or the Spanish people, it is all hell. Like the people will literally get stabbed with a shank if they do that for picking up the black remote or the Hispanic remote. Yep. Or the white remote for that matter. It is very political. So that's the environment I'm in. Lovely. Me all cheering joy. I'm like, hi, George Santos, nice to meet you. Don't talk to me. I'm like, okay, you have another day. I mean, I'm definitely not cut for prison. Let's just be very honest. And that did occur to me before they sent you away. So it was that was kind of the environment, right? And then I start understanding that. I mean, first day I walk in there, I understand that this isn't a place where people go to be abandoned and rotten forgotten about to rock. The ceiling is all made out of like this. How can I call it this canvas? And it's all ripped up patched up and there's a flap hanging open and black moles, like bubbles of black moles, almost like cotton are just like dangling off the ceiling. And you can see that the whole thing is compromised with black mold. We're breathing this in in this nonventilated space. This is the kind of environment that the warden maintains down in FCI Farris. And this is not an indictment, by the way, on the BOP. This is an indictment on a derelict intuitive administrator who has no business doing her job. This is a female warden, female warden, Lynn Kelly, who runs the prison. Absolutely unqualified for the job. I mean, and I say that with confidence, she can sue me. I'd love to go to a deposition for calling her unqualified. When you run a facility where the bathroom has outbreaks of ringworms in Listeria, when you run a facility that you're serving inmates expired food as far back as a year, chicken patties that had been frozen, but expired in 2024 were still being served to inmates in 2025. This is an Ecuador? No, no, no. I thought I was an Mexican. But I feel like I was in a Mexican prison because everything, by the way, fun, fun story, beef taco, beef taco salad, chicken taco, chicken taco salad, beef, he had chicken fajita are all on the menu on a constant rotation to the point you're just like, I don't want to see another tortilla or tortilla jumping my face. So this is a facility I was in. You know, can goods that were expired? I would go to the officer in charge of the kitchen because I obviously got involved in the kitchen right away. Natural fit like cooking like in sertanias that oh, go cook for these people. This is exciting. Well, you got to open it. We take it by chance if it's bad, it's garbage. If it's good, then we'll use it. I'm like, great Russian roulette with good. Good. Literally the botulism Olympics. Pretty much. Yeah. So that's that was the one. Oh, yeah, the kitchen, the kitchen. It's officially closed after I wrote several observations of its risks on my column for the South Shore press because I was still writing from in there. And they were your their prison columnist? Well, though, I my own, I write for the column for the South Shore press, which is a New York paper I've been writing for them for over a year. And I was still retaining that column and I was writing from prison criticizing of the prison that I was in and documenting my journey. Look, unfortunately, I'm known to not be scared of bucket. So well, apparently to my detriment. So I criticized my credit, I mean, I critiqued all of these things to to a massive audience that I have as a platform and it subsequently led to the kitchen closure. But what was it like before closed? I mean, broken equipment, absolute filth, nothing functioning, drains that backed up and bought back the most gawk you can think of machinery that you were literally, I always thought that eating the food at FCI fairytan was either I get some really, really bad food poisoning and I'm going to lose a lot of weight or I might just not die. You know, it's like it's either or you can't really can. It's inexplicable. What's the hand washing regimen like? There's no hand washing regimen. You wear gloves. Who is washing hands? It gives you gloves. They don't even give you soap to wash your hands in the kitchen because you're wearing gloves. But what if the gloves are dirty? Oh, no, it's lovely. You should see the loveliness of how I mean, I got in trouble because I put a pair of gloves on, right? And if I'm stirring the spoon and I'm doing my things and then I proceed to go open a box to get something. Once I'm done with that box, I would switch out gloves and toss them, but I guess I was going through gloves so fast. And I got yelled at say like, you changed gloves too many times. Like, no, you take it easy. Once you're gloved up, you're gloved up for the day. I'm like, what? Like, what is going on here? You would see these guys like some of the inmates follow that regimen. I don't care. I'm like, I'm not doing that. I eat this food. They would put on gloves and the loveliest thing was they get a piece of paper blow their nose where in the gloves. They'd open a box. They touch dirty, dusty cans. And then the next thing you'd see, they're in there, mushing up spices into the ground beef. And I'm like, it's like, I'm telling you, it's your own personal hell for a germaphone. It's like, that's prison. The conditions of the kitchen were just atrocious. It's just it's hard to explain when you have a walk in freezer that's constantly over freezing and breaking. And you have to thaw it and everything in it thaws and then they re-freeze it. And it's like, but the chicken is expired a year, but it keeps well. Like, you got to pretend this is all normal. You know, it's just remarkable. I guantanamo has better treatment for their prisoners. I assume. Well, there's nothing like ending the day by the fire, book in your hand, dogs at your feet, cup of coffee at your side. I can tell you it works. And what makes it better is cozy earth. We're not even sure you've heard of the bubble-cuddle blanket. We have. It's a big deal. It's soft, textured, perfect for settling down after a long day. It's like a cloud actually. It'll make you sleepy just dreaming about it. Speaking of which, cozy earth also has what you need to take your sleep to the next level. We hope you're seated because this may blow your mind. Bamboo sheets. Bamboo. The fabric of the future. Actually, they are amazing. Can't believe they're from bamboo. They're temperature regulating. Moisture wicking. You actually sleep cooler. Smooth, breathable, super durable. If you don't believe it, try them risk-free 100 night sleep trial in a 10-year warranty upgrade. The place you spend the most time, which is your bed, one third of your life at least, it begins at cozyearth.com. You use the code tucker for 20% off. That's cozyearth.com. Code tucker. And if you get a post-purchase survey, let them know that you're heard about cozy earth right here on this show. Because home is not just where you live, it's how you feel. Cozierth. The best. Did you whip up anything good? I did. I did rice pudding. Did you actually? I was the first person I think in that prison's history to have the audacity to make rice pudding. I wasn't. It was good. It was like diner New York style. Like, yeah, I had rice. I had two big cartons full of milks that were going to expire in two days. So I said, instead of letting a coat of waste, let's make something with it. I said rice pudding. It is. I had cinnamon. I had all spice. I had rice. I had sugar. And I had milk. Rice pudding. They love it. Yeah. It's one of the great desserts, which is kind of fading. And I love it. So I mean, I love it. And then it's funny that I did do a flon, but I did a test flon. It worked. I mean, I'm ridiculous. Trust me. I love cocaine. I did do a flon, but it was to do a flon from prison. You can take the certain alarm. I mean, it takes a jones to quack. So you had milk. You had eggs. Yeah, sure. Again, you have the ingredients. It's just really the hoods, but that's missing. Yes. And I you brought it. I bought it. I mean, it was look, I baked lemon cakes with lemon icing. I mean, I came to a place where the kitchen was delivering doom and gloom. And my first week there, inmates were like, revving about how the desserts were amazing, how the food was better prepared. It looked like it was prepared with care. I'm not saying I'm perfect. Okay. I mean, I still had to make the grub that's on the menu. Right. But I actually bother to peel potatoes instead of making mashed potatoes full of dirty peel. I washed the vegetables before I worked them in a wash the vegetables. No. So I actually did took precautions. I mean, they don't wash. They barely peel. You know, it really depends on who's in the kitchen. I can speak for myself. I did. And a lot of other inmates just they didn't care. But what's sad about that is that the mentality that they have is so self-destructive because of how they're treated by the institution. They forget they're going to eat that too. They completely are oblivious to the fact that they're going to experience and eating as a carelessness of their own, I guess, despair. So it's sad. It's a very sad environment. What were meals times like? How was your rate the table manual? Let me put it this way. No table manners. Definitely wouldn't, you know, I don't think we can go to dinner with I'd say 80% of them to I know the French laundry. Yeah. I haven't knew some would never. So, but some people very remember I was in a white collar camp. The problem is is President Obama changed the rules of camps. And now you get other people that are not white collar. So you get some drug dealers. You get some, you know, violent former gang members that have worked their self-stouncer out the years in the system. And their custody points have lowered their own their way home. So they get put in a camp now. So I I joked and I said it's a really dark shade of white for white collar. Yeah. Not not not not an eracial thing. No, definitely not white collar. It's off. It's off white for sure because it's not all white collar. Like they like to say bankers and executive. The only real white collar guys I saw there were actually gold collars because they were Bob Mendendas. It's co-defendants. No. Yes. What were they like? Interesting. Very interesting people. I mean, business guys, very intelligent guys with very interesting to interact with. I mean, we're talking about multi, multi million errors. I mean, their gifts were gold bars. My joke was always the same. I'm in prison. I didn't even get a gold bar. No. No. Are they serving long terms? I believe one is serving a seven year term and the other one serving a nine year term. But again, remember what those charges were for alligator issues. I mean, the book, gold bar Bob that came out just a couple of days before I came out of prison is a wild read. I mean, I I had it ordered and sent to me because I just needed to read it. The stories in there are absolutely fascinating. And I'm sitting here reading this and looking at these two characters. I'm like, that man did not do all this. There's no way he's too doping to do all of this. It's just crazy to me. But yeah, it was an enlightening group of people. Well, excuse me. I reconnected with a former campaign staffer of mine who ended up going to prison for something completely unrelated to me. But in the nature of what I believe the mayor Garland DOJ did was he refused to play the narrative of bashing me and cooperating against me because he had really nothing to say so in lieu of that, they got him on a technicality on some paperwork and they threw him in prison for a year and a day. And that's Sam Mealy who is a really remarkably intelligent young man who I would say made some poor choices. But at the same time, doesn't deserve to be in prison just because he didn't knock on me. But that's what the mayor Garland DOJ was operating like. Oh, you don't help. You know, off to the off the ramparts with you, you're done. So it's just just to make sure it's totally a snitch system. So as far as other people, look, I will say this, I met this very competent man who I still struggle. I looked at after I left prison. I wanted to make sure this is a guy who I think would be a friend in my life because he was a very even killed, well-spoken, respectable executive. He was a very renowned architect worldwide. His name is a Loke. Indian gentleman, former executive for United Airlines, he got caught in a pay to play kickbacks scheme in the private sector though. I never thought that that was illegal. And when I look at his saying, I'm saying, look, don't do it if there's a gray area, right? So I'm not defending the activity. But I'm also looking at saying like, this is protocol in the private sector. I worked in the private sector for 10 years in private equity. I mean, if you go to my house, I'll be glad to tour the wine cellar I've built out of gift baskets. You know, like four, five, six hundred dollar bottles of wine, two, three thousand dollars bottles of champagne, happy, van, winkle, Scotch. I mean, all of the sits in my house, I never bought that stuff. But they were gifts during my private equity days and they were be like, thank you. It was a pleasure doing business. It's not a crime, but they put this man prison. That's right. So I struggle with the criminal justice system these days because I look at it and I feel like it's an overall zealous system. just meant to put people in prison. There has to be some monetary benefit, benefiting suppliers when you look at, do you know what I discovered in prison? Kiefee, have you ever heard of the brand Kiefee? No. Have you ever heard of the brand Bob Barker? No, but you know who Bob Barker is right. Of course. Well, Bob Barker's family or him. I don't know who started a freaking line of supplies from curtains to towels to linens to t-shirts to the jumpsuits we wear in prison all the way to the bare basic toy litries. And it's all the Bob Barker line. That is a multi billion dollar federal government contract. And those parts are for prisons, for prisons, exclusively for prisons. Bob Barker's family started a prison accessory line. Yes. And then there's kind of, I've lived in this country a long time. How did I know I didn't know it until I went to prison? Fair. And then there's this brand called Kiefee that by all accounts ties back to the bushes. Now they sell all the commentary stuff from coffee to toilet paper. You name it. Like you can go down to prison commissary, she and Kiefee. I'm like, what the hell is Kiefee? Well, apparently there's ties of it that tie back to form prison. And then it's Bush. And they've got a retail monopoly. In contracts with the federal Bureau of prisons. So when you look at this, we currently have a system that houses approximately 250,000 Americans in federal custody. I don't even have an idea of what state custody is, but or local jail, hoarder of a million Americans sit in federal custody today. That is a business not for the federal government though. Federal government loses. It's a business for all of those with the contracts to those prisons. So there is an incentive to putting people in prison somewhere along some line judges might be compromised. And I'm assuming prosecutors might be compromised. I can't prove that. But that's the only thing that makes sense when you're seeing people go to prison for arbitrary reasons or for purposes and time frames that wouldn't sue the crime or are overtly unusual and cruel, which is a violation of the eight amendment. So you have to really walk this tight rope to understand. And I don't think that a BOP director will be able to grasp that because a, they work in four terms, four year terms or a, if they get real, like their principal gets real acted as a president. And in eight or four years, there's so much you have to do that. I don't think you can get to the nitty gritty. That's why I'm like so focused Tucker to get into this in prison reform because it's desperately needed. There's more voices needed for this. We're sorry to say it, but this is not a very safe country. Walk through Oakland or Philadelphia. Yeah, good luck. So most people, they think about this want to carry a firearm and a lot of us do. The problem is there can be massive consequences for that. Ask Kyle Rittenhouse. Kyle Rittenhouse got off in the end, but he was innocent from the first moment. It was obvious on video and he was facing life in prison anyway. That's what the anti gun movement will do. they'll throw you in prison for defending yourself for the firearm. And that's why a lot of Americans are turning to burn up. It's a proudly American company, burn up makes self defense lawn sures that hundreds of law enforcement departments trust. They've sold over 600,000 pistols, mostly to private citizens who refuse to be empty handed. These pistols and I have one fire rock hard kinetic rounds or tear gas rounds and pepper projectiles and they stop a threat from 60 feet away. You know, background checks or no waiting periods, burn it can ship it directly to your door. You can't be arrested for defending yourself with a burn up pistol visit burnupby our n a dot com or your local sportsman's warehouse to get your stay burn up dot com. Is the problem with it that it's dirty, disorganized, violent corrupt all the above. Like if you were to isolate one problem with the federal prison system as you experienced it, what would it be? For my experience at FSA fairton and I have limited experience, I know that there's a lot of people that I met who have hop because they hop around prisons and for sure entry. It's an in the federal system. Insanity they ship you backwards. I mean, if you're in New Jersey, here this is I think it's hilarious this story. An inmate was being transferred to New Jersey from Pennsylvania, but first they drove him to Kentucky. I was God said, and then he bought us back to New Jersey. Why? I don't know why. I understand it. And that's why the BOP has a nickname for its acronym, which is backwards on purpose. Even CEOs say it. Real I learned this from a CEO from a corrections officer not from an inmate, by the way, they say the BOP is backwards on per the guards like I should have asked you. That's a great question. The guards 80% of them are hardworking, amazing people. They're doing their job. I had no quarrels with them or qualms or anything. I mean, great people. After a fact, I am only here today talking to you because of two very specific people that didn't let me walk off that ledge when I was in isolation for 41 days. I don't obviously want to say their names because I don't want to compromise that. We don't help. It doesn't help them and they have families and I genuinely like these gentlemen. They were very compassionate men who were themselves distraught and completely flabbergasted at why I was being treated, though I was being treated while I was in solitary confinement. It didn't compute to them. It didn't make sense. So I'd say 80% of them are some of the best people you'll ever meet. They're fun. They can dish it out with the best of them. Like, you know, on a good day, I'd pop some jokes. They'd pop right back. They clap at you. And you have this very good environment because it's supposed to be regulatory. It's not supposed to be punitive. So some CEOs want to make your life miserable just because it makes them happy. And they live and relish off of your misery. But that's not the majority. Those are very few in select and I'm so glad that that's the case. So I look at it as I had a positive experience with the CEOs. I had a terrible experience with the administration from the assistant order noble to the Warden Lynn Kelly to the camp administrator who then turns out to be the most competent man there. And funny enough, his name is Mr. Santos. Yes. True story. You're a husband. I know. No. No. It turns out he was the most competent and most honest of the three on the power structure. And it's infuriating that he's the one with the less power. And then you have the two with the most power in their abs. Tucker, here's you know where my head exploded. CEOs are working with the bare minimum because there's no budget. We don't have that in the budget. The buildings falling apart. We don't have it in the budget. That's her answer to everything, the Warden, the AC broke. And it was broke all summer long. And then I had to fight tooth and nail literally writing about it before they put on an actual temporary, because I wasn't about to sleep in 90 degree weather. No, it's just not going to happen. You have standards. You're willing cars for it. You've been present. I think there should be standards. But upon leaving right before I left, it's getting cold. The ducks hadn't been cleaned. And when asked to clean the ducks, she said they didn't have the budget. One of these CEOs was so infuriating. I think it's for grand to have a full service. We're just going to turn this on. It's going to throw God only knows what onto you guys to breathe. And at the same time, she founded in the budget to buy herself an 85 inch QLED Samsung TV, the cost of allegedly $7,000 and she put it in her own office. Not in a conference room, not in a common area. Is it TV watcher? I work. I guess. 85 inches. I don't even have that in my living room. It's such a massive TV. What are you doing with this in your office? But she found a budget for that. But God forbid the budget to clean the ducks for the heater. It's infuriating. You didn't have a problem with the guards. You had a problem with a couple of administrators. What about the other inmates? It means for me, I call them extras in my journey. I mean, there was like maybe two or three of them now. They had not speaking parts in the car. Totally not speaking parts in the film because look, I didn't. I didn't. I couldn't find a lot of similarities with a lot of them. I think there was like a group of like five or six that I could talk to. But these are well educated individuals. Very savvy. But it seemed very liberal. So it really. There are lots of liberals in prison. What? Oh my God, lots of liberals in prison. You'd be shocked that the amount of people who hate the president in prison. But then the moment, which is funny, the moment I got commuted, everybody was like, oh, Trump's the man. Yo, buddy, take care of me. Here's my call my wife. I'm like, I left with a stack of phone numbers of wives that I've never called. I know. I know a lot of people who have been in prison. They all get more right wing in prison. Oh, maybe these were still not getting. You're in the building. I didn't do my party either. So what do you do for recreation? While I was in the camp for the 43 days that I was in the camp, the first 30. And then the break and then 13 days because I had that big 41 block of isolation. I was in the kitchen from 730 in the morning to 430 in the afternoon. And it was a great refuge for me psychologically. Yes. Because I didn't have to deal with whatever was outside of the kitchen. What is everyone else doing? I don't know. Honestly, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, no, we don't make license plates. It's a work camp. So there's the maintenance crew. So some guys do facility maintenance, I mean, which is whatever they call maintenance, there's not maintenance in the real world. And then you have the warehouse guys who are in charge of like picking up the heavy boxes of the goods that come in to operate the prison. And then you have, oh, you have the cleaning crew. So they're the ones in charge of cleaning the entire compound from the buildings, the bathrooms and all the other facilities for the staff. And lastly, you have the landscapers because this is on a big old bird reserve. That was converted into a president in 1990. So it's massive amounts of acreage and lots of green and lots of grass. And so you have a landscaping crew. So I don't know what these people do. All I know is that I was in the kitchen from 730 to 430. Is anyone plot a escape? No. If they want it, you can walk off. The campers are literally free to roam right off, but nobody's stupid enough to do it. Why? Your custody points go higher and then you lose that privilege and you end up in a low or a medium facility security. So because you just wander off and go to Philadelphia, I mean, you technically could. When you get caught, you're going to be charged with escape and your custody points go higher. And so for my understanding, nobody has attempted to escape the camp in years because once you go to the camp, it's the easiest form of prison. It's imagine an abandoned country club from the 1960s that nobody's ever gone to anymore. And one day you just decide to turn on the key and say, we're open for business. No maintenance, no nothing. You just want to operate it as is. That's what they're operating there. But in prison standards, that is a club fed. Wow. No fences, no gates, no block doors. You can roam and there's outdoor track and there's recreation outside. There's a weight pile, you know, really run down weight pile, but a weight pile for you to work out. They have an annex trailer with a laundry room for you to do your laundry. You have a little library with the actually decent selection of books, which I was very impressed in some of my favorite authors were in there. And then you have a chapel where you can do multi denominational prayer services. So it's very nice environment as far as prison goes. So when you get there, you usually either are somebody like me who is going to hate it, but not understand how good you have it. Yes. And be a big baby about it like I was. Well, it is prison. Or you're going to be somebody who came from the system working yourself down throughout your very long sentence. And now you've reached the tail end of it. And you've been good behavior. You've in the eyes of the BOP rehabilitated yourself. Now you're a minimum security custody, which you're now not even considered in custody. You're out custody because there's no gates, handcuffs, none of that. So that's nobody wants to run away from that. What is showers like? Oh, let's let's I describe that this way. So I want to stay consistent. Imagine a rundown gym with no maintenance. Same structure, shower to two sides of showers and an aisle in the middle like a locker with showers on both sides with curtains that are just falling apart, lime and every bacterial growth you can imagine growing on the walls and in the corners, peeling paint inside of each stall, same thing goes for the toilets. And then there was something lovely that I discovered. There's this, this is what made the bathroom really unbearable for me. all same thing goes for the toilets. And then there was something lovely that I discovered. There's this, this is what made the bathroom really unbearable for me to a point that I started having to brush my teeth with bottled water. You're not going to believe this. But in prison, there's this Muslim culture that has become very prolific in a sense. And I'm not trying to be Islamophobic here. I'm just being really agnostic. Yeah. Have no horse in the fight of Israel, is in Jews in Islam and now. Right. Non political observation. They have a predominant presence in the prison system. The wild thing is that before they go to pray, they have to, I guess, wash certain parts of their body. Yes. There were inmates hanging there as on the sink and just washing it right there where I was asked, washing on the sink. Yeah. That's a bridge too far. I mean, for anybody and one confronted, it's like a big argument on religious freedom. Seriously? Oh, yeah. It's an attack. It's Islamophobia. Are these Middle Eastern Muslims or African American Muslims? Yeah, African American Muslims. So you didn't see a lot of Egyptians. full pods. No, I don't think there was a single Arab in this Muslim crew that I was with. Not a single one. They were all African Americans. These are gang members from Philly pretty much. Yeah. Right. These were the Muslims that I was dealing with. Now don't get me wrong. Some of them. Nice as guys I've ever met. Yeah. Yeah. With these very uncanny habits that were just not for me. So once I walked into a situation like that and it was literally ass washing on the sink, I can't do this. I so I bought the 24 pack of water. You're surely from your state here, not far from here. Same brand. They sell Poland Spring. Yeah. Totally. So you can buy the 24 pack at I think 70 cents a bottle, which is not a bad. No, no, prison. It's not a bad deal. We know it's a rip off, but it's compared to their 150 for a ramen noodle. It's not a rip off. They were church hits insane. They take off. Can you buy cigarettes? No, you cannot. It's a federal buildings are all smoke free areas. What about vapor? No, actually, no nicotine. No nicotine products. I saw a man go to the shoe for 45 days because he was caught with a contraband and vaping in there. No, yeah. That's the that's how severe they consider it of a violation. Really? Yeah. For me. I don't know. Well, Grand Canyon University is not like most American colleges. It focuses on the things that actually matter. It is not a rip off. It is the real thing. It's private affordable Christian, university located in the heart of Phoenix, one of the largest universities in the country actually at Grand Canyon University education is more than academics. It is about opportunity, the chance for every student to live out the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Right. So not given by the government, they were bestowed at birth at conception by God. That's just a fact and Grand Canyon University is not going to lie to your kids and claim otherwise. It tells the truth. So you know, you're thinking a quality education is rare. So this probably costs a fortune. Colleges constantly jack up their costs. They probably do the same. Well, they don't actually. GCEU is maintaining the same tuition for 17 straight years. They're not in education to get rich at the expensive students. The whole thing is actually about learning how refreshing with flexible online classes, hybrid learning options. GCEU offers 340 academic program students benefit from collaborative learning environment, dedicated faculty, personalized support to help them achieve their goals. The pursuit to serve is yours, let it flourish. Find your purpose at Grand Canyon University private Christian affordable. GCEU dot edu. What about drugs? Were there drugs in the present? The prison, not the camp, the prison across the street in the shoe of all places is littered in drugs. Suboxone, K, ecstasy, Molly, cocaine. Are you serious? I am dead serious. How do you get drugs into a present? That is the question I would always pose when there was some court sort of issue where the CEOs can walk the range of the shoe because the smoke of suboxone and K2 were so thick or smoke in it. They're smoking it. And then you ask, why are they being provided lighters? They're not. But some inmates have medical prescriptions that are pumps and require a battery. They take a little piece of whatever foil they can find and they put it on each end, the negative and the positive and create a little brazier and they smoke from that. No way. Yeah, I learned a lot. That's clever. I watched out their maggyver. Did you get tattoos or joining gang or anything? No, I should have joined the gang. But I mean, it was camp cupcake. What was I going to do? Cupcake on my shoulder. The cupcake tattoo. They call it camp cupcake. I called it camp cupcake cupcakes there. So yes, it's camp people are getting high in solitary confinement, which is insane because these are, I mean, they strip, they strip a snake it, make a spread our sheets and costs to go into solitary to make sure we're bringing nothing we're not allowed to into solitary. So I went through that humiliating display. You're always handcuffs your back. You have no access to outside. So when all that is happening, unfortunately, there's only one way that drugs make it in their guards. Guards and why they're under compensated. They're under compensated over work. Now they're working without compensation for God knows how long because Democrats can't even get that that together and Republicans can't seem to work with them to do something. Although I agree with the principle of standing up to Chuck Schumer, but the problem is you're just going to create a far worse, this is a pressure cooker but Farriton is a littered in drugs in the medium. The camp I never saw drugs. I was there. I was pretty all over the place as far as like integration goes. I've never seen drugs. I the worst that I saw there was one guy got caught with a vape and that was like, oh my God, you know, oh, sorry, that was the worst. That was in the worst. The phone one in me got caught with a phone while I was in solitary. Another inmate who actually funny enough to first day I walk in there. He looks at me and says, you were my congressman. I voted for you. I'm like, I'm just fine. A lot of constituents. Two. Two people from New York, Sir District serving there, which was I didn't like that. Similar to big district. It is a big district. That's a very densely populated area. But yeah, there were two. What were they in for? Both of them for PPP fraud. You can't make this up. Actually, millions of dollars of PPP fraud. Yes. So one of them got caught with the cell phone. That was a big transgression and it hadn't happened in so long. I was so like, oh, we haven't had a phone incursion in this prison in this part of the prison for years. I was like, oh, okay, either they're really good at hiding them or they just don't even bother doing it because they have so much freedom. It's not real risk. But that was the worst I saw. Booze, drugs. You know, these guys, you know what's the number one topic in the camp food? It's only talk about really the fantasies of like, oh, I'd kill for a big background. I'm like, oh, metaphorically careful. Like, yeah, that's that's all that because food is such a big part of the day there. You have these two sacred times of day 10 a.m. is lunch four p.m. is dinner. Yes, we run on a geriatric schedule. But that is literally the so two meals today. The entire well, they call breakfast what they give us in a bag, an apple, a honey bun, some sort of like, mad, process cake and a little box of cornflakes. That's breakfast. It's all sugar. So yeah, yeah, lots of us don't even touch that. So I didn't touch that stuff or also I was going to die. I have beaties and sodium issues like just note that you. So really it's two meals and whatever you buy on your commissary. But I did something I'm so proud of. I was able to survive 84 days in prison. I've never eaten a honey bun or a ramen noodle soup. So I'm very proud of so good. You're not good for me. No, they're not how I burn that. I've been reliably informed. Yes. 1000 milligrams of sodium. Are you trying to kill someone by eating that? You know, the ramen's ramen's tough. You know what? I have a trade for you. One honey bun for soups for me to guess hosts your show next to me. So what would that be worth? I know. I need it too. Of course you have. Of course I would. I'll eat anything. That Wow. So what were you buying at the commissary? I stuck to like they have these really, they have some healthy alternative, healthy ish. Right. So lots of tuna. Eight lots of. I felt like a cat like I could do. I think I could do a full blown frisky's commercial right now. Like I know how I have my meowing down to the tea so much tuna. But lots of like cashews and almonds and trail mix. Like I lived off of that stuff. Like and you have to ration because of premium stuff like that. They give you a limit of how much you can buy of it. Oh, you can't go up by case. Yo, like two bags a week of each. So I'd get two of each. Almonds cashews, trail mix and the peanuts. So I just, you know, ration it through the week. Sometimes dinner for me was like half a bag of trail mix and I'd go to sleep because the food was in at a ball from the kitchen. Was it hard to sleep? I cried every night. It was not easy. So much so that the prison there, even though other prisons do allow people to stay on their actual medications that they have been treated on for years. I was on Vivance for I have been on Vivance, which is an Adderall because I'm ADD for 22 years since I'm 15 37. These guys took me off Vivance, cold turkey and literally stuffed me up with a antidepressant and anti-exiety medications. So needless to say, I was kind of zombified. What was that like? No medical care, no mental health care. It's like to complete decay and abandonment. But they will hand you pills. Oh, no. No, no, no. They give you the pill. You can't self-medicate or off course, but I mean, they will give you. Oh, yeah, they, but those pills, they won't give you what you, they won't treat you with what you need at that prison for some reason. Although if you look historically even Sam Bankman freed when he's, he's in prison, he's receiving his Adderall because he's ADHD, right? He still receives not help getting in my talk to him. It's not. No. So still jumping around like a method. Well, I mean, obviously because you take a diagnosis like that and it just exacerbates I mean, me confinement, the solitary confinement, what it did to me. I wrote three suicide notes. So can you back up and tell us how you're working in the prison kitchen? I don't think you're starting fiss fights in the showers. How do you wind up in solitary confinement for 41 days? So Joe Murray, my attorney, who I adore. Good man. Great champion for me. I mean, shout out to Joe because what him, Matt, my partner and my sister Tiffany went to hell and back for me, but Joe really was driving for us. I mean, this man, he texted me. I mean, he did, he did not rest a single day. It was remarkable. And I have two other attorneys, Andrew and Bobby who did fantastic work, but really I'd be remiss if I didn't highlight Joe's efforts receives this text message from a journalist, an investigative journalist from Project Veritas, which is an organization I have. I've given I've donated to their former outfit. I was very close to Keith and all of those guys. I don't know. I didn't even know Project Veritas was still around. To me, eventually, after Matt Tiermont left, I think, after the whole breakup with, oh, Keith, it was gone, but apparently it's still active. So they get this person, this one named Patricia. She's Brazilian. She's had an obsession with me to a degree that I can't explain. It's inexplicable, almost to a degree. She has in the past made threats that were deemed uncredible. So she was a non-closing credible source with these elaborate threats of high power players in DC want to kill you because you're outing about orgies and talking about the DC swamp orgies with the SEC and Congress. And I said, okay, whatever. Capital police looked into it in 2023 when I was a city member of Congress. Not credible. She comes back out of the woodworks and I guess convinces Project Veritas on those old texts to be real. And as a new one, dated August 18th, saying that we need to take care of Santos in prison and I'm paraphrasing, you know, essentially somebody needs to break into prison and kill George Santos, which is on its face valley ridiculous. I've heard of jail breaks. I have not heard of in breaks. So I'm sitting there like, wait, what? So Joe sees this. I've been this object of threat credible threats to the point we do have people in prison for trying to kill me today. Or just out to facility things. Hey, I need you to protect George. I just received this thread. It seems concerning. The wardens definition of protected custody because she's lazy and she's completely irresponsible with her budget and doesn't have adequate protective custody. You know, protocols does what's easy and the shortcut, which is toss your Santos in the shoe. Now, I am not there for disciplinary action, but I am subject to only three showers a week. I'm subject to using recycled clothes, meaning I'm using whatever underwear. Joe Schmo was using yesterday got into the washing machine and was propped up and given to me comes with their, it even comes with compliments Harry's skid marks on them. It's like lovely. So other people's people care are included. And they're trail of unclaimed asses too. Like I'm not kidding. This is real. The environment takes a lot to make me feel nauseous. But that's repulsive. It's repulsive. That's the word. It's repulsive what they do to you. They give you soap that doesn't lather courtesy of Bob Barker's company called maximum security. They give you toothpaste that doesn't foam when you brush your teeth courtesy of maximum security. Great government contract. I mean, it's it's remarkable. It's it's just remarkable. You lose your privileges to email. You use your privileges to phone calls. I am subject now to one call every 30 days for 15 minutes. And I have to pick who I'm calling in my family. I don't get to call five minutes here. Five notes. One call period. So this is what she did and then named it in the name of protection. How does it protect you to limit you to three showers a week and make you wear someone else's 30 boxer shorts? Oh, tidy whities. Boxers actually. Yeah, actually, orange, but tidy whities. Like, you know, fruit of the loom old someone else's orange grapes, smugglers with someone else's kid marks on them. Yep. That is cruel and unusual protection. No, no, no, no, I'd be freestyle. I couldn't handle it. No, no, no, no, that is protection under Kelly Ward, a kewarden Lynn Kelly at FCI Fairton. How dare you say that's cruel and unusual. I am a crybaby or as the deputy ward and said I was a princess, stop being a princess. He said to me. Right. So this is this is this is real. This is actually real behavior. And they put you there. Give you no information. They peep you. So they put you in a cell that's six by nine. I couldn't do this without touching the walls. You know, the six six feet apart. Yeah. If I was really measuring my, my, you know, spread arms distance, I was definitely further than six feet apart for you because I couldn't do that to the wall. So again, you drink water out of a toilet, the top of a toilet, which has a metallic taste. And when you put water in it and you let the cup sit, sediments fall like these black sediments fall to the bottom of the cup. This is what they're putting you through. Now my neighbor in the cell next to me, a murder who had just killed another inmate months earlier with a pencil. Grantan disciplinary custody waiting a pencil with a pencil stabbing another inmate through the eye with a pencil. This is on the news, by the way. Now the lovely part about it is this inmate is a trans inmate who killed another trans inmate who the news reported on as a leader activist native trans leader in their community, God knows where, but failed to disclose that he was a vicious child molester. Okay. The one that got killed. Anyway, perhaps you talk to the pencil killer. I didn't talk to anybody. There's no way to talk other than to scream through your doors. And I'm sorry. Yeah. I'm totally fine with screaming in the hall of Congress like I've done before at people who try to accost me, but not in prison. I kept myself. They would scream at me. They curse. So yeah, Santa's US. So be I know you can hear me answer me. And I'm just like sitting there, my name, my business reading my historical fiction book. What did you do all day in solitary? You go crazy. They give you three books a week, an arbitrary number for, I mean, I understand that the reading level of most prisoners aren't going to be quite high. And they'll probably take a while to read a 300, 400 page book. I was crushing books, you know, 400 page books a day sometimes, you know, nothing to do. I mean, I read a book by Sarah J. Moss, the final installment of her fantasy series called Kingdom of Ash. I think a thousand pages I read that in two days. It does nothing to do. It was great. It was great. I, the sad part is there's like eight books that preceded, but the final book was pretty cool. So I was like, okay, I can, I can kind of imagine what happened before because the final book is pretty decent. So mysterious illusions though, you have no idea. Oh, no. I mean, you just totally have to like pretend, you know, what you're reading at some certain things are just like kind of, but the gist of the book. Really good book. I thought it was a really well written book. I got into Khan Iguid and I don't know if you know who he is. Very, very good historical fiction writer. So I am a pro. You can quiz me on Genghis Khan, the momo god. Yes. Everything. All five books in the series. It was amazing. Like, I mean, I almost want to go to Mongolia now to see some of these things because it's so fascinating. And it's so immersive. I read a Russian. You can see the illegitimate children. It's amazing. I'm sure. I mean, that's why that a, it is your in Asia. Yeah. It's, yeah. Oh, you can see it in their faces. It's amazing. It's like these Pakistanis are kind of like right there. That's the halfway point where they're all there, right? But it's crazy because I even got into War of the Roses, but from the pretext of Margaret John Zhu, the French Queen who was married to King Gattner, which was depicted in history as a great manipulator. But these are the books that was reading. I was so damn bored. It sounds fun. It was fun. I will say this 26 books in 41 days. Amazing. Decent amount. The thing is, I only read that many books because remember that CEO I told you about? Yeah. He took me up. I'd get the three books I was entitled to, but then he'd swap me out, you know, within three days for another three. So nice. It's like, but other CEOs wouldn't do it. Why would they want to limit number of books you can read? This is going to be so funny. I don't know to the extent of F bombs I can drop here. But crazy. Oh, so funny. So my very first book on Genghis Khan, Lords of the Bow. The first chapter was cut out of the book and somebody wrote in the beginning of the second chapter. Fuck you. Figure out what happened in the beginning. You're just like, these people really need help. And then on the very last book of the series, which is Kingdom of Silver, they ripped out the last chapter. No way. You figure out what happened in the end. So I'm just like, who the fuck is in this place? It's madness. I'd say well, criminal is there. Well, but I get it, but they're literally. That is the book that no cover. I mean, it's like the ripped off. It's very essential. I did do a lot of reading, but it was essential creating at best. But that's what I did with my days. And when I was doing that, I was trying to pray because I had a really big awakening, a religious awakening. I've strayed so, so far from the principles and the teachings of my family and literally Jesus Christ and growing up in the Catholic church and baptism, a communion confirmation. I mean, all of those things, I've strayed so far away from it. And I saw where it landed me because now I can easily tell you this. It is so much easier to walk in your life with a god in it than ignore it. I mean, it is phenomenal. I have my peace with God. I it was and I'll tell you the reward that happened. I think it was like day 10. And I had already written my first suicide note. And that's when it, what did you say in your suicide note? I never read it back, Tucker. It's sitting in a Manila envelope in my house. I sealed it all three of them. And I wrote shoe records as something for me to remember how dark it got for me. I don't think I'm ready today to read it. I will one day because I want to I think I want the world to know what I wrote. Funny enough, the very first one I write it. I'm so angry. My whole preface and if I could recall, without it's a blur, right? But the preface was I'm going to kill myself just to fuck with this warden and put up mess in her hand. Look at how desperate I was. I was willing to end my life in my own thoughts to get back at someone who was hurting me. That's that's the level of insanity that you do. What do you think most suicide is an act of aggression against others? I mean, that's pretty common. You know, you're all show them is a common motive. That's pretty much where I was at and it gets to a point where after the first one, I said, what am I doing? I need help and I requested they make you fill out copouts, which is a former request to staff. So I wrote to the chaplain requesting a Catholic Roman Catholic Bible and a rosary so I can pray the warden and approve it declined both requests. Till this day, I didn't get an answer. Till that I could get all the fucked up books in the world, but I couldn't get a Catholic Bible or a rosary. I requested for the visiting priest that comes to do mass at the prison to visit me in the shoe. She didn't allow it. She denied me the how I'm with grounds. I don't know. You weren't there because you broke the rules. You were there because you've been threatened. Well, you should explain that to her as I tried to. I said, this is cruel and unusual. You want to make sure she loses her job. I told her, I had an outburst by about day, let's say 35 or 30 somewhere along that range where after all the meandering bullshit of, you know, it's still under the investigative authorities, blah, blah, blah, blah. And it was like, I go into the shoe August 28 September 23rd, just five day shorts of a month and I meet with the FBI. They come to tell me this is not credible. I think it takes five days later around the 28th, that email is sent to the facility. Look, we're referring us to the AUSA where we don't find us to be credible, but the AUSA has to decline to prosecute. Right? At that point, the warden had the discretion to hold a discretion to say, okay, I'm sending back to the camp, but she chose to let the AUSA do their process, which is fine. I'll give her the benefit of the doubt here, but she chose knowing there was no threat. She chose to wait for the official process. Even though I had screamed till I was blue in my face that it was not credible, there was a former investigation to the same person with similar allegations and these were just new trumped up ones. That took a process and I, so I want to say, oh, well, that was let's say the 28th, I believe is the day that that email went in. And then by the 17th of, I'm sorry, by the 7th of October, I was released a couple of a week later or so. I was released back to the camp. And then 10 days later, I was set home, but she chose to keep me there in my opinion. Now, one can argue she was following protocol. I think if two federal officers are telling you that it's not credible and they've done all the due diligence on this, I think it's pretty remarkable that you're going to wait and extend suffering for somebody for another nine days just because, you know, what do you think that was about? Well, I was very critical of her. From day one, my very first article, I mean, by the second or third article, I literally after being there and experiencing the decay in the kitchen, the food issues, the issues with hygiene, the issues with mental health, the issues with medical, the issues with the dorm and sleeping and health and in the environment drugs and drugs because I only experienced the drug issues across the street. So the issue with the lack of humanity and dehumanizing nature of her facility, I wrote that all down on several different, um, pand articles on the South Shore press and it got millions of views. She was mad. Now, I get it. I mean, hell have no, you know, what is it? If you're really like a word in scoring. Well, I guess or I was going to save something a lot, you're nice. Let's just say that. I was going to be as nice as you. But she was mad. And she made these choices and she mocked me in the process to the, to a point where I was losing my mind. So they do executive rounds once a week. I won't say the day. So I don't compromise a facility again and lieu of not compromising officers. Um, and the facility routine, they do rounds once a week in every segment of the facility. So there was the day of the week that they did rounds in the shoe. Now in the shoe, we're sitting in ourselves and there's this metal door, which is blast proof. Heavy is hell with a little drawer so you can get your trays. And when you got to get out, put your hands backwards through that and get coughed. Um, and this skinny window about, I want to say four inches wide, about 20, 20, 25 inches tall, give or take that they come in and they peep their eye to see if you're alive, right? And they're doing their rounds. And I would always ask, it was around day 30 to 35 or somewhere in between there. I lost my shit. I said, why am I still here? Because now I had already spoken to the FBI and I knew what they were doing. They said that following money, they would send a letter in which in fact they did. So I was furious. And I said, and I quote, bitch, you are going to regret fucking with me. And I've been that and I don't mean it is threatening her. But I'm going to take her to task. Kelly, warden Kelly, Lynn Kelly will be the face of evil of brought and corrupt of the BOP if I have it my way. We need to make an example of somebody because if we're going to rehabilitate people in this country, it cannot be at the hands of that woman or people like her. So let that serve as a warning. If you operate like warden Kelly does at FC I Farriton, I strongly suggest you fuck off. Because I'm going to come for you. I'm going to find you, you're prison. I'm going to investigate it and I'm going to work tooth and nail to make these changes because we're creating more criminals and recidivism is at an all time high because of how we treat people. We're not giving people a second chance at life. We're making them better criminals at that or angry or criminal. Exactly. And also, you know, you should take care of the people in your care period. That's your job. That's your should obviously give you a medical care. We're watching people with dignity. So that was a burst, which is totally out of character for me too, because I'm very non-confidential and individuals. So for me to get that finding yourself in lockup, are you kidding? I mean, I found a courage to literally tell somebody who had all the power in the world to crush me further to fuck off. So I mean, honestly, it's very liberating because I'm a very yes, sir. Yes, ma'am type of guy. That's kind of like my, my niche. crush me further to fuck off. So I mean, honestly, it's very liberating because I'm a very yes, sir. Yes, ma'am type of guy. That's kind of like my nature. I'm not violent. I'm not over overtly aggressive. I'm kind of, you know, mellow. I'm, you know, fun fact guy. You know, it's like that's really my nature. So she pushed all my buttons in general. How does you get out of solitary? I don't know. I just know that it's a great story. That day that I got out October 7th was the day they were doing executive rounds. So they came, I spoke to three different individuals. I capped in the camp administrator and the SIS, which is the internal investigations guy. All three of them gave me different answers. I'm not kidding. They all gave me three different answers. And essentially I sat there thinking, I'm so fucked. I got so angry. This was at nine o'clock in the morning. Come later that day at around one, another assistant award comes by. Actually, very straightforward guy. I'm not going to say he's my favorite. But do you know that guy you don't like, but you appreciate him because he's straightforward. He's honest and he tells you exactly how it is. Very much. We need people. He's not kind. But he's direct doesn't mince around, doesn't beat around the bush. He comes and says, hey, so here's the deal. Got an update for him. Like what's up? He's like, did you hear the news? I'm like, God, no, I heard Doom today and three different kinds of Doom. So I don't even know which one is true. He's like, ignore all of that. We got the declinations investigate. I believe we're going to run an internal administrative process. You're going to go back to the camp. I said, when he's like, look, it's Tuesday today. So if they're really fast, probably by the end of the week, but worst case scenario beginning next week, I had a grin from year to year. Like, oh my God, I got to do at least me at worst. I was like, in my head at worst, I'll do another 10 days in here. I can pull this off. I looked at the books I had selected. I'm like, I'll make that work. I'll journal some more. I had a plan like a goal, an end in sight. And then that same day at 2 p.m. when shift change, the guard comes, bangs on my door and says, pack up, you're getting kicked out. I'm like, to wear. And then she's like, to the camp where else? I'm like, oh, lovely. I mean, don't say that twice. 30 minutes later, she was handcuffing, putting me out of the door so I can go take off the lovely borrowed clothes and put on my actual clothes. You gave back to Tidy White. Totally, I can keep it. So what was the worst part of solitary, was you say what made it, what made you so desperate to well, desperate to kill myself? Yeah. The loneliness and the way I was being treated, there, I'll give you this, something so bizarre. On September 10th, I was sitting in myself, my name, my business thinking, wow, tomorrow's 9-11, what a rough day. And I'm sitting here and like, you know, I'm from New York. It's still very much a somber day for New Yorkers. And a CEO knocks on my door says, hey, did you know Charlie Kirk? I'm like, yeah, I know Charlie, Charlie, Charlie is a fun guy. I've met Charlie throughout the years. He's, I like him. I call him a friend. No, no, no, no, you knew him. He was just murdered and just walked away. Now you're talking to somebody who's all fucked up 50 shades from Tuesday mentally in the show by myself. No one to talk, can't pick up the phone and make a call to understand what's going on. And they took a glee in mice. I was whaling like, what do you mean? Come back here. How do you tell me this and walk away? I was like losing it, like losing it. This is a guy that I've always found so inspirational. And I think I said this here in private once when I was last year. I think he's going to be a president of United States. I really thought that. I really thought he'd be one of a future president of this country. I mean, he had a message, had a purpose, and he was good. And quite frankly, you can call him a little antagonistic, but who isn't these days? Oh, of course. And I love the guy. I think he got a great message of God freedom. I mean, what else can you expect from somebody? Right. And the way it was delivered, it was so rough and that didn't help. How did you get more information about it? I didn't. So the nice CEO I'm telling you about, I asked them to look into it. They're not really tuned into politics, but they did some research. And they would ever on a day to day, they'd give me like play by play of what they had read that when I say these guys were top notch phenomenal human beings. I mean, hop notch phenomenal human beings, they gave me play by play. They told me about the memorial. They told me about the attendance that President Trump spoke that he was getting awarded the medal of free. I knew all of that through the accounts of these two CEOs that I really hope that in my life, I cross paths with them one day because I'd love to thank them appropriately. Like a proper thank you for not treating me like a subhuman piece of trash because they were the only two everyone else. I was nothing but another number and being treated in certain instances quite, you know, bad. I struggle to find the words because you know, this facility declined a visit from my family, my partner and my aunt drove three and a half hours each way to go see me got there and said, no, you can't see him today, even though it was visitation day, but they created a laboratory rule. They had not registered, although they were approved and cleared and had visited me in the camp. Now across the street, it's a whole new protocol. I mean, it's not just kill you with bureaucracy. They just make shit up as they go. It's infuriating. Like literally there's no oversight. It sounds like there's no oversight. The war, wartons create their own little kingdoms and they rule as little monarchs with no real oversight because here's the oversight process whenever they're going to be inspected or receive a visit. They clean everything up. They put makeup on everything. So when you come down doing that visit, it's, you know, you got to do surprise visits on these people. You really want to see how the how the house is being run. You can't say that the cats coming to town, the mice are going to run away. You got to let the cats show up and be like, surprise because the way they do it is just it's so how does you get out exact? Can I say one thing before you explain? There was a vibe shift, which you weren't here to see, but you went from being, you know, widely reviled, all these members of Congress to announce to you, everyone making fun of you to once you went to prison, there was a sense that like, wait, what's torte Santos doing in prison? And it was wild to see it. Tim Burchit, your friend, Congressman, good man from Tennessee kind of led the charge on your behalf, but there were a lot of sympathetic years. Oh, look, it was wild from became more popular like Alexander Solzhenson, you became more popular in prison. Oh, okay. I've ever let a good crisis go to ways of that that's a sad to see, but I'll see this from from Marjorie Taylor Greene, who's a dear friend to Tim Burchit, who's another dear friend, Lauren Bober, Anna Paulina, Matt Gates. Yeah, these guys really came like they, they bad. It's named all the outlaws by the way. That's fine. I mean, I mean, the book, I mean, that is a compliment. No, it's like we're all in the outlaws book with the bad. It's true. Um, they all, all those people have a shot of joining you someday in the camp. I hope not. No, I hope no gosh, I shouldn't even say that. I hope not to. But um, so how did, so you can have I don't know till this day, um, what was a determination? I do know this. I know that that same day I had a legal call with the Joe, my attorney after I got the three different like nonsensical BS and Joe literally said, I'm working, I'm fixing this. I don't know what Joe did, but I will say this. He called everyone and their mother. And he made sure that they knew that the letters out and the word and is still not being straightforward and forthcoming. And all I know is that with an amount of hours, it went from 1 p.m. saying I'd get out at some point at the end of the week or next week at best at worst case to an hour later, saying goodbye, he could go back to the camp. Wow. And, and it's, it was quite an adjustment. You know, um, there's this person, it's, it's perverse. There's a lack of mental health care they give you. They have three psychologists, when which they should have six, they have no psychiatrist, so they have no prescribing mental health provider. So psychologists give referrals to a physician, which is wild in the standards of mental health, especially when you're dealing with people who are incarcerated, which guess what? A lot of them are there because of mental health issues. I believe it. Yeah. Like the poor judge made them mental health issues are really what leads to people being incarcerated, but there's really no treatment for that. And I get put back in the camp. I couldn't sleep the first three nights. They say totally messed up, but that's fine. At least I'm in the camp. I get to go outside. I get to call my family. I mean, in the first day, we get a lot of 500 and 10 minutes a month to make phone calls in my very first day when I had access my phone. I called at 100 and 20 minutes to my family. I couldn't stop calling. I would call away 30 minutes and get another call to someone. I was just like, stop calling. I needed to talk to people. I needed to know they were okay. I think the anguish of not knowing I'm a family guy through and through. And the anguish of not knowing what was going on was killing like pulling limb from limb inside of me. And I got out and I'm sitting in the camp. Now, here's a wild story for you Thursday, October 16. We had a visiting priest. I got ready. We went to mass. I got there. he looked at me and says, you're back. Would you like to do confession? Because he knew I was in solitary. So I said, you do confession. He's like, of course, I'm like, I'd love to. Do you have the time? And he's like, I'm sure it can't be that bad. So very friendly priest. And I took a liking to him. He's a Jersey guy during through. No nonsense kind of guy like he does not accept nonsense, right? Really rough old school Catholic race. And I said, Oh, I like the sky. So we sit down. it's still lengthy confession to come with an hour. She got pretty detailed. Well, in mortal sins, a mortal sin. So you got to go at one by one, you can't just be, you know, I'm with you. You can't just do an over a cap or a review. You got I've been naughty. Doesn't survive. You know, priest, I've been so naughty. You can know how mortal sins work, right? You need to tell me in great detail. I'm like, okay, so what's it gossip at that point? But I sat there, I go through this process that I had not done in at least two years or if not more, it felt great. I go to mass. I take communion. Then we do a rosary at the end. And it was just so nice. I left that feeling like I had squared away. A large part of my life. And it just felt good. So good. I woke up the next day. I had this immense resolve on October 17th that everything would be okay. That even if I had to sit there for seven years, I would be okay. I would not be in pain. I would not be in anguish. I was ready for whatever the road ahead was so much so that I we had something called coffee club that Sam Mealy started my former employee. And we would just wake up at seven, a lot of us looked up early. But at seven o'clock, we would all meet in the library with coffee or tea, I'm a tea guy and coffee cake or whatever it is. The cakes that Sam was hoarding for coffee club from everybody's breakfast bags that didn't want them. And we sat, we'd sit there every morning a group of like five of us. Everybody was welcome to come, but only five people or so would show up. You can't even get prisoners to coalesce trust me. They have no options to do anything else, but they still don't show up to stuff when it's available. So we sat there and I said to him, like, dude, I feel so good. He's like, what do you mean? I'm like, I don't know. I woke up feeling this resolve. Like it's all going to be okay. And he's like, well, that's good, but you know, a strange at the same time, which it is you're in prison. You're not supposed to feel that way. Right. We had this conversation would sound supernatural. Very like, I felt comfortable saying it. Yes. And it felt good to say it. And I did my prayer. And then I get called in the PA. And then everybody like kind of stiffens like, Oh my God, I'm like, oh, please don't let me me going back to the shoe. Cause that's how initially it was. It was called in the PA. And they're like, oh, you got to be seen at the J building, which is a facility building. And I never came back, right? 41 days later. So I stiffened. And I said, well, God's on my side. I don't care. I did a confidently like March to go see what it was. Turns out it was a subpoena from Congress that Timbrech had and Lauren Bobber had sent to the facility for me and the warden to go testify to the oversight committee under the conditions of my imprisonment. And I had to sign and agree for acceptance. She must hate you. I got to tell you. I know that's still happening too. So and it's funny because as I'm reading this, the camp, the camp case manager goes to me. You sure you want to do this? I think it's a good idea. I'm like, oh, it's a great idea. I might want to fly under the radar. I'm like, no, I'm not working for you. I mean, I mean, no, I don't. And I signed it. I consent to ISIS. I did all the paperwork. And I left with the grin from his office from ear to ear went to my friends. The coffee was like, what happened? I'm like, I just got to be in a corner. Congress. So like, what? I'm like, I freaking making changes from in here. Like I was like, I have a date with this bitch in Congress. That's my ground. That's my turf. And I'm in my head. I'm like, Oh, Kelly, you have no idea what you just got yourself into. And I was so happy about it because it's about fairness for me. And I just proceeded my day, right? So walking the track played a little ping pong on this like, really at best makeshift ping pong table. Like, I had a normal day read a little bit of my book called Home. So it's around six o'clock. I we got our commissaries. She starts, you know, budgeting, figure out what I need to do. I'm filling it out in this computer room where we have our computers to do our core links communications with our family. The light there is a lot brighter. I'm getting old. My glasses suck and I need to write lights. So I'm filling this commissary sheet out. And I then make something like, Oh, you were just on TV. I'm like, I don't care. I don't really pay attention to me on TV. It's there. I was shitting on me or whatever. So I'm interested in about 30 minutes later, the entire cafeteria erupted in that son of a bitch, where the fuck is Santos Santos, come over you by the fucker. You were holding out on us. You go at home and word. I'm like, what's going on? So I go out. I'm like, stop. You guys are misunderstanding. It's in the kyron and MSNBC says disgrace, former rep, George Santos commuted soon to be released according to Trump. That was the first you heard. That was the first I heard. Nobody told you this was nobody. Nobody knew that day. Nobody knew heard the news in the commissary from MSNBC. When you were playing MSNBC. Well, there's like I said, there's the black TV and they particularly like watching. Really? Yeah. If it's either not on BET or on like a movie channel with like awful B rated movies, it's on MSNBC that TV. So that's where the audience is because I wondered that who watches. So it's prison. But only on the black TV. I don't know. Wow. The white TV remarkably stays a lot on Fox by the way. And I'm not surprised. I was not shocked either. There was like the debate about where I should watch TV. And where does Spanish TV go? As Spanish TV usually stayed either on telemundo or unifision. Like very, very Hispanic. Like wow, rarely that it go anywhere else other than those two channels. So I'm sitting there looking at this kyron for a split second. I'm like, Apple plaque. Like what? But nobody told me anything. Somebody should have called me. And then I think I'm like, wait, nobody can make an inbound call. So I run to the emails. There's nothing there because the emails take about an hour and a half to get to you of a delay because it needs to be vetted through security. So if you set me something an hour and a half before I get it. And then if I send your response another hour and a half before you get it, because everything is monitored and I can understand that because of criminal conduct and activity after all, your monitoring. Right. It's a prison. So it's a prison. So I just like, I was, I didn't know what to do. So I called my call my partner. I called Matt. What's bad? He's like hysterical. Like I just spoke to President Trump. It's over. I'm coming to pick you up. I'm like, what do you mean you spoke to President Trump? I don't even think of all going. He called you. I was like, absolutely nuts about it. Like wait, President Trump called Matt before he called me. We were in prison. We're not already getting done. He got the phone call first. So I hang up the phone and Tucker. I break down. I bet. I mean, I couldn't stop. I was like probably an hour. I was ugly, snotty crying in that phone stall, head down like my head and all this all these thoughts inundated my body, my soul. I'm going home and it was just, I didn't know this was going to happen. I had really made peace with the fact that this was my predicament just that morning. And to tell me that there's no divine intervention in this, I will never accept that because there was no palpable appetite to give me clemency. According to every single person I had spoken to. And the day after I go to confession and I square away my quarrels and my, my tendencies with Jesus Christ, I get commuted by President Trump. I mean, I am forever humbled to the president. It's a remarkable story. And, and I don't believe I don't do coincidences anymore. No, of course, this was proof. If I ever needed proof God's in your life, if you really make your pledge to him, this was it. I needed this probably and I'm not saying because it's so self-serving. No, he purposely said, you do right by me. I'm giving you a second chance. The second you just surrendered to it. I just, I just could not, there was nothing else to do. I mean, I said, I think I cried all the tears that I had for the rest of the year that hour. It was so how long was it until you got out? So that was around 6, 6, 30ish, right? When I called home, it was 11, 30. I was that night, that night at 11, 30, I was walking out and my phone came in the car and I was already dialing. Like, the first call I made was Marjorie Taylor Green at the assistance of Matt who was prolific on call Marjorie. I want people to know this because it's important to me. I used to say that if you want a friend and DC, get a dog, not realizing I actually had real friends because it's you measure a friendship, not on how much you see one another because we all have busy lives. Of course. You measure a friend on when you're in your worst and how they come through for you. Well, exactly. She was on the phone with Matt every single day, checking in to see how he was doing, giving him updates, talking to my sister. Literally, she didn't have to do that. She yielded nothing from it. This is a woman who will go out of her way for her friends and for what she believes in. And it pains me to see that so many people want to attack her. Now, I can understand Pollard. Why are they attacking Marjorie? I don't know. It's been 11 days and I still haven't wrapped my head around it, but I'll say this. There's no bigger supporter of President Trump that I served with. And I'm saying this to the detriment of getting other colleagues and friends of mine Matt at me, but there was no bigger loyalist to President Trump than Marjorie Taylor Green. In my time in Congress. I've known her since 2020 and I can tell you with good faith. She is a loyal soldier. She means well and she wants the best for our country no matter what. And I think that to conflate that with any other issues that you might want to find a singularity with her. It is your problem, not her problems. I say I didn't for herself. It's a you problem, not a her problem. And I just want to direct her to reflect. You first saying that. No, it's important to me just because I know so many members of Congress and she's in the tiny, tiny, tiny handful I respect and love as people and she's just a really great person. Like I really think a lot of her. I say it. She played therapist, best friend, mother, all of those roles. Yes. So my family. And for that, I'm forever indebted because I you can only dream of having that level of friendship with someone in your darkest moments when you're absent from your family and someone steps in and takes a position of counseling and consoling your family. That's a true friend. Everything else is garbage. And that's wealth. That's amazing. Material wealth isn't wealth. I learned this in prison. Watch as jewelry. All of that stuff. Nice cars, flashy homes. It's not wealth tucker. Doesn't mean crap. Yeah. My great. Well, your family, your friends, your health. That's real wealth. And I want to measure my wealth that way moving forward because there's no point in measuring it the way I use to measure it. And prison was amazing for you as much as much suffering as you went through. It sounds like it was informative. It was absolutely a wake up call. It gave me everything I needed to look into the mirror and look at the man staring back to realize you are in trouble. You've done ABCDE Fg wrong and Wow, that's the beginning of wisdom and freedom. It's that's that's the point. I feel for the first time in my life free free of I have no reservations to what I'll say. I have no reservations of what I care of what society thinks of me. And I don't want to fit your social normative, whatever bullshit. I want to embrace the better parts of life. And those to me are my family, my friends, my health, my pets. That's what I don't care. I don't need to live in the most beautiful house at the most beautiful curb appeal. I don't have to drive the nicest cars. I don't have to have the fancy shoes or none of that matters. I lost complete and total inches after being encapsulated and captured by the consumer mind virus of I must buy the whatever couture and I have to have the $2,000 $3,000 suits and the $800 to the fuck are we doing? I agree. It's like so sobering. It's almost like as if I've lived drunk my entire life and I became sober for the first time. Are you sure you're in the monastery? I sure it was person I'm telling you. So, so cleansed. I'm telling you it was cleansing. It was it was it I feel I wake up every day. I've now reassumed my position of going to mass every Sunday. It's been two Sundays I'm out. I'm at mass. The priest is apoplectic that he sees me there. I'm singing. I'm praying as loud as the as loud as the 80 little 80 year old like Bible thumper next to me. I am I'm proud to be there. I am proud to to literally partake in what I believe saved my life and I will forever do it. I will forever make me emotional. No, it's beautiful. It's just absolutely bizarre like all it took was you falling that you had to hit rock bottom sometimes in order to realize what you had yes and I thank God and I thank God profoundly for letting me hit rock bottom because if not I would still be spiraling out of absolute control in a ball of chaos like I was prior to going to prison. I've been there. That is one an amazing story. So, where did you go your first night home? I slept in my bed. I took a shower an hour long shower. No flip flops. No concerns of the soap falling on the dirty floor. Actual shampoo and all like like I put on every cosmetic product. I had in the bathroom. What's this a face scrub? Who are bodies? I had the loop going on. I was like, I need to do everything in here. Like it just felt so liberating and I cried in the shower and it was it was in tears of pain. It was tears of joy like the simplest thing a shower, the shower. And then what do I want to eat sushi? The next day I woke up, I said, I need to have sushi. I need guarantees that I'm eating something that was barely dead before I consumed it because I was so tired. Not expired. So frozen expired. I couldn't do it anymore. So I said, I need sushi. So we got really good sushi. Had a great time. And I've been nonstop believe it or not. It's it's been as if I've never left almost because I you go right into the media cycle and you're traveling and you're talking and you're doing these interviews. But this is the first long format interview I do. And I reserved it for you because I thought it was appropriate. When I spoke to your booker and your staff, I said, yes, right away, because I said, I finished all of it at Tucker. I gave you the last word. And I only thought it'd be great to give you the first word long format because it plus you. You can do five, six, seven minutes. You know what they're like. You don't get anything out of that. So it can't tell the story. And I just I know I just I said this at the the beginning, but I touched and think we're going to see you for years. The fact that it's not seven years later. So I guess there's something to be said from 80 from 87 months to 84 days. But I can tell you the 84 days made such a difference. Mainly the torturous nature of isolation and the dehumanizing nature of which I was treated really put my entire life back in his perspective for me. It's almost as if it was the worst thing that's ever happened to me. But at the same time, worked almost as a blessing. Oh, I believe that. And I live in the in between gray trying to figure out if I hate it or I love it. And I don't know yet. Maybe without the years, I'll figure that out. But I I still resent it very much. And it brings me great pause when I think of the following. If they can do this to me. Well, exactly. That's exactly right. If they can do this to me, no, imagine what other people are. So I thought I've been thinking that through your entire narrative. You know, you're a very famous person. Remember Congress. No, everybody obviously highly motivated very resistant to being bossed around. So you're like, they're nightmare. And they still treated you this way. Imagine if you were just some guy. I mean, imagine the horror stories. Now, it puts into perspective that I've always listened to two. I'm very guilty of this. Every time I've ever were the words, oh, we need prison reform like who cares? It's a bunch of prison. It's not a bunch of criminals who cares. They should be thankful. They're not dead. We should give them the chair. Like I would say outrageous things like that. And now I sit here and I think, wow, now I understand what they were talking about. And we can't discount people's pain and suffering. Totally agree. And I'm not a liberal position. It's a Christian position. And you have street people dignity, even wrongdoers. And by the way, we're all wrongdoers, if we're going to be honest about it. You know what my stance is? I'm pro life. Not just not just for the unborn. I totally agree. I disagree with death sentences. And a lot of people get on me for that. If I disagree with ending the life of an unborn child, what makes you think I'm going to agree with taking the life of a fully developed human? I believe in punishment. I believe in incarceration. I believe if you kill, you know, you are a dangerous society, you should be put away. But I don't think you should. That's the point where I'm allowed to kill. We're not supposed to kill. We are not. No. And we need to end the practices of death penalty, in my opinion. Society you should be put away, but I don't think you should. That's the point we're not allowed to kill. We're not supposed to kill. We are not. No. And we need to end the practices of death penalty in my opinion. And it needs to be revisited. It really does. People like objects. No, I completely vehemently agree with you. So what? So you were out of circulation for while you're obviously very connected and like on everything in normal life, then you're just like off grid. Literally in the shoe. What did you notice about the changes that took place in the months that you were gone? Did you notice a different country when you get back? Totally. I'm still trying to struggle with two things. Really? Two very big things. I left and we were celebrating in President Trump. And now I come back. There's this weird segment of social media who are all these conservative influencers taking dunks on the president, which I'm like super like lost at. And it all spans from Israel and Palestine. Yes, it does. And I look at that. I'm pretty zigh in. I'm pretty prolific zigh in it. Okay? But I've also learned throughout the last few months that I don't want my president to be at the mercy of prime minister who is toxic and causing great pain to our country now because President Trump goes out there puts his neck on the line. Doesn't amazing formidable peace deal? Amazing. Like something extraordinary. I mean, the man deserves a noble prize. I don't care what anybody says. I don't care what the liberal bench of the noble prize association or whatever you call them. I think the reality is Donald Trump is a peace president. He wants to broker deals of peace and end war. He does this extraordinary measure is now working towards putting the conflict of Ukraine Russia to an end. Hopefully we can achieve that. Only to see that people like Bibi Netanyahu are sabotaging that. I'm concerned. It's shocking. It's shocking because he should be grateful because President Trump is going out of his way doing a formidable job. Yeah. And this is how you repay him spending all this time, all this money, trying to fix other problems. Is a commodity that not a lot of us can afford. So I have have to come to realization despite being a staunch defender of Israel and the Jewish people and their right to exist and their rights to be in Israel. I at the same time now live in a place where I think it's time Bibi move on. He has become toxic. He has become pretty much the merchant of death, the most of face of it. Yes. On both sides, every Israeli soldier and family and every Palestinian soldier and Hamas terrorists and family, although I'm not too sympathetic for the terrorists. Quite frankly, the only good terrorist alive, the only good terrorists in my world are the ones that are not alive. Even though I have this profound opinion of death and life and that we should not kill. But there's a special place in hell for terrorists. Let's put it that way. Especially after what I saw when I was in Congress after the initial October 7th attack, the video, I'm sure it's on the video, the baby and that's stayed in my nightmares for quite some times. So I every single death at this point, I think is easily being attributed to Bibi because he is overstepped. In two months and a half that I've been gone, it gave me so much clarity because I was out of the rhetoric machine. I was out of this spin room and I'm just like, my president is going to bat for a man that is not being forthcoming with him at all. I don't like it. I don't like it. I'm very protective of my country. I'm very protective of President Trump because President Trump is somebody and everybody is saying, oh, you're going to now go. I'm sorry. I've been simping whatever that means for Trump since 2015 since he came down to golden escalators. Like, there's just stop. You're barking up the wrong tree. I am a big fan. There's very little he can do at this point. And I mean, very little he can do that would make me not like him. I mean, I don't think there's all he can't if he killed somebody depending on who it is, I might be like, well, that person had it coming. I'm kidding. I'm not there yet. But watching someone you love and admire to whom you're grateful, Trump mistreated by an ungrateful foreigner who salary we pay is like, is beyond. It's just it's gotten to a point where I and then there's also this other aspect of this, which is anybody who says what I'm saying now gets accused of being on the Katari payroll. So I'm sure by the way, Mr Santos, by the way, the check has not hit my mailbox. So it's like at this point, I yeah, well, tell me about it. And the second thing to really bring it to perspective is what are we doing in this country to really fix anything? The government shutdown, Schumer won't, Schumer wants to make this to a Republican shutdown so bad. It's almost like Gretchen Wiener and mean girls trying to make fetch happen. It's not gonna happen. So I don't know how so much has changed in two and a half months. But I'm here. I mean, I'm literally living in existential crisis in my life right now in New York City. I'm at the precipice of having actual dangerous man become the mayor of the largest city in the country that is responsible for 10% of the American GDP become mayor of a $118 billion annual budget. We're leaving by all barometers. I mean, do you know how I check out my barometers now or not polls anymore? I just go to poly market. Yeah. When you look at poly market and it's a 93% chance that this mandami guys are gonna win. Let me tell you something. Mandami is the next mayor of New York City. There's no wishful thinking. There's no no sensational ads or or or sensational headlines on the New York Post that are gonna say, Cuomo eats 10% of mandami's lead narrowing the gap. Hello, wake up. It's over. I've learned this throughout the last year. I have yet to see poly market get something wrong. And when I see something like that, it's over. So I'm and I don't get paid by them to say that by the way. I'm just making this very clear. It is over. It's it's cooked. So I look at this and you're leaving New York. Oh, I'm it's over. I have 37 years New York City resident born and raised in Queens, New York City. I've lived in various parts of Queens throughout my life. But I'm originally from Jackson Heights, Queens proud of it. My on still lives there. She's lived there for 40 years. My dad's a lives there. He's lived there for 40 years. I have no desire. What's so ever to stay in New York City or New York state at that because it doesn't matter if you're fleeing the insanity. We have a madman in the city when you have I I I I lose the words to describe our governor. So I'll just leave it at you have literally two Looney tunes running the state and the city. Yes. Where do you go? I'm not staying there. So I'm so happy we're leaving. I mean, I'm literally actively packing. We're packing. We're already nowhere. We're going we're we're we're you're leaving the state. We're totally leaving the state. We're going down south or leaving the state. There's nothing left for me there at all. It's it's shocking and I love New York New York. My image is largely tied to being a New Yorker. You know, tell it how it is. You're offended to go to prison. I yeah. That's what a New Yorker you are. You're like a bridge and tunnel prisoner. Yeah. I'm like I still am offended. I made a jersey. I should have got a own a spell. My point is this is how serious it is to me. So this is another big change. It's an existential one for me. I'm uprooting my life. I'm moving far away from my family because there's I mean my poor aunt. She just retired. She she she set up. She's well retired. So there's no point in her moving. My dad's about to retire in two years. There's no point in him getting up to move. You know, like they're they're rooted there. I'm not. I'm 37. I'll put my roots elsewhere. I'll up rooted. I don't care. And it's not a place to raise a family who I'm looking to adopt kids next year because we think it's time to like help kids who are abandoned in foster care. Let's adopt two kids, give them a life, put them through school, give them whatever they want. Education give them a fair shake instead of letting them become a statistic. But I don't want them to grow up in a place like New York City. What do you think is going to happen to New York? At first, there's going to be the sticker shock of taxes being raised on the wealthy. But he's categorizing the wealthy people who make over 400,000 a year, which in New York, you're making about $2,000. And then about 40% of that goes to housing, lodging costs, whether rent or mortgage, whatever that make up is, you're not really a wealthy. Now you're going to pay an additional 1% so that we can have inefficient free buses because you're not going to get better because they're free. They're just going to get worse in my opinion. And it's that's going to be the start. Then you have John Catsmatidis who's a prolific businessman in New York City who's made it abundantly clear. He's going to take his red apple group in dip New York. And along with it, he's going to close his historic grocery chain because he can't compete. Gracidis can't compete with a city owned supermarket. There's just no way. So what's the point? So there goes countless jobs. You're going to see every single major corporation start uprooting out of New York. Pretty soon you're going to leave the stock exchange to the dust mites and whoever there's venture into the city. Just remember, Hen Griffin picked up and left Chicago and took Citadel with him to Florida. And they yelled at him but he went anyway. Oh, guess what? JB Prickser can be fat and loud in a billionaire, but he doesn't tell what other people do with their businesses. So when you see an example of that happening in Chicago with Ken Griffin, it should raise flags. Goldman Sachs moved G. Sam, their asset management, division, all but their retail facing people out of New York to brickville, Florida. Like that division, the only people who stayed in New York of their main, the heart of Goldman Sachs, which is G. Sam, their asset management division, it's mainly the frontline people who stay, like the people who have the day to day because the wealth is still in New York today. It's still there. But the operations end of it is in brick, a large way. Like when you see these moves being made and you still want to talk about raising the corporate tax by 2%, you're either dumb, death blind or all of the above. Because there's just no way you think people are going to stay in corporations, are going to be beholden to stay in the state of New York. If you make it even less business friendly, we have had a net loss of over 600,000 people in the course of the last five years in New York state. We're a large exporter of out migration from the state. Lee Zelden could have been governor if it wasn't for the 400,000 people who at that point in 2022 had fled to Florida due to the pandemic. He almost did it. He got that close. We have at least a fauna who's a phenomenal Congresswoman who has a shot. But I fear that with this out migration that's going to occur after Mondami, it might hurt our electability unless Democrats finally see they messed up and they actually give it a number of people. I never do. No one ever apologizes for it just keeps moving in that direction. It's remarkable. New York City is going to become Gotham and I'm not willing to be the penguin. You can go be Batman. This story ended in a way I could never have predicted, but so much better than I ever would have hoped. And I just would have blessing and you seem like a man transformed through suffering. Well, that's not the easiest way to transform. It's the only way. It's the only way. Yeah. And it's, you know what, it paid off in a weird way at the end. And I'm grateful thanks to God and thanks to President Trump and to everybody who helped and walked that long path with me. And it's great to be here with you. Amen. Thank you. Great to see you. Good to see you. Thank you. Thank you. our 9-11 documentary series. And if there's one thing we learned, it's that in fact, there was foreknowledge of the attacks. People knew the American public deserves to know. We're shocked actually to learn that to have that confirmed but it's true. The evidence is overwhelming. The CIA, for example, knew the hijackers were here in the United States. They knew they were planning an act of terror. In his passport is a visa to go to the United States from America. A foreign national was caught celebrating as the World Trade Center fell. And later said he was in New York, quote, to document the event. How did no there would be an event to document in the first place because he had foreknowledge? And maybe most amazingly, somebody in unknown investor shorted American Airlines and United Airlines, the companies whose planes the attackers used on 9-11, as well as the banks that were inside the Twin Towers just before the attacks. They made money on the 9-11 attacks because they knew they were coming. Who did that? You have to look at the evidence. The US government learned the name of that investor, but never released it. Maybe there's an instant explanation for all this, but there isn't actually. And by the way, it doesn't matter whether there is or not. The public deserves to know what the hell that was. How did people know ahead of time? Oh, I was no one ever punished for it. 9-11 Commission, the original one, was a fraud. It was fake. Its conclusions were written before the investigation. That's true. And it's outrageous. This country needs a new 9-11 Commission, one that actually tells the truth to try to get to the bottom of the story. We can't just move on like nothing happened. 9-11 Commission covered. Something did happen. We need to force a new investigation into 9-11 almost 25 years later. Sorry, Justice demands it. And if you want that, go to newcommissionnow.com to add your name to our petition. We're not getting paid for this or do this because we really mean it. Newcommissionnow.com.