The Joe Rogan experience. What did you think about when they attached in the COVID relief bill 180 days for the CA to release all the information they have about the UFOs? That's one of the things I love about this is this wingo. Yeah. Oh my god. Yeah, we can't be taken seriously that way. Yeah. No, but I will say this. I tell people this all the time. They say they say why is this so entertaining? I said because he's curious about everything. He's genuinely curious about everything. And that's a good question. Look, I'm happy that when it comes to UFOs, there's a lot of things that the agency needs to keep off the radar. Right? There's sources and methods, right? It's a need to know issue. And frankly, again, going back to what's in the US best interest. For that day when China decides to release all of their intel operations and information, then great. Maybe it's time for us to be transparent. But that's not the way that works. The world is just a lot of it is just secret programs, defense vehicles. Well, no, what I'm saying is oh, in terms of the U.F. Great portion of it is. Yeah, great portion of this is 50%. Now the 47% actually, but don't say that. That's well known inside the community. No, look, I think it's good because I think the look, it's for the same reason that Pentagon released the information about A tip about the advanced air angle threat identification program. I think I think it's actually good. There's no reason why we shouldn't unless you are talking about developmental aircraft as an example, right? Which is important because what you're talking about, hypersonic aircraft or missiles or whatever it is, there are some stuff that needs to be kept off the off the radar screen. Because there is a tremendous competition going on right now for particularly for things like control of space. That's going to be a huge issue. Because the weaponization of space for a long time, people think in our space, it's a great exploration and it's good for mankind. Frankly, there is a race to figure out how to weaponize space. And so as an example of what we're talking about, the idea of just saying, oh, we're going to open the books as a country and reveal all our information about developmental aircraft as an example. That's the wrong move, right? Because, but do you think there are any credible stories, whether it's from Commander David favor who saw that tick-tack vehicle off the coast of San Diego or whatever video? Yeah. If I had to point to one, I would say favor. Yeah. I would say without a doubt. I'd say the one that if I were somebody who's looking for some redemption because I've been beating the drum about UFOs and nobody's ever believed me in the always-where-all-or-a-r eyes. I would say the one thing that would give them comfort would be the incident with Commander Freaver and that sighting. That's one that I have yet to see an explanation for that makes any sense. So, only that, they tracked it. Yeah. Like there's... Oh, yeah. Yeah. And then also blocked their radar systems, which is an act of war, they're actively jammed radar systems. Yeah. It's not simple as like they saw something they didn't know what it was. Like they tracked this thing going from, I think it was close to 80,000 feet above sea level to one. And down. Yeah. In one second. Yeah. No signs of propulsion. Yeah. No heat signatures. Nothing, right? And it was just... Yeah. It's one of those things you look at and you go, okay. And look, the ATIP program made sense in the sense that, you know, if a nation is out there, if Chinese are out there, the Russians, whomever, and they're developing a propulsion capability that we don't know about, then yeah, we should have a mechanism within the Pentagon, within the Intel community, to understand what that is. So, let's research, let's investigate, right? And so, oftentimes, you know, they come to a logical conclusion. The favor incident, I have yet to see any information that explains it. So, that to me, and also, as you pointed out, the way that it was tracked, the verification of it from very credible, you know, individuals. That to me is like the prime example. And they have video footage of this thing too. And then on top of that, they have camera footage that's incredible. Yeah. And then Nimitz saying that these things are fairly common, that they're seeing them every couple of weeks. They were seeing them. And, you know, when favors like, hey guys, what the fuck is this? And they're like, yeah, you see it? Yeah. We've been seeing these things. And there's no upside for somebody like that. A very well respected, you know, aviator with great experience. There's no upside for these guys to come forward, right? In fact, there's pressure to not, because it's not necessarily good for your career, right, to come in and say, I think I saw you, I fall. Right. What do you think is going on? Uh, I don't know. We've talked about that before. I'm not, you know, trying to get the right answer out of your camera. Can't you forget what you said before? Yeah. All right. You forgot about the damn bed. I shouldn't open my mouth. I don't know. People will go back to that though. They would have called me out. If Trump comes back and runs, they would say, oh, you owe him a thousand bucks. Can't wait to get that fucking screaming eagle in here, little boy. You know, I'm going to buy it for you with the money. And I'll put a little plaque on there to say where it came from. Sounds big. I know. Big. I've got one. I gave a speech one time up for a Veterans Day event. And they, uh, it was very kind of giving this pig eagle. I keep it in my office. That's fantastic. I keep in the background when I do new segments from my office. And it's like perched over my shoulder. Nice. You got to have one in here. Anyway, I, you know, I don't know. I think about it. Yeah, I do. In the terms of, and like I said, with black files to classify coming up, I just got another plug in. We're going to do an episode. That's on the Discovery Channel, isn't it? It is on Discovery Channel. And you know what? You can see the entire first season on Discovery Plus. I don't know. I don't know. So I, I think it's foolish to discount these things because I, there's so much we don't know. Right? So, and the idea of, of thinking that somehow we're the only, you know, credible life forms out there. I think it's ridiculous. So I think it's a, it's a high possibility that, um, that there's, yes, I do think that, at the same time, then I also questioned, uh, sort of the, the way that that's great. If some alien life force with amazing technology that we can't even fathom right now comes to visit us, then what the hell are they doing? Are they just sort of like watching us just for the entertainment value? Or so I, I'm always puzzled by that part, like, you know, the idea that, you know, I, I know they probably want to observe, but they won't, don't want to interfere. Mm hmm. Probably, if they're super advanced, they probably realize there's a process that intelligent life goes through where there's stages of their evolutionary development in terms of use of technology, understanding of each other, mitigation of war and conflict. And then ultimately entrance into the galactic federation. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.