The Joe Rogan experience. You look at this is another point that Tim, I'm just giving Tim a shout out to give him credit for the shout out to Tim. The life been noodling on for the past, you know, yesterday and today on private a lot of time just sitting on a plane looking out the window going, man, where are all the aliens? And so the other thing he talks about is like if the history of human civilization was an 800 page book. So say 160,000 years that we've been like homo sapiens sapiens with like the kinds of civilizations that, well, even pre-civilizations, right? Nomadic peoples and so on. Then each page of that book is what 250 years I think I'm doing. That's that maths right of 200 years, 200 times 800. Yep, 160,000. Like if you can open that book to almost any page and the same shits going on, right? Yeah. Like all the way up until the like, yeah, basically people are wandering around with pretty primitive tools, a few of them sort of figure out how to use fire, figure them figure out like how to use metals and stuff like that. Yeah. Figure them figure out how to ride horses and domestic animals. But it's basically the same shit for like seven hundred and ninety pages of the 800 page book of the civilization of, you know, of our species. Then just towards the end, it's like the page before the very end, like the United States gets settled Australia, you get settled the Industrial Revolution happens. And then like on the final page, it features pages 250 years of an 800 page book. You know, it's the last half of the page, nuclear weapons, you know, going into space, landing on the moon, the evolution of the internet, vehicles, cars, climate change, like all of this. And it's like the final few, like Facebook and all this shit, actually infinity, little coins and your VR and your, well, gas, michaure and everything is like the final two lines of an 800 page book. So, you know, sometimes it's, sometimes people say to me, oh, you know, people always think that they're living through amazing times, Josh. You know, you think you're living through an incredible time, but I'm sure people were saying that in like the 1820s, I'm sure everyone was like, oh my God, things are changing so fast. And I'm like, no, I'm going to call bullshit on that. If an alien who knew nothing about anything took that 800 page book, they'd be like, ah, page, 200, page, 23 is roughly the same as page, you know, 22. But they get to the end and they'd be like, holy shit, what's going to happen next? Like, I want to read the sequel to this book. What about what's 801? Well, that's when they would keep an eye on us. You know, when they drop fat man and little boy on Japan, that's when UFO sightings started happening all over the globe. There's a giant uptick in UFO sightings. So, was the Kenneth Arnold was one of the first, I believe he's the guy who spotted, I think it's Kenneth Arnold was the guy that spotted the flying saucers. He was the first one to discuss them as saucer shaped discs, but they started seeing him all over the place. Like there was encounters in Washington, DC and there was encounters over nuclear bases and where they said that they had shut codes down. And I don't know if there was alien life and if there is alien life out there that's aware of us, I don't know if they would intervene because we don't really do much when we find champs. You know, scientific community. Yeah. Well, the intelligent scientific community doesn't try to interfere with their life and give them guns and like, this is how you start a fire. Right, but chimps have noticed that we exist. Yes. So like, even if they don't come, like I'm not talking about like why haven't aliens come and visited us like in Independence Day. I just mean like when we train our telescopes on the sky, why isn't there any evidence of like little flickering radio waves coming from somewhere? But a possible explanation is the one that you say, which is we're looking for the wrong things. We've only been emitting radio waves for a century and we might be just about to end with that and go into some virtual reality metaverse or something and maybe we'll meet them all there. Maybe we'll unlock some door of the Zakaberg multiverse and be like, Oh, here are a whole bunch of pre existing civilizations of aliens who already exist on this platform. Well, also, if you think about the various planets that we know exist just in our source system and the conditions that exist on these planets, there's not a lot of them that can support life. They believe that Mars at one point in time had liquid water and they had an atmosphere. You probably hit with some sort of an asteroid that wiped out everything. But other than that, you've got Europa that has frozen water. We talked about the scale of the universe. It's almost like talking about rolling the dice on the numbers of COVID in a population like you don't need very high numbers before once year. Yes, my point was. The solar system that we exist in is very unusual. We obviously have a planet that exists in this Goldilocks range, but we also have an extremely large asteroid belt. It's indicative of the initial impact between Earth one and Earth two. Earth one was a planet that got hit by another planet. That's what created the moon and they believe that also created the asteroid belt. There's a solar system out there that didn't have that sort of event. So didn't have to worry about these intermittent cataclysm where that's one of the things that Randall Carlson and Graham Hancock have done some great research on is the indication that at least one time that we know of while civilization existed, it was probably almost wiped out. It's somewhere in the younger driest impact that we eat somewhere around 11,000. Is this where we will use like 5,000 people or something? No, that was 70,000 years ago and that was I believe it was Indonesia. That was a volcano eruption that there was a super volcano that erupted that wiped out almost everybody that we got down to like 70,000 people or 7,000 people. They don't know exactly, but it was right about there and then we pulled back. We did a lot of fucking. Here we are today. God, we didn't have an organic electron otherwise. Yeah, people would have been in their basement with the solar thumbs. The point is if there's a planet out there that doesn't have that issue and look, let's imagine because I don't know what the reality is when it comes to like ancient Egypt or Mesopotamia or I mean these incredible structures that these people built where unfortunately because the burning of the library of Alexandria, we don't have the real records of how they did or how they accomplished it or where they were or even really how long ago they really made it. We know that some of them they've done carbon dating on some of the stuff and they know it's at least 2,500 BC but there's some indications that some of it might be far, far older than that. So let's imagine that there was some sort of a civilization 10,000 years ago, 20,000 years ago that was very advanced and was allowed to advance without any interruption, without nuclear war, without solar flares, without asteroid impacts or super volcanoes. Maybe they lived in a much more stable climate and they got to a place where there are a million years more advanced than us. A million years. Imagine what the fuck we're going to be in a million years. I can't even imagine what we're going to be in a hundred years. So then take a thousand years. 10,000, 100,000. Yeah, if that's the case, like if they were out there and they were watching us, they probably just make sure we don't blow ourselves up. Yeah, I just want to say that. Well, I don't think I think they would be even that prevalent. Well, you've got to think that, well I don't know if it's benevolent or malevolent, like if you think about what a scientist is, it's someone who wants to observe but sometimes protect. We protect endangered species activists get together and they say, hey, this is only a few of these birds left. Do you have to do whatever we can to preserve them? If they have that same mentality about the human race, I think they would have a pretty standoffish attitude and just sort of wait for us to figure it out. Especially if they look at the acceleration of our innovation and this exponential and so acceleration of technology. I remember if it was like Michio Kaku on the Alagrass tiresome or one of those great science guys who was saying like maybe any civilization that would be advanced enough to be able to reach out to us or to be noticed by us would also have to be the kind of civilization that would not be a predatory colonizing species. Because in that case, it would have devoured itself with internal squabbles. Before that. You basically have to reach a certain level of spiritual and psychological wisdom and self-awareness and compassion in order to sustain yourself over the course of so far we've had a couple of hundred years since the Industrial Revolution and it's only been a century less than the century that we've had nukes. We've had the ability to actually do some serious damage on a global scale. We're just kids, we are toddlers with an AR-15 right now and we don't know what we're going to have to grow up into adults and we're going to have a grown up civilization.