Tell people what it is you do. That's a complex question. I'm sure there's not many people that don't know, but for the people that aren't aware. I'm basically an instructor first and foremost. I train people how to survive and live in and go through non-permissive environments. It's the moniker that I've been given by the people that I've trained. Specifically, my background is working for the government in Mexico. And that kind of gave me some experiences for how to survive some of the conditions that hurt down there. When it came to this country about four years ago, I started getting invited out to different security companies and people that offer training of that nature. So it kind of became subject matter guys for how to not get into bad situations in foreign countries countries or in this country as well. Escaping from a situation of abduction, for example. How to manage emergency situations in places where you don't have the means that we have access to in this country. From osteo-medical management stuff, which I have people that I know that kind of give that specific type of training. And I kind of set them up for some of these instructions, instructive courses out there in the world. And also, I become kind of an advocate for people that don't have a voice in Mexico or not a clear voice that you don't hear a lot about up here. Specifically, people who are in law enforcement and who are part of that weird, undeclared war in Mexico, the drug war. And that's still raging on down there. This whole joke about coming to this country and going to a veteran event with some marine friends of mine. And they all had cats where they served on it. And they jokingly made a drug war veteran hat for me and put it on my head with the Mexico symbol. So I do a lot of advocacy related to bringing a bit more awareness and a voice to people like myself that went through that conflict. That have seen things from the inside and are now on the outside of it and kind of bringing awareness into the voice to some of these people who are still in the fight. The honest ones, you know, because you know, we are we any time you mentioned law enforcement in Mexico, they're all kind of labeled in the same way all corrupt, all evil, all bad. But I know that there are a lot of good ones out there doing the job. A thankless job, you know, a job without retirement. A job that could end abruptly and leave you without a lot of options. And so in a lot of ways I'm also an advocate for some of those people. And Mexico is a whole, you know, trying to bring awareness to what's happening down there up here. Can you show us your shirt? Sure. There you go. I was drugged and left for dead in Mexico and all I got was a stupid t-shirt. It's amazing. It's a movie reference, but also maybe, you know, they part true on my end, you know. It's a, it's from a company called Black Triangle Group shout out to them. They sent me this t-shirt and said, you won't dare to wear this on a podcast and you know, here I am with it. You know, the thing, the crazy thing about Mexico when it comes to right now is that everyone is distracted with what's going on in Ukraine in Russia. Yeah. And it's like no one's talking about Mexico. That is, you know, like I posted something about that in the first 72 hours of that conflict, which was basically an example. Which was basically an armed invasion from Russia into the Ukraine. Mexico outperformed that war zone in the first 72 hours as far as a body count. You know, the amount of people that died in violent, all of the locations related to cartel violence in Mexico in the first 72 hours outperformed to war zone. And this is happening right on the southern border. Not just that, but also if you, you know, I'm not a numbers person, but people can look them up. The amount of people that have died in this conflict and the amount of people that are missing or reported missing in Mexico is astounding. And the amount of mass graves that are being found all over the country now. And the sheer amount of control that some of these criminal groups have over territories in Mexico. There was a recent leak of military documents that has kind of come to light recently. What come IELakes is our version of the WikiLeaks situation, basically. Hacker who basically penetrated the computer systems of the Savannah, which has read this. And a lot of documents that the government itself has written are coming to light. And I think some reporting down in Mexico has put the estimates that the military themselves have put forth that over 70% of Mexico is under some sort of control over a criminal group. And that there are, you know, there are no fly zones over some places because they're afraid to get knocked down. This is happening on the southern border. It's, it's, to me, it's very amazing. Again, it's a conflict that's been going on for decades. It is kind of it's interesting that the denial aspect of it that the US has or the media has in the US, or in the government as well. As far as not wanting to call it what it is in Mexico, which is basically a multi group arm insertancy going on right across the border. And utilizing in many cases, military great weaponry, fitting every single definition of a not only a criminal enterprise, but also a terrorist network in a lot of ways. Very much politicized. You know, we have, I think we have a record as far as the amount of political candidates being assassinated in Mexico and also, you know, reporters that are reporting on some of these things. If they don't meet the definition of a terrorist organization, I don't know. I don't know what does, you know, but it's interesting that it's just not being given the attention of a conflict as far as a war. Do you think there's a reason that the US is trying to bury this or I mean, is it because let me phrase this differently, does the shit going on in Mexico benefit the United States at all? I mean, it's Mexico is, there's a few levels to what I think. You know, Mexico is the second largest consumer of American products that the US has. If you want to think about it that way as well. So we're very much dependent on each other. You see a lot of people calling for like closed borders now and stuff like that. That would, there's a reason why it doesn't happen, you know. One of the reasons is because US economy depends a lot in Mexico, you know, that's one, that's an interesting link that we have. But it goes both ways. I'm Mexican's cross the border and work in this country in a lot of parts of the industry. There are very much a backbone of this country in a lot of ways. You know, you want to think about how indispensable illegal immigration is to this country. Because during COVID, you know, the protoziles were stocked. The what? The protoziles were still stocked. There's no shortage of food. So we are, the Mexican's are essential workers in this country, I guess illegal immigration is essential. And the places where legislation has been passed to, you know, stop illegal immigration working on fields. You know, you get the farming industry crashing these places and some of these things get pulled back. They send money back to Mexico. So we're very much living in a, it's a, we're very much linked through blood, through it commerce, through an economy. And now through basically living next to the largest drug market on the planet, which is United States. And so we're having the experience of seeing the poppy fields down in places like Michoacan. And then training law enforcement in places like Seattle, where I can get to see where that brown light brown, right brown fentanyl infuse heroin ends up. And seeing the government actually supply the tools to put that into your body, the stateside. And saying, you know, it's surprising to me on that end. And seeing, what do you mean there's supply in the tools? There's a government programs out in places in the United States where they supply syringes and means crack by basically as well. You know, there's some government programs out there that that supply some of these things to people, which basically they supply the vessels to infuse things that are coming into this country legally. There are supplied by cartel groups in Mexico, which is, you know, again, there's a, there's a weird denial in the United States when it comes to some of these problems. And also the mentality that a lot of Americans have as far as it being a Mexico problem, like a foreign problem from a foreign country. It's all that it's all on Mexico. And the responsibilities in taking by Americans as far as their role in some of these things, you know, from, from having industry that is completely dependent on legal immigration. And, you know, having the immigrants kind of be the bad guys in a lot of in a lot of mentalities in the United States, you know, and that narrative of them coming here to take jobs and from people. Yes, there is a problem with the legal immigration, but the problem isn't the people that are coming over the border and working in industries that are essential for the United States. The problem is in it, not in the immigration system and the basically the enforcement on that border not being looked at closely and regulated. I mean, people coming here to get a job seasonally should be a thing that could could be regulated, I guess, you know, that that has happened before in history. And something went wrong, something happened, something changed. The only people that benefit economically with the immigration being illegal are the people that are taxing those immigrants when they cross that border. And those are not government officials, those are cartels, those are criminal groups that basically make in some cases most of what they earn comes from taxing people going across that border, getting protection fees by some of the coiota's that work on that border and putting some of these people in actual slavery. You know, people there's a big conversation in this country about historical slavery when there's actually still slavery, slavery going on in this country. People like myself, Mexicans coming to this country illegally and not being able to pay for that process, paying a coyote half of their payment or having their families stateside paying for that process. Over a time period and then working and then and then and then working off that payment through labor, slavery, you know, this happens in this country right now. How much does it cost to get across the border? You have numbers from 8000 to 10,000, you know, you have six thousand some places some people say, well, I'll just go off myself and then get caught by people on that board and say, what are you doing crossing through ours own? What is that process like? So if I'm living in Mexico, I'm living anywhere in Mexico on the border or whatever. And I want to get across who do I have to go to? You have to go to a smuggler. You have to go to a smuggler. I mean, people do it independently. You know, they try and do it independently. Some of them get through some of them don't. Some of them die in the desert. You know, some of them get caught by the same smuggler. So like, what are you doing trying to cross yourself? You need to pay us a toll. Some of them get caught by the police down there and then get all of their stuff taken. because cops down there, some of them are really bad and some of them are not to be trusted. Take their take their take their meager belongings and then get tossed back into whatever border town they they're currently in. The border patrol are working with them. Right? They're paying a border patrol. Are they in cahoots? I don't I wouldn't say that. I know the border patrol the US border patrol. I'll say this. I've worked as an instructor with some members of the border patrol. And I've also seen how they operate on both sides of the border. Both on the Mexican side with binoculars looking at some of them, you know, looking the other way as a group of people cross by. So there is corruption in that and there is corruption historically in the border patrol on the US side. You look at convictions as far as corruption charges. The US border patrol is one of the ones that have the most convictions when it comes to corruption. And it's clear that it is not only underfunded, but it's underman. You know, I've also seen them perform acts of great humanity and paying out of pocket for things like toothbrushes and toys and cold medication for some of the people that are in detention centers. You also don't see the fact that most of them are first generation or section generation Mexicans. And do have a vested not only interest in some of these people being treated mainly, but also for them doing well. So it's a complicated issue as far as the border patrol. And yes, they do in sometimes I've seen when I was down there, and I've seen that in the next few months, it's not something that ends at the border. But then you go into Mexico and you see municipal state and federal police agencies also predated being a predator as far as trying to get some of these smuggling groups and tax them as well. Some of these people that are coming to the border. And it's known that if you're coming across the country to try and cross that border, you probably have some cash on you. So there are perfect victims for anybody in it. If we're a lot of people that are coming up on that border, you know, specifically authority figures. How did you get involved in Ukraine and training people to go to Ukraine? It's not even that I train people specifically for that is that a lot of students that actually came through some of my classes, including one specifically, events. He's out there. Listen to this. I love you brother. Basically some students that went through some of the training that I provide, you know, basically I train people how to working hostile environments. And some of the stuff that some of the classes that I've done, you know, some interesting people have shown up, you know, people that have a background themselves, people of life trained people from military get federal agencies and people of that nature. Some of them showed up and said, wow, this material could be put to good use somewhere currently, you know, you know, or some it's like, oh, that's awesome. I go ahead and I'm like, yeah, I would want to go, but I'm just no conditions to go physically mentally and all that. I'm at 40 and I have a have a kid, you know, and I have my own fights, you know, so some of them. Can we take some of the material material out there? Yeah. I gave them what I what I could as far as educational material and they took it with them and they went out there front lines and trained a bunch of people specifically how to utilize what they had on hand as far as a medical management emergency in providing medical management equipment, material that that I gathered from some of the people that I've worked with before and also how to get out of a bath situations, you know, restraints, how to get out of handcuffs, how to get out of certain certain improvised restraints like zip ties and duct tape is a lot of a lot of stuff that are using out there. They're very, they're not equipment rich, you know, these Russian forces, so they're improvising a lot of stuff they're doing, which kind of like emulates or mirrors a lot of stuff that I saw in Mexico as far as some of the criminal groups of ducting people out there. So made sense for some of that material to be spread out there. What has as far as like your communication with the guys that are out there, what has shocked you the most or what has sort of surprised you the most out of how they operate over there and some of the tactics that you use like you just said using duct tape. Part of this brief interruption, but I want to take a minute to talk about this incredible supplement that I've been using for over a year now after it was recommended to me by a nutritional scientist, Dr. Dominic Dagestino on this podcast. I take Dom's advice when it comes to anything related to nutrition, diet, and longevity because as we get older these things become more and more important. That is why I started using Verso. Verso is a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold the potential to increase longevity. I take cell being, this one right here, which contains Nicotenamide Mononucleotide or NMM based supplement paired with naturally derived, micronized, trans-risk Viratrol and TMG. These two chemicals are actually precursors to what's called Nicotenamide Idonine Dynonucleotide, which is commonly known as NAD. And NAD is essentially the precursor to energy, cell repair, and longevity. If you've ever tried fasting or even intermittent fasting and you've gotten that feeling of super high energy or mental clarity is because your body is activating these genes called Sertuins, which are actually longevity genes. The downside is as we age NAD declines. When I found out I could naturally increase my body's activation of Sertuins and naturally activate my body's production of NAD, I was sold. And it is so much more affordable than doing NAD IV drips. Head on over to vr.so and use the coupon code ConCreat It Checkout to save 50% on your entire order. That's K-O-N-C-R-E-T-E at checkout. And get 15% off your entire order or you can just go to vr.so-K-O-N-C-R-E-T-E. It's linked below back to the show. I mean, you know, I think both sides are doing a lot of horrible stuff. You know, it's a war zone. And there is no shining night in that situation and there is no clear heroic side. You know, some of them are defending their homeland. That's to be admired and commended. And then there is this Russian contingent coming in and, you know, some of them are mercenaries and they are performing some barbaric acts against the civilian populace. And they are leaving some of the areas of mining planted fields. Leaving improvised booby trap explosives in schools and places where, you know, people would try and scavenge food and stuff like that. I think something that's pretty scary alarming and unneeded in a war zone like that, but that's happening, you know. And then, you know, not to just focus on Russia. I've also heard, you know, from other people come going out there to try and fight for that. You were creating it. Getting treated poorly by the Ukrainians. Like civilians going out there? Former military individuals. There are veterans. Veterans. There's at least two Mexicans out there that I know of who I used to work with who are now out there, you know, performing, you know, task out there. They've reported back that they were treated poorly by some of the Ukrainian military because of the color of their skin. Really. So there's a, there's shit happening on both sides. You know, there's a, there's some elements of the Ukrainian military. There are clearly, there are clearly, you know, very racist, very racist, you know, culturally detached from the fact that there are people out there that have brown skin that might want to go and help. I heard there's a bunch like a rogue neo Nazi groups out there. There are, and there's some sentiment like that, not all of them again. This is, this is just some stuff that I've heard from people like that that went out there. The shocking thing for me is that the whole, the whole targeting of a civilian popular is basically, you know, how they're, you know, setting booby traps, man traps, and explosive devices. They're going to be probably plaguing that area for decades from now. Who are the ones that are setting those traps? Is it both sides? I mean, the rush mainly rush in, rush in and retreating forces that are letting, letting, letting, uh, retweeding and or, uh, moving back and letting some of that control territory or, or maybe place back in the hands of your cranes. And this is the kind of stuff that you teach to be able to, I mean survive and to be able to recognize. I mean, I don't, I don't, I don't show anything related to explosives, but I do show things as far as I try to survey a little bit of environments and to see risks involved in moving in places like that. You know, we weren't exposed to a lot of improvised explosives of that nature. Well, I'm not not improvise conventional explosives. A lot of these things are military grade explosive that are being utilized in some of these conflicts zones. Uh, down in Mexico, we were when we faced, uh, you know, civilian drones being used to drop grenades on, on, on people that happened in Mexico like the little DJI drones. Yeah, that happened in Syria first and then in Mexico, you know, that, that kind of that went to that happened in Syria first as far as it being kind of like shown publicly through videos on social media. So, we started seeing it in Mexico. The first improvised explosive that I saw in Mexico delivered by a drone was actually dropped in Baja. It was a grenade that didn't explode in the end, but it was a grenade attached to a civilian drone that was dropped in the backyard of the private residence of the Secretary of Public Safety in the state of Baja. And the first drone I saw used for criminal activity was actually crashed on the road through Baja, that's a quad drone that was carrying a giant brick of meth. So that was like 2011, I think, I think I remember the 2011. So it's the, the, the, the, the rise of drone technology as far as where it was going and was apparent to a lot of us when we're started seeing them being utilized for stuff like that. I remember seeing some of the first videos coming out of me to a con probably two, three years ago. We took on right now for people that don't know it's basically an active war zone in Mexico. Can you tell like paint pictures of where in Mexico is in the joke on? We took on is a center of Mexico towards the Pacific side of Ocean. It's next to, next to a hot, hot bit of activity that is related to the new generation cartel, which is one of the largest, most military right cartels coming out of Mexico right now. It's kind of vying for power as far as the seasonal oil cartel and new generation cartel. They are trying to gain entry and control of mutual con, which is a very rich place as far as the ability to plant and harvest things like poppy. And it's also on a drug route. So it's a pretty strategic place for the Mexican federal government is actually allowing themselves with the catezos oños out there, which is basically what is the left of the cartels that used to dominate that area. So they're involved in trench warfare with the against the new generation cartels and the new generation cartel. Two, probably two years ago, I think some of these videos came out and I remember them coming out on social media and then kind of me sending them off to some of my US based friends specifically EOD teams. So they can see it, you know, because I thought it was interesting and they were surprised by the fact that they hadn't seen some of this stuff before. They were basically weaponizing using mining, mining explosive conventional mining explosives in combination with chemicals used to pesticide chemicals. So basically using the explosive not to disperse these pesticide chemicals, they're mixed and very harmful if you breathe them in. So using them to drop on some of the fortified positions at the federal government and the cartels, the catezos oños had to fight against the new generation cartel. So, you know, that whole exchange of information that's going on right now as far as social media and YouTube and live leaks and all these online sources basically exporting your methodology has been kind of like a really interesting. Part of all of these conflicts that have recently kind of dawned on the world. How are they exporting the methodology? What do you mean by that? I mean, you see, Barmington back 40 millimeter grenades being dropped in Syria to stabilize that grenade as it goes down from a drone. And somebody out there takes note of that and then you see it in Mexico. And then somebody takes note of the fact that some specific drones are better than others, taking some of that methodology and showing it to the Ukrainians and how Ukrainians are using the UIs and some of this. So this whole weird improvised civilian drone arms race that is going on right now in the world. That combined with the group chats on WhatsApp of them sharing different things and photos and videos and learning. WhatsApp signal telegram, you know, social media, Facebook used to be like a place. It's not anymore because of all the the censorship. In shorthand also used to be a place. I mean, I remember I looked this morning. I was looking for you this morning and for some reason I couldn't find your shadow ban. I'm shadow ban. Basically, you can't find a lot of the stuff that I post because of the repeated violations of the terms of service. And usually they come from like news, me sharing news posts from our sister page. Then we'll have most of my current death strikes on the page have been of me sharing news about stuff that's going down in Mexico. So some of the censorship online is pretty crazy. So I had to put all my information on my educational information behind a paywall and Patreon because of this. Because there's just no way that people can access that on social media without me getting some sort of strike on my accounts. That's insane. That's insane. They're doing that. And they're doing that because of like your posting stuff that it actually violates the terms of service. Are you just? I mean, if I'll give you an example of something that got a strike on my page. There was a major offensive by a certain cartel in Mexico and they left a bunch of their plate carriers. Basically, armored plate carriers that they carry with them behind. And I shared a picture of one of those plate carriers that had the name of one of these groups down there. You know, the four letters. And that got a strike on my page because it was promoting terrorist organizations. Right? So the key words in a news article related to that group also promoting terrorist or hate group organizations. Meanwhile, I was telling earlier, Luis Chaparro, the reporter in Sudad Juarez was telling me that not only are El Chapo's kids and family all on Instagram, but as well as El Myo's family and cousins and sons. They're all over TikTok. You know, all over TikTok Instagram, they have Instagram accounts. They're using basically utilizing TikTok as a recruiting arm for them, you know, for some of these cartel groups out there. That's fucking insane, man. I don't know how to describe it as far as experiencing it. You know, you see, you know, I'm no saint, you know? I post things that are, I think, informational or educational in some cases or some funny stuff as well related to PTSD and alcoholism and all that stuff that I'm going through. But it's funny when you post something related to news or dispersing information in this country. Again, we have a sister page that deals specifically with reporting on specific cartel activities in Mexico with English, which is not our easy thing to do. They're based out of Mexico and they're doing some amazing work, but they get reported on and their pages, I think the first page they had was taken completely down by Instagram. Specifically, because they get strikes on their page because, again, the wording, the imagery, it's not, and they're very good at blurring everything out. But that gets taken now. And on the other side of the... again, the wording, the imagery, it's not, and they're very good at blurring everything out, but that gets taken now. And on the other side of the aisle, you see some of these organizations basically posting videos and pictures of them spreading, you know, some of these, when COVID was happening, they were giving, you know, the spentas out there with the name of the cartel specifically, you know, here you go, family, this is on behalf of this cartel, you know, or they were enforcing some of the mass mandates in Mexico. And if you were caught without a mask outside or if you were caught partying outside, you would get, you would get that blah blah, which is basically a board, a board, the flat board that would use to hit your ass. And you would see that on TikTok, you would see some of that on Instagram as well, and it's, it was up in nothing out. No problems. So yeah, there's definitely some strange allowances that some of these groups have, or at least preferences that I think that have, we've seen as far as, you know, Jabato looking at how some of the stuff he posed and how maybe he's being, you know, centered on some of the stuff he posed or how demo led to post some things that are very much informational dealing with some of the stuff that's going on down there. And it getting, you know, blocked or banned because of it. And meanwhile, some of these accounts that are out there, specifically TikTok, I think TikTok is, that's it's right now. It's the main platform for a lot of people specifically in some of these criminal groups who, uh, the, you know, it's out there. No problem kids running around, uh, 17 year olds running around with AK 47s, you know, beating the shit out of people that, so weird. I've heard the opposite about TikTok. I've heard people have problems getting banned all the time on TikTok. Well, they might get banned all the time on TikTok, but I can, you know, you can, you can do a search of specific criminal groups on TikTok right now, and you'll find hundreds of videos of them rolling around. Yeah. What was your search? Like what would, give me an example of like, what can we search? I've seen that on Cartel de Sino, el trislet, uh, and seeing other those values. Uh, El Chapa, who's mine, you can look for a lot of these things. And also, though, just pop up as far as, uh, as far as, uh, videos and imagery related to Cartel and Cartel, Cartel, Kofi, that's for example, popular music down there that is kind of like, uh, glorifying some of these activity, you know, uh, the fact that it's being utilized as they, as a, uh, sort of propaganda armor recruiting arm for that is very clear. And many people have reported on the fact that some of these, uh, some of these, um, anonymous TikToks pop up every now and then I think we saw a few of them specifically in Baja related to recruiting people to a certain Cartel. Like, if you want to, if you want to, you want to work for us, you know, reach out. We're here, you know, uh, we had an incident de Huana, where a bunch of young kids, uh, recruited by one Cartel, um, to put pressure on the government, basically burned a bunch of cars and cost a lot of the v, v HIKI, or chaos in Tijuana. It was a specific day. They, uh, at this whole orchestrated where they put some cars, uh, set some cars on fire and some, um, major traffic zones during peak, uh, traffic hours. And later on, when they kind of, they put this message out on social media about them, what they was about and people are basically sending a curfew, people don't go out because we're going to clean the plaza, basically. And later they was found out that some of these kids, you know, after they, they were paid by said criminal group and they skipped down that a lot of them were basically recruited through social media. But a lot of them got like, hey, if you want to make some money, you know, do it through here. So WhatsApp group, social media, uh, uh, signal, um, telegram, a lot of these things are being utilized by some of this groups. How long have you been dealing with this censorship on Instagram? Like being shot, albeit on your counts gone down and come back right? Many times. Yeah. So I mean, I'm, I'm at, uh, 300 something thousand, um, I've, uh, attempted to be verified, you know, I've been quoted by Al Jazeera, New York Times, BBC, uh, as, as, and I've been on some pretty major podcast. I've worked on some movies, uh, uh, uh, right for a few magazines. Um, I talked to, I talked to the Senate, uh, some Senate hearings in myself as well, you know, all this documented. And I can't get a verification of that, you know, because of the controversial, maybe it's because of the controversial nature of what I talk about or maybe specifically it's because of some, uh, uh, some of the tag lines and subject matters that I talk about are considered banable offenses, I guess, on, on, on Instagram specifically. Do you do with any of that like on other platforms at all? Like, like Twitter and YouTube? Uh, I've actually recently started posting more on Twitter and it's a breath of fresh air because a lot of stuff stays up. Um, totally opposed anything. Right. Yeah. But not, uh, not in the Instagram. It is a, and again, it's hard for people to line me on Instagram and, you know, some of the stuff that I've been posting recently has been very benign and it's mostly leads people to go and look at my stuff somewhere else. But still it's bad. Yeah. Yeah. The week, the week, Chippara, he's biggest, uh, one of his biggest media outlets is Instagram for his stories too. Um, the funny thing, the interesting thing about people like him is, especially when you decide to live there near the border, like where he is, yeah, like him in particular, he is not like a gun guy. He's like, he doesn't like to own a gun. And the question I have for you is it, if you're a journalist living down there reporting on these cartels, meeting with these cartels, would it be advisable not to have a fucking gun on you? Or is it, is it almost smarter to just not even have one and be considered harmless? That's an interesting question. Like I am not a reporter. So my mentality around a lot of this is completely different. Right. Right. Uh, but you come from the opposite. But, um, I have trained a lot of reporters that worked down there, including, uh, again, our sister, Paige, uh, demo there who, you know, they, they worked in the Mexico and it's not easy. And, you know, there's, there's some issues to that. Um, uh, uh, uh, arming themselves is not something I would advise for somebody that's going to go into the, in the dragons, then to talk to some of these people because it basically turns you into a, uh, basically it turns you into a, a, a combatant. Right. Um, but that being said, not being safe or not knowing how to be safe or trying to get yourself out of some of these situations is probably, you know, ill-advised. Um, the, you know, the amount of reports that are killed in Mexico is, you know, mind-bob. It's one of the most dangerous, uh, jobs in Mexico is to be a reporter. Um, there was a lady that actually went on in my nanero, which is basically the current president of Mexico and there's my nanobas over as these, uh, these daily meetings where he, uh, addresses the nation and rambles around about, you know, whatever, whatever thing is in his head at that particular day. Um, and a reporter lady steps up and says, hey, they've been threatened my life. They want to kill me. Can I talk to you about it? They had an exchange there and, uh, nothing happened. You know, nothing was done. She went back to where she was from and he was popped. Basically, you know, that is the level of insecurity in Mexico. Now she told people what was going to happen and it happened. Right? She told the president of Mexico. Um, mind you, uh, I, I speak ill of the government right now and I will speak ill of the government that I was a part of when I was working for it from Phoebe Picadon on all the way to here. You know, I'm, I don't, I think all politics in Mexico was corrupt as hell. You know, but, uh, current government is, is, uh, towards the left of political spectrum. And there's a lot of, uh, sentiments, uh, of the vision in Mexico right now, uh, as far as the left and the right. Um, the current presidency in Mexico said that they were going to make a civilian police force that they were going to take the military off the streets. Um, that they're going to, uh, just the hugs, not bullets. Yeah. Hugs. And now we have a militarized national guard unit. The civilian control federal police has gone. And, uh, he's doing exactly what his main rival Phoebe Picadon did back in the day, which basically militarized this war. And it's surprising to me that people on both sides are in denial about it, too. You know, I get, uh, attacked a lot of, uh, about my criticism system, uh, as far as the current government, but I criticized the whole of it. Right? I was a part of that, uh, government as well. And I criticized the shit out of the, uh, they, uh, they fully become the wrong government. And the pain and the death of government and the current government, it's all of it is, there's, there's no, there's no saving grace. It's for a lot of these, uh, these, uh, these, uh, these presidencies in Mexico and we've never lived in a more dangerous sign to be in Mexico, you know, as far as the amount of violence that, that, that, that is occurring in Mexico and at the scope that it is, you know, 90% of all murders aren't solved in Mexico. If you are a civilian traveling down there, for example, like if you're someone just traveling from Florida, going on a surf trip and you catch a ride to, you know, a local beach to go surfing or whatever and you end up running a, getting intercepted by somebody in a cartel, what kind of like, what should you do physically and what should you do? Like how can you use words to get yourself out of a situation? Yeah. So first off, Mexico isn't all bad, you know, there's a part, the parts of Mexico, they're perfectly safe for people. Uh, 90% of all new houses in Tijuana are being bought by Americans. So have a friend who lives in Tijuana just built a new house. Amazing. San Diego South. Yeah. They call it now, you know, a weed trafficking is happening from San Diego to Tijuana, you know, that's, that's the weird thing about it. You hit Mexico has a bunch of economic migrants from the US living in living in Mexico. They're reviled in places like Mexico City, you know, some of them are they, they won't want them there because they're driving up prizes. So the whole notion of the Mexico being the dangerous place is in some parts, it is very dangerous. And some parts is very safe. Every now and then I see people like, oh, I live comfortably here. My kids go to town. Yeah, but you live in a fucking resort fucking area. Of course you fucking can do that, right? And also your American, uh, your passport, even if you don't think that your passport actually provides you with certain, uh, immunity to some of the violence because criminal groups don't want to target Americans because that'll bring in a lot of extra heat today. Oh, really? Okay. So that is an, uh, that is a product of that. You know, you're more likely to be stopped by a, you know, corrupt local cop and, you know, get asked for a bribe and, you know, get abducted by a criminal organization now there. So the nature of the beast down there is completely different than the United States. I always tell people from the US, you know, if you, if you, if you can't travel with your sense of normal, you can't travel with your legal system and you can't travel with your pillar rights. None of that means anything once you cross that border. So you have to adjust, you know, you're normal as a fluid concept. Um, the same thing happens up here. I mean, I've been to, I remember going to Detroit with some friends of mine were in law enforcement and getting to see certain parts of that city. I'm from Tijuana and some of those, some of those parts of that city were pretty gnarly. Um, I will say, first off, you need to adjust what your sense of normal is and what you would expect somebody to react to or what you expect somebody to view as valuable on you or with you to change. People going down to Mexico and get getting their, you know, their truck stolen. Um, they think, oh, the cartels are targeting me. You know, they, they want your truck because that is a resource there. People going off to a foreign country with their iPhone and getting stabbed in the neck for it by a 11 year old that iPhone will pay for a lot of their issues in that place. So it's, it's worthy as far as an object to steal from you and murder you for. So first off, uh, you have to regulate your sense of normal in some of these environments. Um, Mexico is a place that is varied. There's places that are safe. There's places that are safe for the locals. If you're local there, you'll know what those places are. You are a sense of normal for somebody from Tijuana is completely different from a sense of normal from somebody from San Diego, for example. You know, the shootout happens and you duck behind the taco counter and then you peek out everything's fine and you, you know, continue wanting your tacos. Meanwhile, the American across from you is calling the embassy and get extracted or something like that. Um, I'll say this. Uh, first off, you need to realize that you are in another country. If you're in Mexico traveling or living down there, you need to realize you're in another country that has a very different set of rules that has a government that is pretty iffy as far as trusting it or not. So they're not going to be the ones that you might have to call for something maybe. Uh, some of these places are cartel owned, you know, uh, what you're seeing sometimes in some of these resort towns. Uh, what the violence is going on inside of them is it's, uh, it's a fight for the giant drug market created by Americans living down there. They brought their, their consumption with them when they go down to Mexico and live in some of these places. So now it's an extra valuable place. So people are trying to kill for some of the drug markets that people are creating. Um, that's another aspect of this whole drug war that people don't realize. In Mexico has drug markets themselves. It's not just the US drug market. Mexico is giant drug markets themselves. In Americans, not not not needing to, not needing to cross the drugs into San Diego, for example, to feed that drug market and have some of these Americans come down and now live in Mexico and live in place like Tijuana and bringing their habits with them. That means that there is more violence as far as the people that are fighting for feeding that habit down there. So advice, you know, realize that you have to adjust your sense of normal. Even if you're, I'm from San Diego, I'd have my rights. I'm an American. I've lived down here. Things should change. They don't give a shit where you're from. I don't give a shit where you're from. Also, the locals will be less sympathetic to you. You know, as far as you trying to adjust things there, it's a hard issue. I've been told me to tell my friend told me to say if I ever got in a situation to say, so are they Monterey. Oh, yeah. Mexican Wacan is what I call Monterey. That's where all the old money hides in Mexico. And going down there, you'll see a Lamborghini, where Seattle just rolling down the street. He said also the white guys too. He's like, everyone in Monterey's white. Yeah, that's another aspect of Mexico that people don't realize. There's a lot of white people out there in Mexico where Mexicans are speaking. All right. My foster brother, Alberto, if he's listening to this, shout out to him. He doesn't speak pretty clear English. And sometimes we would go to San Diego where kids and they would speak English to him and not me. You know, he was like, okay. And Lucy K is Mexican. I know that's crazy. I just learned that like a couple months ago. Lucy K is Mexican more Mexican than a lot of these, uh, when Mexican, Mexican American comedians out there as far as like, he actually lived in Mexico. You know, it's pretty, say, to kind of think that it is insane. But, uh, yeah, the Mexico is pretty diverse. Now, there's this whole, uh, it's another weird thing about American mindset as far as Mexico that it's Mexico is a single place when everybody's the same. Um, people from Baja, like even Baja, like that's a state I was born in Tijuana. It's actually rare to meet somebody that was born in Tijuana. It's not a common thing. Very transient place. It's a transient place. So I was born, uh, uh, on seven street, um, the hospital will speak that that, uh, that they own, right? Which is, you know, a hospital with a lot of people. If you're born there, you're either the son of immigrants that were kicked out of the US, uh, or you were on your way to the US and you missed the date of your birth, then you got born in Tijuana, right? So it's, uh, it's an interesting little part of the world, Tijuana. It's a city of immigrants. Um, it is, it is one of those places. Like it's like a narnia type place, you know, anything goes. Uh, opportunity, uh, food, street food is amazing there. Drugs are prevalent there. Um, there's a place called that's on a, so not Rosa, a tolerance zone. That's what I thought of on said where prostitution is basically legal. Uh, on top of that, there's the ocean there. There's an scenario to the south. There's a wine valley there. It's an amazing place. There's a lot of opportunities for people. There's beautiful parts of it. There's bad parts of it to, to want to whatever you want it to be basically. But people from Tijuana are known, you know, in other parts of the country. Because when they pass through there, they're, they're, they're predated upon by people from Tijuana, you know, they're, you know, they're, you know, I met somebody on, uh, I think Oakland. He had a taco shop out there. And, uh, I have this clear, clear English, because I actually went through language school and I actually worked on not having an accent. See, because I was my young, I mean, because I see my molly mania is a unique little, watching now they throw a ghettos. I can speak Spanish. I can speak English clearly. Uh, so it, I turn off my, I turn off the Spanish when I'm in the US for no other reason than I don't want to be treated differently. Right? So I'm there. Some friends online are there and they're kind of joking with this taco guy. That's that idea guy. It's great tacos. By the way, I wish I'd remember the name of the place. It's in Oakland. Uh, it's near a swap mate. Amazing place. Uh, speaking, jokingly, he's from Puebla. Speaking, uh, jokingly with him was like, uh, what do you think about people with the quana? Right? And I'm like standing, I was sitting there, you know, eating the tacos. You know, uh, they'll steal the t-shirt off your back and sell it back to you. It, it looks like it'll be like like, I don't know. What do you say that when I went through there to jump to try and jump that board? Um, I, I, I bought some, some, um, gold necklaces for my daughters. Oh, these beautiful. Thank you. Do you want to gift wrap them? Yeah. Which box do you want? That one in grab the box for wrap. If you weeks later, when he was up there, uh, he opened up the boxes and the chains were gone. So they didn't know what the, so he got duped. Wow. This is the whina. And this is part of the whina. And also there's, there's a lot of that going on there. And, you know, the, then you go to places like Puebla, which people are beautiful there. It's a beautiful place. Most of the, you know, most of the best food, uh, or the best people that make good food come from there. They could boardane had a chef that worked in on one of his restaurants that actually came from Puebla. They had a whole episode down there. But it's very innocent. It is a very, you know, close-knit town. There's not a lot of shady shit happening down there. So it's a completely different place than the one. Then you go to Monterey or some of the old money is and some of the people that have a lot of opportunities and not a lot of Mexicans have live. And there's, there's, uh, there's a certain aspect of, uh, almost like a bubble around, uh, around some of the, the richer communities that they don't get affected by some of the stuff that happens in other places. And then they're seen in Lola, where everything goes. It's a lot less, you know, people from seen in Lola are known for known for their, you know, thing. I think there was a ban on people joining certain aspects of the military from seen in Lola for a while in Mexico. It was that kind of of ban on Lola. Um, but all in all, it, uh, I've met people from all over the country of Mexico up here in the United States. Every time I'm up here, like I see somebody, like, hey, kill him, don't notice. Like, where were you from? And from while I'm from here. And like being so far away from home, we just, you know, the, the, the feeling of warmth, like, ah, it's a connection. Oh, it's a connection. The connection of we, we have to earn our plays here. We have to, you know, it's, it's a, it's like a responsibility for us, not only our place, but the place of our children, which is something that I think links at most immigrants or every immigrant, we're always looking for a better place not only for ourselves, but for our kids. But there's another side to it, you know, there's a, there's a doggy dog eat types mentality in some Mexicans as well. You know, I always said this, I'm my biggest critics here in the United States are Mexicans or second generation, third generation Mexicans that have lost sight of what that struggle with that, that, uh, that say that I talk too negatively about Mexico or that, uh, I don't know what I'm saying, even though I came from that place, you know, they might know better if they never been down there, or if the only experience with Mexico is going to resort town somewhere or visiting La Wellan, Der Rancho, you know, every, a few, few years, I guess. Um, but it's a, Mexico is a very diverse place. Um, if anything, uh, you can't, you can't compare it to, you know, you can't compare it to the United States. Like I haven't, I think I've seen more of the United States than most Americans, every weekend, I'm in a different state doing a class with, uh, with the, with the locals or doing a glassware law enforcement. Uh, in the last two weeks, I was in Atlanta. I was in Los Angeles, I was in San Diego, I was in Texas and a few parts of Texas and now I'm here and I think I'm going back to California. I mean, like understanding Mexicans and Mexican culture and Spanish is such a important part of living in Florida. I grew up in this town right here and I am just like, it's been such a part of my childhood, growing up and working and, um, you know, like I'm trying to teach my kids Spanish that are really young age because to be able to communicate and with, with the Mexicans around here, because there's so many of them, it's such an advantage in life. Yeah. And, and I mean, that's another aspect of it. The, uh, the whole, the whole fact that Spanish is very important. Then I've been, I remember having this, you know, people talk about racism here, you know, or, uh, and if I've experienced it, uh, I've experienced a few cases of that and, you know, I've lived in Kentucky for a while, you know, so in, I've never experienced any of that there. Um, I've been through this. I've been through all throughout the South and parts of certain parts of the East Coast are considered kind of rural and, and the only time I've been experienced that has been in California. Really? Yeah. Um, two times. One of them was in a grocery store in California and, and, and, uh, I won't say that town, but it's a, it's in California and it was by, uh, probably a second generation, uh, Mexican, uh, berating me for the fact that I was speaking Spanish to my kid in a restaurant. Well, it was a restaurant attached to this supermarket and she came on and said, you need to speak English. You're in the United States and you need to adapt and also if your kid's going to be here, she needs to speak English. And it was a, it was a weird moment, right? Because I turned to her and I could, I could see, I could see the brownness in her, you know, yeah, I could see some of that. You know, that was, that was odd, you know, and another occasion was, uh, did you understand her? Did you think she had good intentions or do you think it was just, uh, it was, it was, uh, I switched, I switched to Spanish with her. So she, see, see if you can talk back in Spanish and I just caught the, the fact that she had lost that Spanish, whatever Spanish she had was broken or that completely unrecognizable to me. So maybe it was a, maybe like maybe that wasn't being expressed. That's when she said that to me, that she couldn't speak at anymore or she lost that. And I don't know, that was a weird one. And the other one was related to my faith. Um, I, I come from Mexico and I have a very weird faith to a lot of Americans, I guess. Um, the Mexico, we have a really close relationship to death. Mm-hmm. You know, we party at the graves of our ancestors. We have a whole list of things about Mexico. We have that, you know, um, and I've been trying to give that to my kid as well. You know, that culture, I don't want her to lose that. Uh, and, um, I had the situation that, uh, where some people were calling me out on the fact that I was wearing something very satanic or demonic, you know, it's usually, I don't usually carry it out, but, uh, you know, I usually carry. Can you hold it up like a buyer microphone so we can see it. Okay. That's cool. The Reaper. So I usually carry a la vicaine de la lupa, which is like mother of Mexico and that's something worth it. Yeah, which is something I grew up with as far as a faith. And I had some people calling out satanic. That's, that's devil worship. And, and that's, uh, that's a reason why in Mexico and Mexico is so bad is because you're very satanic and you have this sort of demonic relationship with stuff. And I, and my mind, I was like, you wouldn't have the balls to call somebody out out on that if I was a Native American now and I was expressing some of my Native American ancestry here. You wouldn't have the balls to say anything about it. But I'm from Mexico. I'm from, I'm, I'm immigrant here. And it's, I'm a fair game person to say that too. Right. And I just found this weird, like openness to, to, to attack that faith aspect in me is interesting. Maybe not racist, but pretty interesting as far as the, uh, the ability to be able to, to say something about that openly and freely, you know, that's what yeah, that's on in California. I feel like one of the most one of the biggest misconceptions, at least from my point of view with Mexicans is that the, they're all concerned. At least all the ones I know they're like conservative country. Yeah. Like a lot of them, I know they walk around in cowboy boots. They, they're conservative minded. Like when it comes to politics and love country music driving jacked up trucks. The identity politics, politics that encountered up here has been also pretty fascinating. And you're Mexican. You should be to this side of this. Right. Right. Or the discussions that I have with Latinx term terminology. Oh, yeah. People want it. Well, Latinx had like, like, okay, okay, they get something Latinx. That I have no idea that terminology means the assumption that I'm an immigrant. So my politics should be of one and the other. Right. So first off, I don't like both sides. Usually, right. From my, I'm, I'm, I'm, I end up with you. I don't like both sides. I'm, I don't, I don't particularly agree with a, a man in power that is completely detached from the general, my generational needs and then general, general needs of most of the people that I know. The fact that he probably, he's clearly not mentally capable to be in office. And on the other side of the political spectrum, there's this reality star who, you know, we, we can, we can talk about some of the stuff that he said about, about people like me and about some of the, some of the places where I come from. And his politics, I mean, you know, two each is on, I'm not here to talk about that specifically. But there's assumption that I should, that I'm just, we should be on one side of the political spectrum or another. Yeah. I come from a country where we're not allowed to have guns. And I know what that freedom would mean to a lot of Mexicans. If a lot of Mexicans were allowed to have that freedom, which is in our constitution in Mexico, there's a, there's a constitutional part of it, that where it states that we have the ability and the right to bear arms in our homes protection. But we have one gun store and we have a military that has monopolized that right. And if you are not a member of the officers club and the military, you can't own or possess a firearm and carry it legally. Or if you're a member of a police organization, you might be able to carry one as long as it that compliance with the license. Other than that, you have to be upper middle class through a Florida plane ticket to fly to that single gun store and buy a gun that you're not going to be able to carry meanwhile on the other end. The other end, you know, criminal groups are carrying around. Really wantors and you can take down helicopters. So coming to this country and seeing the right to bear arms. the other end, criminal groups are carrying around really launchers and could take down helicopters. So coming to this country and seeing the right to bear arms, I have a weird relationship to that, because I know what that means to people here and I know what happens when that right is gone. But on the other hand, I also see things like fast in the furious and how the proliferation of firearms in Mexico, and most of them, it's probably 70% of weapons in Mexico come from the civilian great AR-15s and handguns that are converted into full auto in Mexico, for example, not all, but a lot of them do. What can you explain with fast in the furious is for people that don't know? Fast in the furious was an operation that probably started during the Bush administration. It's not a people like to use the Obama, but it started during the Bush administration, what I know of it externally. It started during the Bush administration and basically a program that the ATF had to track firearms, small firearms purchases by gun runners in the United States. Let them basically buy a bunch of firearms that the cartels wanted. Know about it. Tell gun stores that, hey, let these walk. I know that it's a very suspicious purchase, but let these go. Let these walk out of your store. It's fine. Them looking at these following these gun-gun-stropper-users, take them to a gun runner, the gun runner loads them up to a car, and then drives them to Mexico, and nothing happens, because they were attempting to follow these somehow. They were attempting to follow where the guns were going. Yeah, they're trying to track them, but of course nothing was tracked, and a lot of these guns were found in murder scenes across the country, including specifically have this memory of these FN-57 pistols, a high velocity around, and these pistols have been able to go through soft body armor. And 50 cows in the box with the manual and everything. Basically bought off on American gun store and sent down on Mexico. Some of them were used to kill a friend of mine, and I remember finding these on the emergency, and not knowing where they came from, or they were pretty new and almost like out of the box, and you start finding them everywhere. I only found out about them by watching the hearings related to the shooting of Ryan Terry, federal agent shot with some of these guns that later were traced back to the ATF's Fast and Furious It is amazing that we know the names of these federal agents that were killed on the US side with those guns, but we don't know about all the Mexicans that were killed with those guns on the Mexico side. And for people that might want to say that I'm being anti-American with this somehow, I actually raised money for the Ryan Terry Foundation during a charity event for them. Despite the fact that I know that some of the people involved in this whole situation might not know about some of the victims in Mexico about it. So I'm trying to be fair and bounce about my views and some of my activism work that I do on both sides of the order. But that operation did great harm to Mexico. There was probably some government participation as far as keeping quiet after it was found out in Mexico by the Calderon administration. I'm probably almost sure about it, which was the administration in Mexico during that time, the administration that I was working on. So there was shady stuff happening across that border, but the sentiment or the mentality of Mexicans towards the United States after that happened changed. You know, the trust in certain circles as far as the US changed. And it's all, it's Mexico has had a longstanding relationship of good and bad with the United States. We had some suit massacres that were related to CIA activities in Mexico. We have heard about those. We had, I watched the documentary, the last knock. That was a very, very dark, dark story. And I think I key key, Kim Arana, the DEA agent and the CIA agent. I mean, there's, there's clear involvement with the CIA in Mexico, utilizing drug running at that time to basically piggyback weapons trafficking down to the contrast. But there has not been any apology about that, you know, is that story? Is that been verified? Or is that still like quote unquote conspiracy theory? It's not in my, it's not, it wasn't in my time, of course, you know, I started working in the early 2000s, but I've met people that were from that age and that time, you know, people that worked in around that environment. CIA and CIA involvement and a lot of stuff in Mexico has long been known, you know, Mexico City specifically has been a hotbed for, you know, back then, so we had era, this best being an origin and activities, you know, there's a few cases of us, so we had to spies being assassinated in Mexico. If it all Castro spent a long time in the Mexico City, you know, some of the, some of us are revolutionary, it's actually trained in Mexico before they went off and, and, and took you. So it's been a hotbed of activity. If people want to equate it to something, Mexico has basically been a staging proxy war area for the United States and it's enemies for decades. You know, you're starting off with the Soviets, I guess. And now you see influences from China in Mexico that seem to hint at some of the same kind of activity as far as foreign entity influencing or involving itself in certain aspects of Mexico and the United States trying to combat that. So, I mean, now it's no longer spies being sent to Mexico to spy on, on the United States. Now it's a pipeline of fentanyl being prompted to Mexico to feed an American so that before we go into the whole China thing, I want to like for people that are listening, if they're not familiar with the last narc, the basically the story of that is there was a DEA agent working in Mexico, I believe his name was King. He came on in. He became a marina and he was kidnapped and taken to a some sort of house and he was tortured for days and eventually I forget how it was really how who blew the whistle on it. But essentially one of the guys that was in there torturing him. His name was Felix Rodriguez, who was a CIA officer. He was actually the CIA officer who was responsible for the capture of Chegua, I believe. Yeah, there's a there's a weird connection between that, the Bay of Pigs, Q, and the Bay of Pigs. Yeah, there was a and again, this is Cuban intelligence, CIA operations all over Mexico. This has been going on for decades. But that specific case is interesting because to this day, we just saw the recent recapture and arrest of Gao Quintero, who was one of the guys who was stingered for that. Yes. He was when they interviewed him, they did, they brought him in front of the media for some sort of thing after that. He was just sort of like laughing and joking with everybody. He's like, fuck you guys, I'll be out of here in two months. No, he hit, I mean, he was, he was a high level cartel guy. Got arrested for it. That was pinned on him. He was never actually guided, which should be something that people should look into, you know, he was freed under weird circumstances, you know, then made a run for it again. Then he was placed on the, you know, most wanted list by the US recently. And then he was arrested again. He's in a law. Some people say it was betrayed. But he's never going to be extradited to United States. I don't think, right. And they should, you know, I wonder why that is, you know, what does he know? I don't know. The, but the interesting thing is that it was all pinned on him by the US government has always considered him to be the responsible guys for us. That murder that, that, that torture and murder of key come on. I don't know. You know, there's, there's a lot of questions there. There's a lot of, you know, again, the whole aspect of corruption only being on the Mexican side or shady shady stuff being not on the Mexican side. I was going to kick out of the comment section when I post something about Mexico. I recently posted about this woman assassinated one of the ladies that led one of these, uh, let's find our children groups basically. And it's a phenomenon that's been happening across the country where women organize themselves and parents of people are missing organize themselves to go and find their kids by trying to find clandestine graves or knock on doors. Basically doing the job that police don't do that on there because they're either don't care or overwhelmed or whatever. And she was a sassan. I'll set her house. Two guys, uh, no motorcycle came in and shot her. She's one of five. I think recently that been killed in this way. Now you see this and in the comment section, like, well, the US should get involved somehow or we should send the, I don't know, some sort of intervention, I guess is what people think about. And I am asked like what, what, what is the public sentiment as far as US intervention in Mexico feel like right now? Yeah, nobody wants it. Really? It's, uh, they feel like the US is responsible. They, they, they don't view the, a lot of them Mexicans don't view the US as a innocent party or a savior of any sort. They see your foreign, they see the US as foreign policy history recently is not good. So how come we can protect a guy like Karo, Kintero, but we have El Chapo. How did we get El Chapo? And why, why do you think we were able to get El Chapo? I mean, well, Chapo wasn't, you know, I don't know, people paint him as this major leader of the scene on Karo, which he wasn't, you know, he was probably, he was a member and leaders. It was a member in a leadership, uh, part of that, uh, that federation of cartels, which that cartel groups, which is the scene on what cartels basically, a, a federation of, of, of, uh, about a smaller cartels that are all allied themselves and, and are based out of, you know, lower. Um, he was arrested and paraded in front of the press as the main, you know, that's the biggest misconception of him. He's like the, the head honcho that you, everyone thinks of him as the boss of the Saint-Aloha, which is, you know, it, uh, probably, it probably was beneficial for the government at that time in Mexico to parade him, as that. And also for the US government to kind of push their drug war policy, uh, as like, oh, look at this success, we just arrested this guy. Um, but nothing change, you know, drug drug prices remain stable, you know, there was no, oh, no, we had where there's a shortage of cocaine in the United States now because we erected the major, this major kingpin, uh, nothing change. Uh, why was he caught? Uh, he was caught because he he was, I think this is my theory. Uh, I don't know if it's true or not, but you know, you, you saw his arrest after his, uh, meeting with Sean Penn and, uh, got the Castillo who was a Mexican del ano elestar, you know, and I think that conversation or whatever was happening at that point as far as the Chappos intentions were to put his story or his narrative out to people and utilizing Hollywood for it. And whatever he was going to say about that was probably not something that people wanted to one and out there. That's my theory. I don't know if it's true or not, but you saw his, uh, his, uh, capture pretty soon after another somebody got scared that he was going to put his, I mean, he, he was, I mean, you talking to Sean Penn, you know, they right. So that's, you know, uh, he wasn't arrested by the, the, the, the Mexican military by the way. That's another misconception about it, which is a, he was a, there was a raid on his, uh, on his, one of some of the safe houses that we was at by the Mexican, uh, marina, the Marines, but he escaped and he was stopped, uh, a few miles away by federal road police. Uh, that's what was, that's what he was arrested by. He was stopped by two federal cops near, near the area where the raid happened. Uh, he was, uh, with his head, what his head bodyguard covered in mud because they went through some, some, uh, sewer tunnels to get to, to a road outside, common, the, the carjacked somebody and took his car and then he was stopped by these federal road cops and then the, and then the Marines showed. Right. And so again, narrative is very important in Mexico and how to construct that narrative as far as who arrested him. So you see these, you see the military parade him around, you know, they dress him well and they parade him around, and we arrested him. But there, there's a lot of stuff that happens on there. There's a big, again, narrative has to be controlled and who's seen as the, uh, the victor, who's seen as the guy that, uh, the, the group that is specifically involved in harassing it, it has to be the, it has to be the military, you know, because that is a narrative. So that, that, that, that, on the other side of it, you know, there's a lot of narrative influences as far as the cartel and what's happening now. And there, but also the military is also doing its own, uh, narrative influence in Mexico. Who is El Mayo, Simbada and how important is he to the Central lower car, cartel and how is, how is, uh, what was his relationship with El Chapo? So what I know about him and again, I'm a street level guy. I worked on the streets in, in Baja, as a, as an agent and then a few other parts of the, of the country, but specifically Baja. And what I hear about him comes from people out there working in that field. El Mayo, Simbada was somebody that learned his trade craft as far as how to move traffic and figure out drug routes all the way from Colombia up into the United States. He learned his craft in Los Angeles, not in Tino. So a lot of people want to think of the scene of law cartel as a, as a Mexican creation and or, uh, or virgin or, or, uh, originating itself in, uh, in a Mexico, but actually started in Los Angeles. So it's a, it's a very much an American origin, originated origin story, um, through his, through his, uh, relationship with, uh, with somebody that was, uh, you know, by marriage linked to him. I think a Cuban national, uh, if I'm, if I, if I don't, uh, misremember about it. Um, he learned some of the trade secrets as far as getting contacts, learning how to package what, uh, what distributors, distributors in the US to get to how to work distribution in the US and how to finance and figure this thing, these things out. He learned and you learned in LA later on. He went back to, you know, and started setting up some of his network, uh, from Mexico and started figuring out how to get people involved in it. Um, he's never been arrested. Uh, the pictures we have of him are probably almost a decade old now of an interview. He himself, uh, had, uh, asked for with a magazine called process, uh, down in Mexico. Um, did you say he asked for it? Yeah. He, he asked to be interviewed by somebody from that night as he wanted to talk about, you know, some things that were being said about him, I guess. Um, but he's, he's, uh, he's in the shadows. He's a shadowy figure. You don't, you don't, you don't hear a lot about him. Um, that's interesting to me that nobody knows about. Most people have never heard his name. Well, it's, it's, it's, uh, I think now a lot of people have heard, heard his name through his son being arrested in the US. Uh, his son, not arrested in the US. He was arrested in Mexico, but actually to the US and there's a, there's a very amazing book written by a reporter on a little joy. I think is her name. Uh, that is basically an interview with his son, uh, the son of a, a Maya sambala and, and his experience, uh, in that family and the whole process of how he became involved in that business and how, how that business is, uh, you know, it relates to a lot of the, the corruption, not only in Mexico, but on the US side, there's, there's this whole, uh, story about that. And she's asked her on. She's, she's, she's somebody to talk to. Um, but yeah, it's an interesting aspect that he's never been arrested and that not a lot of people know about him. Um, what did it end up having to do with son? Uh, he, he probably, I think he, I think he turned to state, uh, witness, I guess. So I, that's at least what you gather from some of the, of the, he talks about in that book. Um, so he's probably in some sort of protective custody somewhere, probably, but, uh, he's dad wants to kill him. I don't know. Chase. But yeah, it's interesting that he won't hear a lot about it. Um, and it's, uh, you know, there's, there's, there's some aspects of some of these criminal groups down there. You know, Chappo, a Chappo was one of those where I think they turned into some of those, uh, kind of celebrity figures, you know, Chappo escaped from, uh, captivity a few times in a very dramatic way, you know, one of them he was probably laid out by the president guards. You know, there's a story about him being in a laundry cart and stuff like that, which again, I think is completely BS that the government kind of said to not be embarrassed. He was probably let out that prison. And then you have the other one was a drug tunnel that was, you know, dug underneath the prisoner, where is that? Uh, and he was kept on the ground level for some insane reason. And, uh, if you see the drug tunnel, the drug tunnel is shaped like that. It's like, uh, you see some of the drug tunnels underneath the border that are shaped the same way. So you, why the shape like that? It's the quickest way and more, and the quickest way in the more, uh, the most stabilized way to create a tunnel in a hurry without it being, without having to create a, uh, a shaft with, uh, support beams on time. So you, you make something that is shaped like that. Interesting. And that was probably made by some of them saying people that make the tunnels across the border is going theory. It was, it was wild seeing the video that viced it on that tunnel. Like there was electricity throughout the whole thing with lights. Like it was, it was, it was a major operation that cost a lot of money. And all the people that weren't working that jail or, you know, they had to be complicit. Um, but, uh, you can see his celebrity, uh, or his almost legendary status kind of build from all these exploits he did. Um, and, you know, it also tells you a lot about sentiment in Mexico, you know, how people that are working for the government are vilified because of all these major issues with trust and the violation of trust and corruption. You know, I understand that aspect of it, you know, I'm considered a villain because of where I worked, you know, even though I despise and fucking say a bunch of shit about the government that used to work. But I'm still, I was still an agent in Mexico, uh, the police. Yeah. So that means all of us are corrupt and all of us are evil. But on the other side of it, you see the Netflix series where, you know, the romantic romanticized version of cartel members who are, you know, Robinhood characters almost and all these cases and are romanticized. And you see, you know, why do you think that is? Why do you think American culture is so fascinated by, by cartel lore and cartel and drug stories? It's a Robinhood, you know, you can't help but, uh, root for the, uh, for the Robert in this, in these cases, a Robinhood figure, I guess, I don't know. So one of the, one of the oldest, oldest example I think Mexico has of this kind of phenomenon of rooting for the, uh, for the, I won't say bad guys because I think Mexico is beyond good and bad right now. There's a, there's a devil's on both sides. Um, but one of the first cases of this Robinhood type sentiment was a guy that later on turned into the saint of cartel of, uh, of, uh, traffickers, Maldera, Jesus Maldera. His, his, his, uh, is a folk saint in Mexico that came out of Sinola. You see him depicted as a, as a man well dressed with a mustache, usually carrying around money bags or weed on his bottom of them, like in these statues that they have of them. Um, they call them El Santo El, El, El, El, El, El, El Santo, called Galito or the hanged saint, basically. Um, he was, uh, he was abandoned, abandoned that lived in, in, in the status in El Lola back when, you know, um, turned to the century, Rich Land owners used, uh, some of the rural roads to go in and out of the area. And he would rob them, you know, just like Robinhood would, you know, um, he would rob them and, uh, he was known hard to get, you know, he, uh, he would, he would know his ways around the, uh, the rural area. So he would escape these, uh, these, uh, government troops that were after him. So he became legendary, legendary band, eventually a government got tired of his shit. He tried to rob a rich, uh, which, rich land owner somewhere out there and he got, uh, shot in the process and boomed it. He hit himself in the, in the hills. You knew he was going to die. So he told one of his friends to basically turn him in. It was, I'm not, I don't think I remember clearly, but 10 gold coin reward on him. So 10 gold coins were so he said to his friend, you know, turn me in and get the, get the money, give it to the, give it to the towns people. And well, that's the legend. Um, he was caught. He was hung and he was, they, they, there was that in order for him not to be buried. So just let him rot. Um, eventually his bones, uh, made it to the ground and the towns people one by one put a rock over his, over his remains. There was a mount of rocks or eventually, uh, people started praying to his Anima solar, which is basically this, this, this, this, this, this, soul that's stuck in purgatory type, I believe that a lot of Catholics have, um, they view, view people that died in justly like that, uh, as a, as a link or as a way to, you know, ask for favor or ask for, uh, for, you know, intervention. So he started granting miracles. And there's a big shrine to him in, in, in, in, in, in, you know, law and, uh, you go there and you'll see, uh, pictures of some of these, traffickers in the US with their big trucks and their big houses and like, thank you, my better day for, for, for granting me this miracle, you know, I think that is an interesting aspect of the, the, the psyche in Mexico, this, uh, almost rebellion against authority or government that we have in us. Um, and specifically higher in places where people don't have a lot of opportunities, you know, the reason why some of these criminal groups are so large and so powerful in Mexico is because we have a lot of youth. We have a lot of expendable youth bodies that have absolutely no opportunities other than going to work with some, with some of these criminal groups out there. Right. So they start working for cartels as young as like 11 or 12, don't they? Yeah, you can, you can work them in the fields and then they turn into the coconus. Yeah, you'll see 13, 14 year olds with a, with a cell phone in a radio on the rooftops, you know, their eyes and ears. There's no way you can get close to any of these towns that are car, trail control without them spotting you from a mile away. Uh, you'll get, uh, then you'll, then we'll be able to write a motorcycle. So now they're following around military, uh, convoys in a city so they can report back of all their movements. So it's, and then you'll get an AK and you'll be in back of a truck or you'll get a gun and you'll get a task with going to shoot somebody. You know, this is, and the dream they used to have was through music. You would hear about the exploits of this, this guy, this cartel guy would hear Corita about this guy. You would hear, you know, stories about this other guy. You would, you would see a Mexican B movie in VHS about, you know, so and you would get inspired. But now we have Narcos Mexico. We know we have a bunch of these online series related to them. Now we have TikTok. Now we have Instagram. Now we have a lot of of things that will give us, give you the window into some of these lifestyles and like, I want to be that, that's the way to get out. That's the way to give my family what I didn't, uh, what I didn't have. You know, this is the way I guess this is the lottery ticket. Although, it's like the easiest way to get out of poverty, right? I mean, it's, it's the way, you know, the way it's the way there's no other option. So in some places in Mexico, there's no other options. So where you said you were born in Tijuana, where you do one, where you raise a young child there, or wherever you want to cut the one and to cut the, so basically the two municipalities that are joined. Yeah, we had a ranch with a pig farm on it. So I would go back and forth between the city and this pig farm area. Is there like a key moment you can remember or reflect on in your life where you ever made a choice, like to go in that direction or where you had a choice to, to enter that world? Yeah. I mean, again, when I was my, my teenage years were in the late 90s in Tijuana, where the whole, uh, not go junior phenomenon was happening in that part of the world. Not go juniors were basically middle class kids being, uh, brought into cartel activity. I think at that time, the Ariana Fusz cartel was the main cartel in that area. So they were, they were basically bringing the Tijuana was thriving. It, uh, it had poverty in it, but it also had a very big middle class population. And they saw in this mental class population opportunities for them to infiltrate regular, regular industry, to utilize some of the sons and, and, and, and, and kids that some of these families that are well off, uh, to gain entry into industry gain entry into, uh, transport, gain entry into means of moving across the border through, uh, regulator legal means, uh, by utilizing transport companies and stuff like that. So, you know, I saw friends in mind in that, uh, in that timeframe that went off to work for some of these criminal groups, uh, and saw them go from not being able to, and I was a skateboarder back then, you know, that was my thing. I played in the punk band. I think, I think a lot of that mentality that I got from that culture kept me, kept me out of it. Uh, but some of my friends left that behind where some of my friends were never part of that whole kind of culture counterculture type of thing. So you see, I saw them go from, you know, driving around, uh, you know, beat up a Hyundai, Hyundai Excel to then showing up in a ram, Dodge Ram, a brand new Dodge Ram sport, uh, sport sport sporter one with blue and a stripe going down the middle of it and then showing them they're showing me their AKs, you know, at, at, at, at, uh, at, uh, at, uh, sweet parties, you know, about the old for lightnings. Yeah. Remember those that the old school F 50 lightnings? Yeah. I mean, you would see these, these guys go from nothing to everything, you know, they, and they would come and like, hey, you had to check this out. My understanding there wearing dickeys, uh, wearing airwalks, uh, and people, you know, my, uh, blind skateboard that, that's tails were all worn down because that's, you know, I've been riding around all this, uh, all this time and independent trucks. So people know that I'm legit. I'm just talking about my board. Um, but I'm sitting there holding this and these, these guys show up and they're like, walk out of this car wearing, you know, Italian stuff on them, you know, clothing and boots and flashy, you know, monies everywhere and women are there and it's like, what the fuck am I doing? You know, if you have these moments of like, where am I going, you know, uh, but there was, uh, there was a specific place I used to hang out. Uh, it was a, it was a straight street and everybody on that street, all the kids went to work, went to work in the, in that industry, you know, and I remember when I was active. street and everybody on that street. All the kids went to work, went to work in that industry. You know? And I remember when I was active, it almost became like this list that I would go down because I kept finding them in murder and executed scenes. You know, a lot of these kids that I remember from that time, all of a sudden, are found in pieces over here. There's another kid that's found dead over there. Their houses were fucking raided and burned. And you saw this whole generation of people just get eaten. I think there was one night when we found 12. 12 kids ranging from 17 to 28. Just tied up beaten, tortured and strangled and shot some of them. Uh, in one night, 12. And going through and looking at them and seeing, I think I know that guy and some of our other guys that were there, like I think I know him. And these were kids, you know? And it's, they were part of this machine that was trying to gain control of that part of the, that part of the country to control the port of entry into the largest drug market on the planet, which is California. And that's why they're dead. You know, do you see an end to this in in the future? Like even if it's the long-term future or our cartels forever just going to be a part of Mexico? That's an interesting question. And I have something that I thought I could consider like we talk people talk about fully legalization or decriminalization of some of these substances across the board. Um, there's, uh, there was a moment in a time when some of these criminal groups only focused on moving narcotics across the board. I mean, you've, you, we found seen a long car with the activity all the way in Europe and Northern Africa and Southeast Asia, you know, they're, they're everywhere. You know, it was a time and place when that was their only means of of money making. But now they're local drug market giant local drug markets in Mexico as well. So you can decriminalize things in the United States, but that's not going to end anything in Mexico. So that's an aspect that that is no longer just like it's Mexico is no longer just a drug route. It's also a giant drug market itself that is feeding a lot of these criminal groups. So unless it's going to be a like a regional decriminalization of narcotics of all kinds to, to, to, to regulate that, that's not going to be an issue. We already saw the legalization of marijuana in certain parts of the United States. And all that, the old, the old that did is it turned marijuana fields into poppy fields. That's what happened. So they just, you know, shifted or adapted. The reason why they started putting fentanyl in the, in the, uh, in the poppy and the, uh, heroin was that a lot of these places where they were planting these poppy fields were already leached as far as nutrients. And they didn't, that, that wasn't their industry. So the potency of this, uh, lighter colored heroin was low. So, you know, this is kind of legalization of pot in places like California was kind of around the same time that the, the prescription opiate epidemic was was kind of peetering out in the United States. So it was a, like a perfect storm, you know, you started seeing these marijuana fields now turn into poppy fields and people started putting, you know, an extra kick, uh, fentanyl into the, into the heroin. And it became the product. Is it the fentanyl cheaper? Yeah. I mean, it's a, it's a time dependent. So during COVID, it was not cheaper. Oh, okay. Because the shutdown, although a single cartel was the one that was getting most of it, I think there was a case of single oil cart, actually smuggling some of the fentanyl from the West into Mexico to load their drugs. But it definitely gave it a kick, you know, I mean, as far as whatever potency heroin had coming out, coming from now there, the, added the fentanyl in it and just trying to, and not only drugs, but isn't the cartel also involved in like lots of other main industries, like even if like we have a Ford factory down there, isn't the cartel somehow like doing any major industry in Mexico is either in some way, shape or form financing criminal groups around it by paid protection schemes, by racketeering, a racket related to robberies inside of some of the mining industry, for example. Oh, yeah. And my, you know, um, feeding some of the drug habits in the communities around some of these industries. They have their hand in human trafficking, they have their hands in regular industry. There's been a few tequila companies that later were found out to be owned and operated by, by families that are attached to some of these criminal enterprises. So yeah, I mean, it's the, the interconnectivity of the United States in Mexico as far as all of these, these illicit activities, the whole aspect or concept that Americans have of this is a problem that is out all the way out there in Mexico doesn't touch us. It's like I think about is there a time in the future where like the cartel could just evolve into it's now the government, like, well, that's some of these leaks that we're going to start making our own rules, like we're going to, we're going to develop our new constitution of the cartel. The reason why you're seeing so many political candidates being assassinated in Mexico right now, is because that's, that's what they're already doing. You know, they're already, they already have their candidates. They already have their governors. You think the governor of Sino-Law can be the governor of Sino-Law without the Sino-Law cartel saying that he's going to be the governor of Sino-Law. I would bet now. So that's an example. Okay. That's an example of that. And the Mexican military doesn't work with the marina, but the Mexican Marines, you know, they don't work together. So they don't trust each other. So if, and members of the federal government don't trust each other in that way to work together in conjunction, something's at a very high level wrong or broken, and they themselves are admitting that they are compromised in a way. So when you ask if the cartels will one day govern, they are already in a way criminal groups are already in a way governing large sex and segments of Mexico through influence. That's already happened. Because one of the presidents labeled them terrorist organizations, right? So the, I think that the, the, the, the, people will think back on Trump talking about the, the fact that these groups would be labeled or the possibility of labeling cartel organizations as terrorist organizations. And this happened after the, the massacre of American Mexican American Mormon Mormons in, in, in Sonora. There was a mass, there was a massacre over this, this family group in Sonora. Now there's a bunch of stories out there as far as if they were involved in cartel activities or not. If they had some sort of a connection to any of that, you know, conspiracy theories abide out there as far as that. I'm not here to say exactly what the motives were. I know that it was a bunch of women and children in cars that were basically shot and burned alive. You know, that's what I know. I know that they were Mexican Americans. They had American passports and they had Mexican nationality. So they were, they had both national allies. When that happened, uh, there was also this surge of the migrant care bans going on as well. And this was at the beginning of the Trump, kind of the Trump administration's uh, efforts and also we had a, a, a new leftist president in Mexico, who was utilizing all the anti-American sentiment. Just a little pass. Yeah. It was utilizing a lot of the American, anti-American sentiment that, that Trump himself created as a political pressure point, you know, uh, so when the migrant care ban happened and all these people moved through the country, uh, towards the border, Trump, uh, was trying to figure out a way to pressure the Mexican government to reinforce its own southern border. And one of the ways that he put political pressure on them was to put this thread out as far as the United States labeling cartel organizations as terrorists organizations, whichever happened. It just made the threat, you know, it was used as a political pressure pressure thing. I want that mean if he labeled the cartels as terrorists. It means that anybody supporting them relating to them harboring them, working with them, financing them, moving their money or anything of that nature would now be fair game for the US military to go after. I think, uh, think of Saddam Hussein and what happened in Iraq when that happened and the, uh, that, but Iraq had a lot of resources that we wanted there. What would the US gain by going in an invading Mexico? Well, we have most of the line of lithium on the planet, underneath the same place where all those moments were, uh, really, if you want to talk about resources, Mexico has a lot of resources, not in, I think it's main resources that people, you know, but, uh, there's also a lot of had this conversation with a, with a former CIA engineer and I asked him this question. He said he said the biggest incentive for any country is, um, to improve its GDP, to grow its GDP. Revan is resources and money. Yeah. What will we gain by doing that to Mexico? That was his question. Uh, most of the mind of lithium on the planet is the number one deposit of lithium, I think. Right. That's it's what's the biggest, mindable deposit of lithium on the planet, I think. And if you see what has happened to other South American countries that have lithium, um, that has had, had regime changes recently in the recent history, you would see some of the influence of the United States have had some of these regime changes. Um, South America is going to the left and this, this, this sentiment against the United States is prevalent throughout the Latin America right now. When, when the, uh, when that threat was made of labeling cartels as a terrorist organization, it moved whatever, whatever, whatever apparatus was there to fortify the southern border to admit the whole policy that United States now had as far as them saying, Hey, I know you're coming here illegally. You know, you wait in Mexico while you wait your turn, but in Mexico. And the only reason all that happened was because of some of the political pressure that happened with that threat. Now think about it, you label cartel organizations, terrorists organizations. Now do they meet that definition? Are they politically motivated? You see all these political kind of skaters, ass and agents say yes. Right. Um, do they have an ideology that they want to put forth? They're, they're the, they're the heroes in their own story. So there's an ideological ideology there. There's some certain cartel groups and leaders in the past that have actually turned themselves into saints in some parts of Mexico. There's a, there's a, the case of a cartel member they nicknamed the Omaso loco who turned himself into like a crusader type saint in the meat statues and trying to himself out there. So there's clearly some, uh, some, some of that to be said about some of these organizations. Um, they utilize assassination, murder torture and, and terror, terror, terror related tactics that did to further their, their, their, uh, their intentions as far as what they're, what they're working on. A lot of the ISIS highly produced, uh, videos of executions and stuff like that that came out. Uh, back then, we're actually influenced by some of the narco vlog and execution videos that the cartels had. So you really, it's like even there. There's like a, you know, they, they've been influencing that type of stuff. Now, I, I consider that they meet every single definition of that, uh, of that terminology. I don't think they will be labeled that because that means that the United States will have to, uh, we'll have to fight that battle on both sides of this border. You know, if they cartel, cartel organizations or label a terrorism organization, it means that any industry government or people that are harboring, uh, helping, aiding, supplying all of that will be fair game. And I think there's a lot of that industry and stuff like that in the United States as well. And there's a lot of political and health and create terrorist organization. The US government not being too, for, uh, for our sided with their, or their foreign policy, specifically in Mexico is probably fair to say. Well, I'm just looking at what happened in, in, uh, Iraq and Afghanistan. So you use, like somebody does not from here. And I don't know a lot about that war, um, but, uh, the fact that you were attacked by a bunch of Saudis and Egyptians. And then you, you, you went off and, you know, took down the Iraqi government and the, uh, and I was looking at it now and seeing the Taliban back in power. Right. That, that's, that's an interesting, that's an interesting lesson for other countries that are looking to the US where solutions, like the lesson is learned by the international community specifically your, your neighbors down south, like we don't, like Mexico doesn't want the US and Mexico to intervene or come as a savior. That's, that's not in the mind. That's no longer in the headspace of most people down there, which again, it's, you talk about looking for solutions and stuff like that. It's, it's hard to, to come up with any sort of solution that doesn't involve a bottom up transformation of Mexico that includes its people, you know, if you want to talk about true change, I think it comes from a grassroots effort from the people in Mexico that doesn't include the government and doesn't include the military in Mexico because I think, and this, these recent leaks of documents have shown that they have are completely under equipped and under overwhelmed by this problem down there. It seems like if you could just alleviate all the fucking bloodshed and violence and brutality in these cartels that you could make shit way better. Do you see any sort of way to just fix the problem when it comes to the killing in the murder? Like if you could legitimize them somehow or give them some sort of power, like, look, stop the killing, stop the murder. Let's make this, let's make this work. Keep the cartels, lose the death. It's interesting that, you know, the, the drug war that was kicked off by the president of the Ypres Calderon, chopped off the heads of certain leadership in, in some of these criminal groups, which basically meant now one group is to, right, this group over here now has a vested interest in attacking this one. So it basically was basically kicking a beehive and not having a be suit on is the, the analogy that I want to give it. I think whatever, whatever options we have had of pacification I don't know what to call it, are gone. I think these, these groups are fractured in like similar cartels are fractured entity. I mean, they have killings going on between their members. You see places like Baja and Dehwanah specifically where you have one side fighting the other for a control of the local drug market. You, the most of the murders that happen in Dehwanah are related to local drug sales, to their killing each other's sales points, people, right. And then you see some of these criminal groups that are no longer able to maintain their organization through trafficking means. So they start going into local extortion, going into, abduction for ransom, going into people trafficking and going into other sites that have things in making the worse and worse and worse, the situation worse and worse and worse. And all we have to combat that in Mexico was a government that is in complete denial about the fact that it every five years, six years where a president comes in, all the stuff that was done before gets completely discarded, even if it was successful, demonized and that all that is a bad. Now we're going to do this new thing. An example of this current president Lopez over there. And again, I'm not to the left or the right of political distractor. People want to say that I am to the right or something like that. I want to smoke a joint and take mushrooms at my gay best friends wedding with a gun on my hip and I don't want the government to come in to say, those are my political views, right? You can't put a calendar on in a box. No, I mean, I'm cool. I'm cool. Everybody wants to live their own life. I'm fine. I'm about small government. I'm about responsibility. You know, if there's one thing I would change in the world, it would be to declare the ability and the means to protect yourself and your loved ones as a human right. And that would mean firearms. Right. That would mean to be able to take that responsibility for yourself because in places like Mexico, that that's that's not available to people. So the people want to see my politics. That's pretty much it. There's it's about responsibility and about being able to do that for yourselves. The president right now in Mexico is doing this call. They can call that Guadalajan from Masian. And he's being he's highly popular as far as the the the masses. To the right of the political spectrum down in Mexico, there's the conservative people that that have done a horrible job at governing Mexico. And it's clear now because of the complete disdain that the populace has towards the they have no political candidates that's going to rival anything that the I'm just wondering a little bit over there is going to put forth as far as the next person that's coming into the presidency in the next two years. So but the main thing that the the current administration does is criticize that right for their handling of you know, the drug war, criminal, the drug policy and all these things. And they're doing exactly the same things that they the past administrations have done, which is basically militarized the police that militarized the counter cartel activities. Go after go into a fragmented effort against all cartel organizations out there favoring some not favoring others. And the main thing that they promise was to create a civilian police federal policing organization across the country, which they didn't. They basically changed the uniform of the military from green to white camouflage and put a military member in charge of this new police group, which now the federal police is gone. All these guys who had a lot of training, a lot of the counter counter narcotics, operational skills and and experience are gone. Where are they? Where are they? This massive people that work for that institution? Where are the skills? They're probably at work somewhere else, right? A lot of these a lot of these criminal organizations are recruiting somewhere else. So they're probably somewhere currently working against our best interest. So where are they? And this this is basically us shooting ourselves in the foot again. When I left a job where I was the same thing happened. We the group that I worked with and some of the people in the leadership that I worked with did an amazing job in and in Baja. We took the Tijuana specifically off the most dangerous that he lists on the planet with the work that not only we did, but some of the local government did there. We were given a clean clean slate to try and figure that out. And when that ended, political rivals came into power and everything was vilified and demonized and all of us were all the villains, right? Because there's a case of systemic amnesia that happens every five years. So it's going to happen again. Things are really bad right now in Mexico as far as as far as control that some of these organizations have over vast amounts of the population. The leaks that just came out this walk of my leaks that just came out that basically put bare all of the mistakes that this current administration has had and also past administrations have had how it taints all of their hands from Felipe Calderon to the current administration. How the military is completely under prepared and ill-equipped to fight this problem and how they they're holding on to the responsibility and the power that was given to them by letting them go out of their barracks and do this stuff on the streets to try and gain control of it. We just had some legislation pass that's going to put them on the streets even for like five more years because they were trying to be put back into their military barracks. Now they're involved in creating a hospital, creating airports, trains, they're trying to create this whole, they're involved in all this infrastructure work down there which is making a lot of people some money. So you see all this systemic problem basically cycling and people are fighting as far as the political left and political right when there's the same problem is just repeating itself just under a different banner. So it sounds just like the United States but with different issues. Yeah I mean that division is what it is. God. We never explained it but what were you doing specifically in Baja? I was a member of a state organization that's a start as a state organization basically it's an attempt in Baja to Americanize police forces. It's a modern police force that they attempted to create. They were successful in some of it and some of it basically the initial efforts of it. We were put through FBI background checks or backgrounds where checked financials, houses, it's put through a paramilitary style training regiment and we were basically used the tip of the spear basically to work against some of these cartel organizations in the area. When I started the federal police was were a soldier stressed in gray and they would ride around the back of the truck with us. It's funny now that the soldiers are dressed in white and the same thing happened. They're riding in the back of the truck. So I was part of that organization for 12 years. I did a lot of stuff in that organization from working in conjunction with federal agencies, the military. Sometimes I would get embedded with the military units because they would know their way around because the way the military works in Mexico, if you join the military in one part of the country they send you to another. Sometimes these specialized military units were doing counter narcotic operations, car or car tell operations but they didn't know their way around. So we would have to have us as guides in some of these areas. So I worked with some of these mixed groups basically doing some of those jobs in that area. Not just in Baja. I worked in other parts of the country. Also the US, I got to do a lot of executive protection and body guarding with some high-level people including the governor of Baja and actually got to work here in the United States protecting him and his family. Oh wow. So that's another aspect of some of the work that I did. That led me to get exposed to American military training. We did some time in Coronado and actually trained with some of people in NSW and NCIS. So I remember getting this feeling or this taste of what we could be as a law enforcement and what our military could turn into if we had the backing of our government and if we had the confidence and faith of our people. But we don't. So I did that for 12 years until it became completely unsustainable for me. What I mean by that is I could no longer do that job without being compromised as far as you know my person. I was never I was never on the take in any way, shape or form like in people that doubt that you know I currently have a contract with the federal government and they look at my background before I I could get any of these. So I trained federal agents in the United States and have in the past. And I left that job with nothing basically you know. There was a there was a moment where I was basically brought into the office after after most of that situation was ended and I was offered either to work for a team or not and I just resigned. And I had the opportunity that not a lot of people have of coming to the United States through marriage. So I had a marriage I went married in American and came to the United States. I'd never made envision myself to come to the United States and living up here like I was married for a few years down there. And our plan was to live in Mexico. It's you know it's not not expensive. We figure it out. Never in my wildest dreams that I imagine I was going to leave that job alive or or not just do that for the rest of my life. But it became less and less sustainable until it just became like corrupted at the highest levels. And you know when I was up here going through my immigration process and finally finalizing that I remember seeing the arrest of Martina Luna Garcia. The guy that was head of counter cartel operations for the federal government when I was active in that he's up here in the United States on cartel charges. And this is somebody that was rewarded the FBI recognition and like the government was saying this is the best guy out there. And he was the guy that was in charge of of overseeing the organizations that would keep us honest you know the people that would go and put us through a polyref examinations every every year you know or something would happen they would you know evaluate us and investigate all of us. And all of a sudden you know that's that this is our boss and now he's under arrest of your cartel charge. How many times did you get approached when you were doing that many times? And what what are their tactics to do in that? They try to like blackmail leverage like what do they do? Through others through other people that are working in the same organization as you basically you'll get approached by people inside. Okay. And there's a culture in Mexico of you know you don't want to tell on people. Right. You know and it is understood that there's people in there that have there on the day and there's people that are not on the day. So you just got drive-in nice cars living in nice houses. Yeah people suddenly get a jine house and you arrive at work in a hammer H2. There's a there's a there's a and people that there's there's some people out there going to listen to this that work with me and they're not going to let me lie about this. There was a there was a guy that showed up to work one day in a yellow hammer H2 and everybody there was like what the fuck? He was later later let go of the job and he got into some shit and each two. And everybody there was like, what the fuck? He was later, he was later to let go of the job and he got into some shit and arrested and all this type of stuff. But at that time I was working for as a as a bodyguard for one of the directors of the of the group that I used to work with. And I remember him looking out the window and being like, it looked back at me and I was driving around a a sunfire, a planet. I think it's a planet's un-fight. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I know a car talking about. She had he asked the car, you know, but that's that's what I could afford on that salary. And as I arrived, it arrives and that car. You know, I was basically driving a loaner car from my it was my brother's car and he loaned me that car because my truck was all fucked up. And this guy just shows up in this car. It happened regularly or just getting we would change our phone numbers every now and then just to, you know, for security. And my phone would always get, you know, somebody would call me and threaten the people that I was working with. Hey, tell your boss that he's going to fucking die. It's like, shit, who's that? You don't even want to know. You know, our information, our emergency contact, contact numbers and then personal information found in photocopy form at a safe house somewhere, you know, and all of us having to get a call and like, hey, your information was found somewhere. We were everything around, you know, it was a constant thing. And also, there was a lot of cases where you would approach people and they were clearly more of them than there were of us. And he would have to just, you know, stand, stand down or stand back or getting a call from high up and say, whatever you're going to, we had don't go. Okay. There was a lot of that. What were the guys thinking that would show up like the guy driving an H2? Like he must have known that everybody was obvious, right? I mean, to when that happened, I remember everybody was like, it's obvious. But it was at a weird moment in that institution's time where we didn't have a lot of backing. We didn't have a lot of people basically looking out for everybody's interest. We were kind of compartmentalized and these guys over here were doing what they were doing. These guys over here were doing what they were doing. It was true throughout it's throughout my time there where we had people that we knew who we recognized, who was cool to work with and who was not doing shit. And we recognized who wasn't. There was a, there was a very influential man that came and was in leadership during some time when I was there. His name is Lieutenant Colonel Lizola, very famous character in Mexico. One of the, one of the most famous lawmen in Mexico, basically. He had a documentary done on him. And he was, yeah, I've heard of this. Uncorruptible dude, I'm saying, you know, I'm sorry, not dude. He's still out there and I'm probably going to talk to him pretty soon. He came out of the military. He's a, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, to the end of the coronet. You know, it's a little tenant colonel. He came out of the war college. Amazing man. Fearless. When you talk about like superhero characters, like, like these, these, these men that you meet that are supernatural. He, that, that has to be one of them for me. The first, uh, the first time I, I met him, uh, he came to Tijuana to take control of the institution that I was in, that I was in, the, the organization that I was in. And, uh, the guy that I was working with as a party guard said, you're going to drive him around. So I go over and I introduce myself. He looks at me, he looks at my equipment. He looks at all the stuff like, he looks at my firearm and things that are on it. And it says he, he says who, who, uh, who got you this equipment. It's like, I did. How'd you pay for it with my salary? Do you like this job? So yes, uh, what, what don't you like about it? I wish we had more support. I wish you had more training, I wish we had more equipment, and I wish we had better firearms. And he just nodded. And then I got into a car with him and we started patrolling Tijuana. The first night he was active. Um, you would walk out of the car and straight into shit. You know, and I was supposed to be guarding him and I was like, sorry, you can't look kind of shit. What are you walking into? I think it's got a cartel members being stopped somewhere. And I could just surround him. You would just walk in and I was like, why are you like who you're working for? Like this man was fearless, you know, he was a fearless man. It's several assassination attempts on his life. Several like they tried to poison him. Is that something that the like when you walk into those situations like that, like you explained him walking into just a group of cartel guys. And he was fearless. Is that something they can sniff out very easily? Can they sense people's fear and they take advantage of that? Yeah. I mean, they sense that people are not being too sure about what they were doing or or like, oh, who are these guys? Are they who they say they are? Is who are they calling? Who did they call before we stopped them? You're watching your back. He would stop some suspicious people and you weren't have to put people on the sides of the road pointing got both ways in case you would get ambushed by somebody trying to rescue them for some for something like that. But he changed a lot of the ways we operated. He basically turned us into a counter insurgency in a lot of ways. He started developing these, these nucleuses or cells of people that would move around the city at all hours of the night and operate. And we were nobody knew what's going on. They would just move around the city and he would keep some of these groups on edge because where these guys come with, they know that we don't know. He got us better firearms. And remember we had one AR 15 and in two through three and one in nine millimeter in the armory. And that's what we were roll with every night. Some of the some of the cells that I would work with at night. That's what we had as far as as far as, as far as to arm ourselves. We were moving five, six man strong groups. Then all of a sudden all of us were carrying around G3 assault rifles and G36s and we had the full backing of the military. And now we were a thing to be feared. And we were operating very much almost an again counter insurgency way against some of these groups. And we had the backing of the government at that time. So they were pretty behind his efforts. We changed a lot of stuff in there. We changed a lot of it. I think one of I remember the first thing that I kind of noticed is that he had a selection process as far as who was going to be in charge and he put to standards in front of us. So it was no longer who you knew or who your compadre was as far as if you wanted to be in leadership now you had to I had to prove yourself. Uh, a dental ass though, you know, lasted a few years and he was moved. Uh, he was, uh, he did some great work in Tijuana. He was then he was a police chief of the Tijuana Police Department for a while as well. He was the one that disarmed the whole of the police department in Tijuana, which was insane. The police, Tijuana was basically without an armed police force for a few weeks because of him. How did you how did that happen? He had the military with a oh, shape surrounded them with the military and they said, give the guns up, specifically he wanted those guns to go through forensics because a lot of them were being utilized as the murder weapons because they were a lot of the municipal police department in Tijuana was on to take not only undertake, but they would be utilized by some of the cartel forces to move drugs around and perform hits. Um, he did such a good job that he was then sent by the federal government to take leadership of the police, uh, precinct in Juarez. And he did the same out there. You lowered the violence out there with the same approach he took in Tijuana. Um, politics change, you know, uh, amnesia comes in. So he was on his way out of Juarez and he was with his, uh, the one of his kids and he was shot in the back and this is the last assassination attempt and lost to the use of his legs. Jesus, when that happened, you know, all of us were like, it, uh, to the people that knew him and that worked with him and, you know, it was, it was kind of hard. Um, but then he came back. He came back with a with a vengeance and he politicized. He started, he wanted to be the, uh, the municipal president of Tijuana. So he's made the run on the office of that three times now, I think really, yeah. Uh, I held a political rally for him at, uh, at my family's house. Uh, where does he live now? He's, uh, he's around. He's in Mexico, but he's in Mexico. Yeah. But he's, he's hard to find right right for good reason. Uh, but he's, uh, you know, if, if there's anybody that people should look at as far as like, I don't think that big Mexico's lost or I think, uh, there's nobody out there to trust or nobody out there to kind of look at, they should look at him. I think he's this, he's what we need. This is where as a leader in Mexico right now, he's, uh, not only proving himself as a, uh, the leader as far as some of these problems that we have in Mexico, but he's also, uh, they, there's a reason why they try to kill him so many times. It's because he couldn't buy him off. That's the reason why they try to kill him so many times. Um, what was the most optimistic point of your career working in Mexico, doing this stuff, working on these, on these counter-narcotics operations or what was like the most successful point in your career where you thought like, like I'm working for something that's greater than me that could actually fix this country. And then at what point did you lose hope? Uh, I remember this, uh, it was a almost a joke every night as far as how much bodies would find. Like every night, there was three over there, five over there, six over there, 12 at one night, shoot out in the middle of the day. Um, I, I remember coming to this point during some of the time that I was actually working at the bodyguard for the governor of Baja towards the end, where I was sent to the police academy for retraining and during that retraining process that we got, we were basically told to tone it down a bit. They said, you're militaristic approach or this, this sense that you're still in this war and doing this job that you used to do is not what we need anymore. We need more community policing. So you need to chill out. And then we were shown some of the numbers and how the state itself was actually more peaceful than it was a few years back and how some of the work that we did made a difference. And now we were being told to chill out basically. So martyrs were down. And some of the things kind of pacified or calm down. You know, if you want, I was known along around the most dangerous city list on the planet. And I had like, I was like, I had this moment of well, it worked. Um, but then, you know, then it came back with a vengeance and it's been back for a few years now. Um, people forget there's a short memory in Mexico, I guess. And what was, what was done correctly for a while was forgotten or suppressed or pacified. Uh, you know, they, they saw no wolves. So they shot all the guard dogs basically is what I kind of gathered from there, the political, um, efforts down there. Uh, when I was when I was coming out of that experience. And, uh, it wasn't whatever was successful, wasn't popular anymore because it was, it represented a path administration. What was it like leaving? Was it difficult to get out of there? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's, I've invested my twenties to it. My, my, my life, my, my body to it, you know, there's a few teeth missing. And my nose is a pretty, uh, good example of some of the shit that went on as far as that work. Um, some of the shit I saw is stuck with you transformative, you know, um, I had this, notion that I was going to die in that job, you know, uh, I don't think I was going to live there's the 30. Um, but I was okay with it. You know, because I was, you know, I was doing something, you know, I felt like it was doing something. And for people that are involved in the military or that, uh, do work like that in the world, it's never about the politics behind it. You know, the people that went to Afghanistan and are seeing the exit and of that whole conflict and stuff they're not worried about the politics. They were, they were worried about the people they were there with them, you know, they were worried about things mattering life and death, shit mattering at that moment when we're there. So that was, that was similar for me. I wasn't in a far off land. I was where, you know, I was where I grew up. So it really mattered to me. And I was worried about the people that I was with. I was worried about some of the people that I was going to leave behind. Um, when I was, uh, when I was in a command position, I had a few people, the go to school because of the influence that I had. So I left a few lawyers and a few psychologists came out with careers, came out of the time that I was in command down there. So I left it a better place in a lot of ways. I, I, uh, had a lot invested in that. Um, and all of a sudden I found myself in a place where I, you know, being told to either work for one side or the other. And there's no backing anymore. Like, you know, all the people that I mentored, I mentored under were gone or not in a command position. Um, uh, some of the politicians that I work with are gone. It's a different place. So I just made the choice to jump, you know, um, it wasn't easy. It was, I felt a, a sort of abandonment, uh, by the people that were behind me at that time. And also a betrayal of a sort from the government that I gave so much to when I was in this position and I had nobody to look to. I'm still waiting for my severance, they never paid me when I left the job. Um, the, I asked for a license, basically, uh, uh, so to leave the job and come back to it after I did some things, because I was, I was under a lot of pressure and I had a lot of shit going on in my personal life. I wasn't given to me. So it was one of those moments where like, fuck it. And I just fucking, uh, risked everything literally risked everything. I had a two year old at this time and no other means of supporting her. And I decided to say, well, it's either my me being dead and her getting life insurance policy or me being alive and struggling, but figuring it out. So I, uh, I had a lot of threats when I left, you know, like, why are you leaving? This doesn't make any sense. You're, you're having a good salary. Uh, you have a category in the police, basically category. There's a, they would have categories as far as your, your level and how much time you would work there. So I had a good category, I had a very good salary. And why are you leaving? That's suspicious. We were working for what's going on. You know, all the status that I got called, like a bunch of calls, uh, threats, around all my stuff and left. They question your motives, like what you're going to be doing. They could be going to the other side. Yeah. I mean, it's, uh, it's, it's, it was odd, I guess to them and also suspicious. So, but I just can continue on there. So I left, uh, I found myself in the US, uh, during the election of Trump. So that was a unique time, you know, it was an easy at all. Very unique time. It was not easy at all. Um, luckily I had some pretty good people with me, that friends that I've made, uh, on the US side during my time active, helping me out through some of the process of making my way up here. And, um, I found myself in a place where I was trying to forget or leave that shit behind me. You know, leave that whole experience behind me. And then finding out that the only bankable skill that I had was that passed behind me, you know, my experience and I'm a little gabber right here. There you go. It's just a little wearing slowly. Yeah, always that really. So, uh, you know, I find myself in the US and I find myself in the US without what I thought was in and no bankable skills. And that experience is what I was looked out for. I mean, I started doing classes related to some of just a counter abduction, for example, and like what's your experience space? And I'm like, well, you know, I did 12 years here. And they would be like, oh, that's an interesting experience space. Um, and I just realized that, uh, one of the things that I could do as far as changing things was to take that experience and take some of that voice that came from that experience and use it. And you were, it was, you moved for the first time. It was right in the beginning of Trump when he was running for president. Yes. How did you meet Joe? So that was like right during the time you first went on his show. Yeah. So it's like you came straight from here and went straight to his studio. No, not at all. I was going through my process of uh, based on my immigration process. And I got it. It was very complicated. The thing that made it complicated with the election were Trump is that everybody thought that window was going to close for people. So everybody went after it. So a process that would take eight months turned into two years. Um, I started being involved in going off and training people, specifically people that wanted or needed to know some of the things that I mean about moving and operating in a place like Mexico is for personal safety. What to carry, what not to carry, how to social engineer certain things. And I realized that, oh, I have this whole experience space that I didn't know. One of the first companies had hired me in the US was a company called Triple Law Design. It's a clothing company, but they used to run a training wing based out of San Francisco, shout out to those, those people, um, great people, great company. Um, I'm going to start doing training, uh, open classes for people basically there. And they would sell out. And I was like, man, I'm on to something at this time as well. I had a blog that I was running a first off tumblr, then Facebook and Instagram. And I had a lot of people following since I was active when I didn't have my name out there, what I would just blog about some of the stuff that I would see. So my name started kind of being known out there. Was that, did you call it Ed's manifesto? Yeah. So the Ed's manifesto thing, I was actually something that came out of my time in Coronado training with the NCIS guys. And then it's that with you people. Uh, they would see me write down everything in a little black mouse can notebook and they say, what are you writing in your old manifesto? That's where that's manifesto came from. Um, that's cool. So I, I start posting a lot about, uh, Mexico. And then when some of the horrible violence started happening in Mexico again, and, uh, it was at a time when social media and people would cut camera phones and cell phones and videos were more prevalent. And a lot of the people that I used to work with would send me some of this stuff that would they would gather directly from the field. So I started sharing some of these things on my social media platforms and talking about or commentating around that led into me being invited to write for a few magazines and then, um, to talk to the, to the news and to be quoted by a few news agencies and then all of a sudden I would look at my following and I would see different people on my following that were known, you know. Um, he had a, he had a Joe Rogan had a guy on, uh, an author that talked about cartel activities. Was it a Grello? I think, I think it was him. Um, and a lot of people in the comment section said you would have, you know, she would, she would have had to talk about some of these issues. I mean, he was actually working down there. Uh, and, uh, and then he just reached out directly. That's amazing. I got a DM and then I realized that he had been following for a while, uh, not only following, but also kind of like actually legitimately wanting to learn about some of the issues down there. He asked me a bunch of questions and all of a sudden I found myself, uh, I found myself in a studio, you know, um, I think horrible. I did two episodes with him and it's, you know, it was life changing, you know, life changing to be certain. Um, but specifically for me, all it changed was, uh, not more people know about me. Right. But as far as, uh, as far as, uh, it, it changing my life in other ways. I mean, I've been since I came up here, I basically would be on a road, not only training people, but also, you know, learning stuff for myself, you know, go out there and train with other people myself to better myself. And I've been on this weird, you know, kind of pilgrimage to try and figure things out as far as my own healing after my experience down there and kind of how to make sense of all of it, you know? Um, so how long, how long has China been an influence in Mexico? And when did you first find out? Was this happening? Are you aware of this happening when you were in Mexico? Not, not, not, not specifically. I think, uh, there was an arrest of, of a Mexican Chinese national in Mexico, and who had a record as far as the amount of money that was found in his house. Uh, then is she legong? I think I don't, I don't remember the name clearly, but it was a, it was basically somebody that was involved in the pharmaceutical history of Mexico. Uh, Chinese Mexican American, uh, Mexican national, he had over a hundred million dollars worth of cash in his house. The stack was about the height of this table. Um, gold, all you name it is houses, basically this giant money bit. And, uh, the government, the federal government, uh, obviously took this money and, you know, made it disappear. And, you know, he got involved in, in, in some, it's the way that sued the Mexican government. There was this whole case around it, but that was the first sign of public kind of very public sign of Chinese national involvement in some of the issues related to precursors coming into the country. And what the pipeline might look like as far as some of these products and, and, and precursors to create math or construct method in Mexico. And also the proliferation of some of of these chemists, Chinese chemists actually teaching or bringing some of the equipment to Mexico to create some of these substances in Mexico. Some of the first fentanyl, uh, production facilities in Mexico were kind of found around that time. And this is this, the Leopec other on administration era. Uh, so that kind of started being a thing, you know, specifically around math production, not, not fentanyl, but fentanyl started kind of looming in the background. Uh, math production in Mexico. And the quality of math that it was produced in Mexico that was better than anything was being produced, uh, statesite, you know, that things that inspired probably the, uh, that, uh, that series here in the US, the breaking bad, you know, the whole defining these giant crystal shards that were clear and the quality in them, uh, coming from Mexico into the United States. And some of these industrial level laboratories in Mexico kind of popping up and who was showing them how to cook it, how to create in some of the equipment to make it. It was in the precursor to make these were some Chinese source. So that's kind of as far as my on my radar, that's when they first kind of started popping up as a player in Mexico. What is the mode? What do you think the primary motive is, uh, developing and helping produce all this stuff in Mexico and traffic it around the world? Do you think it's financial motivations or that is or something else? So there's, there's no, there's, there's no criminal enterprise in China that's happening without the government knowing the right, right. There's no Chinese mafia moving fentanyl and having an ally, a lot of lines with Mexican cartel that, that, that doesn't exist. That shouldn't really kind of make sense to anybody. Um, so it's impossible to have some rogue organization that's not tied to government. It's impossible for anything coming in and out of China without the Chinese government knowing about it and not doing anything about stopping it. Okay. So it's, that's what I'm saying. Okay. So there's a pipeline of fentanyl coming on a China into Mexico and into United States as well through there, through a lot of ports, probably Canada as well. So there's a pipeline of precursors to make methamphetamine and also to make, uh, to, to, to, uh, fentanyl coming into Mexico and other parts of the world, but specifically in Mexico, that is happening under the watchful out of China, right. This is produced in laboratories, uh, in, in, in chemical pylans in China, then are clearly clearly under a supervision of somebody ups and up there. And there's, there's people have gone out there to report on these things. You know, all you have to do is change a molecule and some of these substances and it's turns into something else. There's people out there manufacturing and making these things and kind circling back and engineering some of these things. But whatever it is, it's coming out of China with Chinese. No, how they know about it. I don't know if they're making money off it and the government's like using it to fund anything, but they know about it and they do not do anything about it basically. That's one part of it. Another part of it is basically all the money that's made off some of these, uh, processes and some of these trafficking and distribution networks goes into, sometimes goes into Chinese money laundering networks and banking networks. Uh, two years ago, there was a news breaking about, uh, Chinese, Chinese banking apps used by Chinese money broker stateside to basically take, uh, money earned from sales and distribution of the United States to go into the Chinese banking system basically disappearing from a US and then materializing in Mexico with another money broker down there. So even in that case, there, there's an involvement, you know, as far as moving money and moving funds from one part to another to another. Now this is a place where people have social credit, you know, right? People are being watched. There's, uh, there's people that can't move on one part of the country to another. Right. This is big brother area. So there's nothing happening there without the them knowing. How is it possible for criminal enterprises to be operating? Big brother area. So there's nothing happening there without them knowing how is it possible for criminal enterprises to be operating completely in the open and utilizing some of these systems that they're completely super-organized and under supervision without the Chinese government knowing about it and knowing what they do or what they do with those funds or where those funds come from. They either don't care or they are seeing that as a way to affect this country and saying, oh, that's a pretty interesting thing that's happening with this whole process. Let's just not do anything about it. Is the United States the biggest country or is it the most affected by fentanyl deaths? Do you know? I don't know about if it's the most affected by fentanyl deaths. I think it from what I see in the amounts of numbers that are being reported. It's clearly that that's killing a major amount of people and in some of the arguments I've heard of trying to specifically disrupt America is that this is happening in a bunch of other countries that no one just talked. There's no one's talking about. There's fentanyl deaths in Mexico. There's a little giant market in Mexico. But that doesn't matter to Americans, I guess, people dying in Mexico from fentanyl over late at death. But it definitely happens. I don't come from the war college. I'm not somebody that's involved in international geopolitics or war scenarios. But if you wanted to affect the United States in a big way, you would, if you can't attack it directly militarily because you guys have, they've spent more than any other country on the planet as far as your military industrial complex. You would tack it in directly. And one of the most indirect ways of attacking it is your youth and influence. I think the fact that the NBA can't say things like Taiwan is a country is mind blowing to me in this that to be living through a day and age when the US when the private entity like the NBA can't have its players say that Taiwan is in a country that the ones that country will get. So you talk about the influence and censorship it's going on. So I think they're very much playing the long game as far as influence in this country. Their pipeline is far as fentanyl. And they're completely passive reactions to banking institutions and monetary systems being utilized to move around money is just a clear sign that they're not looking out for the passengers in the United States. And I'm sure I'm sorry United States is doing the same. Oh, that's just the number of deaths. According to the CDC, 107,000 people in the US died of drug overdoses and drug poisoning in the last 12 months ending in January 2022, staggering 67% of those deaths involved synthetic opioids like fentanyl. Oh, okay. So fentanyl is an opioid. Yeah, some of these deaths were attributed to fentanyl mixed with other illicit drugs like cocaine. See, that's what I don't understand. If you're selling cocaine, why would you mix it with fentanyl? That's just going to kill somebody like fentanyl is the opposite, right? It's a it's insanely cut down. Maybe they're they're small time distributors that are trying to figure out how to, you know, give a kick to their product that is extremely cut down. You know, you want to make more money. You're greedy. It's in the illicit market. So nobody's got a supervisor. Hey, went to buy these drugs. Right. But I'm saying is that if you if you got clientele buying cocaine and it's killing everybody, they're going to stop buying you. This is this is in for more company. They're not worried about being sued or anything. No, but right. But they're worried about making money. They're worried about selling their cocaine, right? They're not apparently. They're not apparently. They don't they don't give a shit. Some of these people don't give a shit. Do you think it's deliberate or do you think it's by mistake? I think it's by mistake. I mean, being able to to give a percentage as far as the mixture, the amounts, people on chemists, some of these guys are getting some of their product from Alibaba through weird underground black market means arriving at their houses and they're just cutting the shit that they're based. Right. Just to make a quick buck. And how you're seeing the change right now is not specifically related to putting it into existing stuff like heroin. Now they're actually involved in manufacturing fake paint paint medication and camouflaging or creating their own packaged pills. So now not even that is safe anymore. I saw that when I was in a forget where I think I was like I forget the name of the town, but it's it's like one of the biggest tourist destination places near Punta Mita. Okay. And what I remember going through town, there's all these far like farmers every single drug, every prescription drug was there. Yeah. Agress, the Alice, bike it in. The white people math is what they call they call some of them with that down there. White people math. Yeah. Basically a lot of stuff is over the counter and even if it hits it over the counter, you can go down there and get a prescription like hey, you need to prescription for it. Okay, where can I get it? And the guy just turns around, you know, and hello, I'm here to do it. You know, that's when I aspect of it down there. It's interesting that there's a giant pharmaceutical industry down there. Should people should question that? Why is there so much, so much, so many pharmacies in the giant pharmaceutical industry down there, it makes you wonder what else are making, you know, behind that car. There are US pharmaceutical companies based on there or operating down there. That's a lot of the bigger ones are mostly mostly Mexican ones that are operating on there. The guys of making similar pharmaceuticals are the major ones for the for the populace that are more affordable. Wow. And right now what you're seeing, China does. With everything else. That's the that's the influence, I guess. But what you're seeing now is the evolution into fake medication and fake pain medication and things that look exactly like prescription opiate, which is fentanyl loaded fake opiates, pain, pill presses being found in safe houses and manufacturing facilities in Mexico, packaging. So why would I risk smuggling a break of something when you can just put it in medication is put in the person crossing the board? So that's that's what you're seeing now as far as an evolution of some of these things as far as the US. So they're sending chemists over here and the cartels are working directly with Chinese chemists and they're teaching them how to manufacture the asylum. That's something that's been documented and to happen a few times. Yeah. That's that's that's already documented and that's happened. Yeah. And that is and how does that benefit these like the sinaloa car to does that just save them money? They had some money saver. I mean, they're they don't have to go to even though that so another thing to kind of think about is for some of these criminal groups in Mexico, they they operate in all the way down Columbia now. But there's there's there's there's factions of the cinelo and in generation cartel operating in Colombia at the source. I mean, they're not taking control of the whole operation, but they're already down there kind of like basically doing this. They can't it over, you know, they're in Northern Africa. They're in Europe, you know, there's network of them that are now trying to find a way into like places like Australia, you know, they're they're they're everywhere. Jesus. As far as they're, you know, if you if they can figure out a way to produce and not depend on anybody that makes it more money, you know, when COVID happened, it was a big hit to some of these groups because it couldn't get access to precursors and fentanyl specifically. It was interesting that you had a cartels that were on the Pacific side that had control over some of the Pacific side ports in Mexico like the new new generation cartel actually grow during this time period because they had access to the Pacific side ports, which led into a route directly to China, even during COVID. They were getting supplied. So that's again, interesting phenomenon of that. But you see this whole proliferation is specifically around fentanyl and kind of cartels and criminal groups moving into manufacturing and creating it for themselves. You know, that's going to be the money maker in the future. So if you can figure out how to basically develop that industry and stabilize it there, it's going to be just a supply wire. What else is China doing in Mexico? I mean, lithium, buying mine, buying. There was there was rumors of them gaining ownership over a Canadian mining company that was actually a Chinese owned company that wanted to get into getting some of those mining lights in the state of the state of Sonora. You know, there's there was a massive exit of American companies during the Trump administration when he was basically, you know, bringing our companies back at whole policy. That didn't affect the economy in Mexico at all because Chinese Chinese interests, Chinese interests, you just move in quickly. So there's a lot of influence as far as China as far as industry in Mexico, big big influence politics in Mexico again is moving far from the US from the US for a lot of reasons. It's popular to be anti-American in Mexico. Really? Yeah. You know, the Ukrainian thing they voted, they didn't, they abstain for voting for the during the Ukrainian resolution thing, you know, during COVID, they got supplied with some of the splitnik, the Russian vaccines. So there was a max code in. Yeah. So it was like, there was this relationship of, you know, pro Russia thing in Mexico. Interesting. For a lot of people in Mexico, Putin seems like, you know, he's kind of like fits into the, into the macho. Well, it's kind of like, it's interesting to hear that I've heard that other people too. And what's interesting about that is how we have the in America, you have this constructed lens of Russia. Like we have our, we're under our own propaganda. We can't see it clearly because the way our government, our media feeds it to us is different than how people in Mexico see it. Yeah. Can you see, do you notice a difference in like the propaganda in the US compared to Mexico on on what the views of Russia are? I mean, I think, I think in a lot of way, I don't know, like, you get the sentiment in Mexico that the Russia is basically trying to unify its, its historical territory. That's the sentiment that, but that's the sentiment I get from a lot of the, a lot of people that I've talked to that in there. And the US is, is basically destabilizing and pushing in pushing its influence in places where it shouldn't. And it's a propping up a corrupt regime, which is a Ukrainian regime that it's currently there. Right. They see it's current president as an American plant. They see they saw some of the troubles that happened there as American backed situations. Yeah. So they see that, again, the whole aspect of the US being like a like meddling in foreign affairs and putting its influence and and supporting things to an extent and then leaving those people behind or abandoning is something that is kind of in the hearts and minds of a lot of people out there. What it, what happened in Afghanistan? What's happening in Ukraine now where you're sending, you know, armaments and, but you're not, you know, you're not going to be there if the Russians actually in get to get to the capital, you know? Yeah, it's like with Ukraine, we're just, it's like an excuse for us to to use up all of our surplus weapons and war machines that we have and be able to test new things for when it does when the time does come that we have to face China. This is like an excuse for us to I think it's an interest. It's an interesting, you know, example of the fact that, you know, Russia wasn't everything it everything they said they were. Right. It wasn't that crazy crazy, but also the US isn't really backing the Ukraine. No, they said it. And also all of this green energy, sustainable energy politics in Europe have made it completely a slave to Russian energy. So, and so that's an interesting aspect of it that people are now kind of realizing that this whole thing about how people were moving green and stuff like we're really not green, you know, they're kind of dependent on this energy, this dirty energy from Russia. And as far as, as far as the visuals of it for other people, including myself, seeing the exit from Afghanistan and what happened to the people that you supported in that country and now they're left to their devices. Right. What might happen in the Ukraine? Yeah. I don't know what's going to happen there. People are celebrating Russian retreats and and people are leaving Russia's Russia's retreating and stuff like that and you see it in the media as a major victory. But then you see the Russian media and they say it's there and then you see some military advisors. That looks like a tactical retreat and they're gathering forces and they're probably going to do an offensive on this side of the country. Right. So you don't know. The fact that some of these weapon systems that are being sent to the Ukraine are showing up a black market, Stinger missiles and remote control guided missiles and stuff like that. That's something that's been documented out there. Some of these things are going to be, I'm going to disappear off that battle field. I know remote control guided missile of that nature might show up somewhere. Do you imagine if one of the cartels got their hands on a nuke? I don't know about a nuke, but they got submarines. Why can't they get a nuke? I mean, I don't know what they would do with a nuclear bomb, but specifically with a remote guided missile, the ability to take down a helicopter which they already done, the ability to take out a plane, which may or may not already happen. It's scary. Capabilities like that are scary. My whole fear is some of the stuff that is being now in the wind, like a rocket launcher, a rocket launcher, two or a lot of things. A 50-cal rifle, which is a civilian grade rifle. I say in some parts, you can buy a 50-cal rifle. My father, my father, my father, my father, my husband, my buddy does bought one. A single one of those rounds somewhere in the power grid. Don't like that big. A single round like that somewhere in the power grid. Right. There's the power grids already going down everywhere in Ukraine. The amount of fuckery, basically, that we can do with military grade equipment that is now out there or with something small, a drone technology. The thing that people should wait for and see is swarm technology related to drones. Cheap swarm technology, militarized in this war field that we're seeing right now in the Ukraine. I think when people see that, that's when we all of us have to really worry about it. What is that? Swarm technology. Basically, utilizing a bunch of drones in unison to attack a specific target. Let's say 100 drones in unison, swarming a specific target. You can have military grade technology trying to take all of them down, but not all of them. One of them will get through, or a lot of them will get through. So imagine that ability, which has already been showcased by China. I think it's already done the public demonstrations with that technology. And it's viable. It's accessible. It's possible. So see some of that technology in the wrong hand. People worry about a nuke. I worry about swarm. Anything about those fucking things that those fighter pilots are seeing off the off those ships off of San Diego. Those, I don't know. Is that cartel technology? It could be. And they have the money to make some shit like that. I don't know. I've seen some where you're sitting in my life. I've seen some weird lights and shit like that too. But I don't know. I don't know what that is. You see them, how they move the fact that the military and some of these pilots are reporting on it. Those guys are, yeah, you want to talk about people that go through a lot of scrutiny? Yeah. I mean, those guys are go through all the crazy things. They just started seeing when they got the upgraded radars on their jets. Like, they never saw before that they all upgraded their radar. Now they're, they were seeing them everywhere. The weird thing about them that gets them, you know, like, I'm, again, I'm not, I'm an Alex Jones. Yeah. But the Mexican Alex Jones. There there's a Cartel alien drones. I worked on that for a while. I got a shout out from him once I was weird. The ability for them to go into the water and also go into like a hail side, which I've seen, you know, evidence of that kind of like done talked about. That's weird. The fact that they interplay what's observing them is also kind of weird. I don't know. I don't know what they are. I have no idea. For me, I don't think they're for me. I don't think they're aliens. Yeah. I don't see that. I don't know. They very much perform or act like drones. Like something you can send like a probe or something like that is what they seem like. I don't know I don't know if there's something in them, but I know something's controlling them. That's what I think. I don't know. I mean, I've tried the day that those things are what are being used for warfare. I can't, I can't fucking imagine. Yeah. I don't know. Again, this is me just, they don't seem like their, they don't seem like war technology. They seem like surveillance. Maybe. Yeah. There's a lot of stuff that's being declassified of them appearing around nuclear. facility. Yes. Yes. And, you know, the, the, the, the historical presence of them as far as mass, people, mass of people knowing about them was around nuclear testing. Right. Yeah. There was more, there was more, there was more UFO sightings during all of the nuclear jet. Yeah. There's a great documentary called the phenomenon and actually show a graphic of like the map of the world. And they show like the timeline where all the nukes were detonated in history. And like the time, the period and time, where there was the most detonated nukes like when we were doing all the nuclear testing in Arizona and shit. Yeah. And the Russians were doing all their nuclear testing. That was the biggest spike correlated in UFO sightings. That's a weird, that's a weird thing. The, the, my, the, my funniest alien related thing I like a lot is that, you know, you go to Egypt, you know, I see aliens made this. You got a Mexico, all those pyramids out there. Mexico. Who says the Mexicans made them? All of us. The Aztecs? Yeah. Well, no, we made those. So those pyramids like kind of hate aliens didn't make the shit. You can see the mortar who she like, yeah, we made that shit, you know, you can see, you can see the hand of man there. Man, there's a lot of fucking pyramids in South America and Mexico. Yeah. A lot of crazy, like temples and pyramids and shit. The interesting thing about some of of the stuff in Mexico as far as a culture or wise. Now, we're, they're very advanced. You know, there's the cradle of culture and, and, and Mexico as far as, you know, the astronomy, math, writing, you know, when the Spanish came, there's this whole misconception that the Spanish took down, Danostitlan, you know, they, they took down the, the, the Mexico empire, the African brothers is going down. That's not true. They came in the allied themselves with all the enemies of the, the, the, their enemies are the ones that took down the number and they were aided by the Spanish, but it was basically an cultural implosion when it happened in Mexico. That's, we took ourselves down in a lot of ways. Interesting thing about the Spanish coming to Mexico and doing that conquest, they were conquest themselves before that. Right. They were coming off the Moorish conquest. So a conquest of people that got liberated went to another part of the world in conquest that another people. Mm hmm. Yeah. My, how my maternal grandmother is from, I think she is a last couple taken ancestry that are the ones that allied themselves with the Spanish when they came. Really? Yeah. Warrior people. They've got finished taking down the Aztec empire and they got on a boat in a place called Bado de Navidad. It's a little coastal town on the Pacific side of Mexico. I went there a year ago. There's a big placard there. This is where the, the expedition to the Philippines went from. So when they got done doing what they did in Mexico, they got on a boat and went to the Philippines to do the same thing. Oh, shit. At some point in history, Mexican warriors fought samurai pirates in the ocean in the Philippines. I want to see a moving thing about that. Wow. That was that happened somewhere in history. I would be, that'd be a cool movie. That would be a cool fucking movie. Holy shit. We have the, uh, Mexico is a, into like a, as far as a place and a lot of the stuff that happens and it happened in Mexico historically and where it is, how it is now, you know, so much history there. The, you know, we're so rich in culture and history. You know, like, uh, you want to talk about old things and I remember going to Boston and somebody while this is this church is from this. Right. And I'm like, that's not old. I've been to, you know, I've been to the, I've, I've stood on top of the, uh, the pyramid of the sun, you know, that's old. You know, when I talk about old things, right? Yeah. And uh, I don't know, I think it's something we forget as Mexicans about how old our culture is, how rich it is and how many times people have tried to destroy it, take it over the deconstructed, suppress it and it's still holding on. I just learned that. El Dia de Los Muertos was based off of, um, the younger driest cataclysm. So like El Dia de Los Muertos was supposed to be a couple days before a crazy, comet impact wiped out civilization. And that's where the stories of like Noah's arcs comes in and that's was like somewhere between 11,500 to 12,500 years ago. So the other little more, those a lot of people considered like a native celebration of some sort that actually came as a nationalistic movement in Mexico during, uh, during a presidency. We had a president down there who, uh, nationalized patrol even did a lot of stuff from Mexico. And part of his, uh, part of his efforts was to create a nationalistic sentiment about the culture in Mexico. So he created the other El Dia de Los Muertos, which is not a native celebration. Actually it is kind of a, uh, created institution or celebration that was wanted to rival some of the other celebrations out there in the world as far as Halloween and something. So it doesn't go all the way back to, to, to, to, to ask that or a hicke culture. But it, uh, it definitely has some sort of influence as far as ways other other parts of the world celebrate and that specific period in time frame. I don't know if I asked anything. Maybe that was Halloween specifically. Maybe probably an old deal of this much as I just thought there was a connection there. Um, anyways, thank you man for doing this. Thank you for the invitation. Fascinating. Where do people find you? If they want to find me, I'm super shadow man on Instagram, but, uh, Edse Man, a Festa underscore at, at, at, at the manifesto underscore. If you want to find me on Instagram, um, I have a website, www.edsemanifesto.com. Uh, you can find out about the training I do classes I do, some of the, um, appearances I have. And, uh, you can also find your way to the Patreon that I have where I kind of put everything related to my personal notebooks, observations, video interviews. And, uh, I have a podcast too. Oh, you do? Yeah. Uh, manifesto radio, uh, manifesto radio on YouTube, specifically focusing on talking to people that have similar experiences and other of the of mine. Um, people that I've met and learned from my first guest was a rapper named Koneko. Uh, he was arrested on murder charges in Tijuana. It was wanted by the FBI back then. And I was part of the organization that, uh, Russia. Uh, and I got to, he was my first guest. Uh, our kids were playing outside while we're talking. So it's a pretty good example of how, you know, time is a flat circle. That's so some of these conversations are on my, uh, on my YouTube channel, uh, manifesto radio. Are you going to get that guy on there who, uh, was the leader of your, your group in Mexico? We're trying to get a, we're trying to get him on, uh, to basically have him, you know, one on one conversation with him. Uh, I can't wait to hear that one. Uh, he is, uh, he's going to run for mayor again. And, uh, if people want to look at an example of somebody that's actually providing hope for people or somebody that could make a change, you know, look him up. Cool. All right. Well, thanks again, man. Goodbye world.