Joe, I'm gonna rock the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Mr. Green, I want you so good. How about you? Good to see you man. Good to see you. What's the latest? You got a book out? I do. Yeah, the paperback of Until the End of Time is out today. Until the end of time. Yeah. That's uh, that's heavy. It is heavy, but it's a big story, but it's one that we have a nice part within. A small cameo. The human species has a cameo, so it's a human story too. Yeah, the human species, uh, what have we been around for what? 300,000 years? 400,000 years? It depends how you define the species, but yeah, that's not a bad number. Some people will go back to a million or so if you go back to early human species, but yeah, and compared to the length of time scales that compose reality from the beginning to the end, that's zero. That's nothing. When you, being a physicist, being a person that really does have a, a much greater grasp of the concept of infinity and of time and of the, that just the length that the universe has existed in its current form. How do you just get through your day and not freak out? Well, it's because my wife says, you know, you got to cook dinner. So I mean, things that you have to actually get done, but it does change your perspective in a significant way because you recognize that the things that we consider to be oh, so vital and important are just as blink of an eye on the cosmological landscape on the cosmological timeline. And it does change the way you approach the world when you pay attention to it. It's hard to always pay attention to it though. Look, I mean, if I'm walking down the street and I'm thinking about quantum mechanics, I'm thinking about, you know, quantum tunneling. I'm thinking about relativity time slowing down when I move right. So if you're in the physics mode, you are living life differently, but who can live that way for more than a moment? Right. Because life is too powerful and it's intrusion on the way you are actually behaving the world. But because of your perspective and because of your education on this, do you feel like almost an obligation to try to expand people's perspective? I'd say that's part of what my goals of life is to do just that. You know, I don't want people to not live their lives the way they have, but I want them to be able to broaden the experience by recognizing that every day phenomenon is a small slice of the way the world is actually put together. And when you can see your life and your experience is just a tiny sliver of a reality, it's like bizarrely strange and utterly wondrous when you understand everything from black holes to time dilation, to quantum tunneling to all that stuff that we have discovered over the last couple hundred years. Yeah, it changes things. Is it a difficult thing to get across to people? Like do you try to think like what is the best way that people are going to absorb these ideas? Because they are so they're not abstract, but they're so outside of the norm in terms of the way people view the world. You kind of like, I know you're concentrated on this, but look at that. Yeah, I mean, the real difficulty is not so much getting people interested. You might think that that's the big hurdle. People say, oh, I don't talk to me about that stuff. It doesn't matter to my life, but that's no. People are very curious and interested in what physics has found. What's hard is getting them to not just take it in, but to take it in correctly so that they don't take the ideas and twist it into something else that suits whatever weirdness they may have encountered in the world. The number of times that I see people take the concepts of quantum mechanics and turn it into utter nonsense. Because they're like, hey, oh, yeah, probabilities. Okay. That describes this quality of my world or the weirdness of time. Yeah, that's why I had this like mine mill with my best friend on the other side of the. That sort of thing. And I don't, I don't fault people for that. These ideas are difficult, but if you ask me what the challenges, the challenges breaking through that and getting people to really understand what it is that we found. And it's weirder than many of the things that the human imagination would go to. But it's harder because it's very specific and rigorous and mathematical ultimately. And that's unfamiliar. Do you think it's the complications of quantum mechanics like the comp? It's that it's so it's such a bizarre field of study that it sort of lends itself being sort of occupied by people like the what the bleep do we know to folks that kind of co-opt it and then spread nonsense. It's exactly right. I mean, that that film is an unfortunate, very good example of people who took the ideas and you served them for their own purpose. Right. I had friends that are in that film who are deeply disheartened by the way their words were twisted. Well, they were tricked. They were tricked. They thought they were doing a documentary on quantum mechanics and turned out to be essentially a cult documentary. Exactly. And so there is a sensibility of that sort which is volitional. That's like a choice. I think that was made. In fact, I think I mentioned to you once with the director of that film had called me to be in it and I was like, well, what are you doing? Because I can tell what there. And then he called me like a year after the film came out and kind of apologized and said you were right. Oh, so he didn't know. Yeah, he didn't know. So, so, but yeah. We should stop just so people that don't know what we're talking about understand what's happening. There is a person in that documentary that calls themselves ramp though that there's they don't explain it in the documentary, but they claim to be like, what is it, a thousand year old? 35,000 year old sage from the lost land of Lemuria, I believe it is, which is like another lost land with Atlantis. They were like at war with Atlantis or something like that. So yeah, it's a pretty deep cult. Yeah. And yeah, I think I mentioned to you once. I actually accidentally found myself at one of their headquarters in, I think was in Washington state gave a talk at a gathering. And it was it was so sad at some level because I saw people searching for truth, but being misled by a charismatic speaker who is basically coming up with this nonsense. You know, and and and so that's one way in which these ideas are you sir, but others it's less it's less by design. It's just more you hear quantum mechanics is weird and then you hear something else is weird and say, oh, that must be quantum mechanics. Because there's this general sensibility that the world is weird, but quantum mechanics is we're in a very specific way. Right. I mean, Schrodinger, Erin Schrodinger wrote down an equation, a mathematical equation that actually quantifies the weirdness in a very specific way that makes mathematical predictions that we can test in the laboratory. So that's not just like, you know, people in their minds coming up with crazy stuff and saying, wouldn't that be curious if that was part of reality. This is stuff that has emerged from careful study. So you know, when you learn that the world evolves according to a game of chance. It's as if no, there's a throw of the dice that determines how things evolve from one moment to the next. That's deeply unfamiliar. We don't go around the world thinking that there's a chance at something bizarre will happen. But there is such a chance in every moment and every experience of your life that chances are so small in the big, every day world that we don't experience these things. But if you were an electron, yeah, you'd be having the weirdness of being two places at once in some sense. You'd have the weirdness of passing through solid barriers. You know, these kinds of curiosities would be in every day phenomenon if you were small as a particle like an electron. That's sort of what lends itself to the woo woo people, right? Yeah, because because when you talk about things being in superposition or you talk about spooky action at a distance, you talk about these bizarre things that they sound like magic. Yeah. When you're talking about something that's both moving and not moving. Yeah. It's in two places at the same time where there's a probability of it being in these like that's describing stuff like that, especially to the average person. It doesn't have a background on this. It's they go what what what is the world then? Yeah, what are you saying? And I have to say that we physicists come to the very same place. We say what is the world then? Yeah. What are we talking about? And the difference is we can then look back at the equations and say, if we're talking about quantum entangement, we can see how two particles far apart in space will have behaviors that are correlated. You do something on this particle and we'll have some instantaneous correlation with what happens at that particle regardless of how far apart they are in space. Einstein himself called the spooky. Yeah. Spooky action at a distance. You do something in New York and it affects in some quantum mechanical way, a particle in California. How could that be? How can that be? Good. So I don't know at some level if I'm trying to answer you human to human. But if I'm answering as a mathematician, as a physicist, I can see it in the equations. I see it in the mathematics. I see how this particle has a quantum wave, which has a piece that stretches all the way out to California and way beyond. And when I interact with this particle, I affect that probability wave instantaneously. Therefore, I change the wave in California even if my action is in New York. So I see that in the mathematics. I understand these words you're saying. But I don't understand it like you're lying. That's the point. You know, so it's what level of understanding are we talking about, right? If you're talking about intuition, like a deep intuition, the way we understand two plus two is four, right? I don't have to explain that to anybody. They get it. They see two apples and two apples for it. But when it comes to quantum entanglement, I don't feel it that way. I don't have that intrinsic understanding of what it is. And so if you push me to say, well, what is it? I ultimately fall back on the math. Right. And ultimately, I say the reason I believe the math, because the math makes predictions. That we can test in the laboratory. And then you say, well, then what kind of understanding is that? And some people would say that's the deepest understanding. All we really want of a physical theory is for it to give a rigorous mathematical articulation of what happens out there in the world. And it's the human brain struggling for some kind of intuition. That's our problem. That's a human problem. That's not a problem of physics. That's a problem of us being satisfied. A problem of perception. Reception and understanding. Yeah. So this spooky action at a distance. Why was it first? Was it a hypothesis? Or was this something that was proven by math first? Yeah. So Erin Schrodinger, one of the founding fathers of quantum mechanics, a curious fellow, very interesting life. But he realized, looking at the equations, that there was this quality of the math that if two particles come together and they interact for a little while, and then they separate, they can no longer be thought of as independent or autonomous. I mean, the very basic quality of autonomy, you and I are autonomous because we can separate. We can go our separate ways and do whatever we want at our respective locations. So you would think that if two particles separate, they will also be autonomous. But he saw in the mathematics that they would not be autonomous, that what you did to one would have an effect in some quantum mechanical way on the other. Now he saw that in the mathematics. He called it out as the central feature of quantum mechanics. And that's a big statement coming from him because there are a lot of other weird qualities of quantum physics. Einstein then comes along, 1935 with two colleagues. And leverages this idea. Rights of paper, he tries to prove that quantum mechanics cannot be the full story of the world because of this weird quality of what you do here affecting something over there. It's not until the 1980s that people really start to test this idea. And by today, this is used all the time in the laboratory. Quantum computing makes use of this quality. So this is no longer an idea that's abstract. It's something that's applied. Applied quantum entanglement gives us things in the real world in the laboratory. So this is beyond question real, even though Einstein thought it couldn't be, and Schrodinger considered to be the strangest feature of the math of all. So beyond question, it's real. But what do you think is happening? Well, so if you're going to allow for the most exotic possibilities, some would suggest that you are probing the many worlds of quantum mechanics. So in quantum mechanics, all you ever do is predict the probability of this happening or that happening. Electrons, you know, 70% chance here, 30% chance here. If you measure the electron and you do find it over here, what happened to the other possibility? Some say it happens, but just in another world. In one world, you find the particle here. In another world, there's a copy of you that finds the particle over there. Each of you's doesn't know about the other, and thinks you are the unique version of you, the unique Joe Rogan. But now there are two of you, each thinking that the particle is found in one location or another. If that's the way quantum mechanics actually works, and some people do think this, then quantum entanglement is, in some sense, less weird. Because what happens is that in one world, you have a certain correlation between the particles. In another world, you'd have a different correlation between the particles. And that's just what happens. So that's one, but you're allowing multiple universes in this explanation. That's pretty weird in its own right. The fundamental way that we encapsulate this, we say that quantum mechanics is non-local. Non-local means that the influences are not limited to where they are applied. Our experience says, look, if I do something to this bottle of water, the influence is in this local neighborhood. What I did just now didn't affect something on the other side of Austin or on the other side of the world. But quantum mechanics is saying that that's an intuition built up from everyday experience, and everyday experience is grossly misleading when it comes to this kind of an idea. Severely limited. Severely limited. And this concept of many worlds. So the idea is that there's multiple versions of you and multiple versions of everything that you've experienced, all the things that you see that you consider to be Austin, Texas, or the United States, or the world itself. There's multiple versions of this happening simultaneously. How many? Well, in some sense, infinite. Oh, boy. Because the basic idea is that any outcome that is allowed by the laws of quantum physics, any outcome will take place in its own separate world. And so when you think about every decision you've ever made, every possibility that you've ever encountered, all of the outcomes happen. And that would happen throughout all of time. So in some sense, there's an unending number of realities that are in the grand landscape of the quantum description. Now, we hear that and you say, that's nuts. That sounds nutty. Right? We experience one world. But if you look at the mathematics as a guy named Hugh Everett did in 1957, he was a graduate student at Princeton, unknown. He looked at the math. And he said, I want to look at the math and give it the most straightforward intrinsic interpretation. And the most economical intrinsic interpretation of the math is this one. It sounds grossly uneconomical all these universes. But that's an output. The input is incredibly economical. You look at the equations, and this is the most straightforward interpretation. Every outcome does happen. It happens in its own world. Now, I'm not saying that I believe this, but it's definitely a worthy contender for the way that we should think about quantum mechanics. So do you guys get together and bounce these ideas off each other on a regular basis? It depends who you mean by you guys. You're physicists. You're physicists. You were physicists. So only some. So some physicists, when they hear about this kind of talk, they roll their eyes. And they say, just use the mathematics. Make predictions for what we'll see at the large Hadron Collider. Make predictions for what we'll see in this or that laboratory. Don't try to understand it. Just do it. It's the call so-called shut up and calculate approach to quantum mechanics. And Neil's Bohr, who is one again, one of the founding pioneers of quantum mechanics, this was his perspective. I mean, Bohr basically said, the goal of physics is not to tell us how the universe is in the sense of understanding. It's just to make predictions that we're going to see in experiments. That's all that you should ever expect to do. There are other physicists who don't feel that way. And there are other physicists who think physics is a matter of telling us what's happening. It's got to give us the story. It's got to like peel back the curtain and give us a clear glimpse of what's happening behind the scenes. And so those of us who do have that as the gold do get together and to talk about these things. Well, glad you guys exist because those shut up and do the math. Yeah. Those guys, they're not going to help me. Like, I'm not going to be able to understand that. Like, you are a bridge to someone like me having the slimmest grasp of understanding of what the stuff is all about. Although those guys would say that I am doing you a disservice. Also, they would say that I should convince you that there is no deeper intuition that you're missing. That the only way to understand what's going on is you learn the math, you do the calculations, and looking for anything else is looking for too much. Now, I don't feel that way. I feel that in the end of the day when we understand the world deeply, it does give us insights into what's actually happening. And the question you asked, what's happening in quantum entanglement is, in my view, the right question to ask. Unfortunately, I can't give you a good enough answer today, even though mathematically we understand it perfectly. I think one day we'll go beyond that. And there is work happening today. There are people who suspect that quantum entanglement is nothing but another idea of Einstein's in disguise. Wormholes. Right? You've encountered wormholes, probably if you ever watch any like Star Trek, these bass. These are tunnels from one point in the universe to the other, kind of shortcuts through the fabric of space. And some suggest that when two particles are entangled, there's actually a secret wormhole connecting them. And that wormhole means that they're secretly close together because of the shortcut. So they look like they're far apart, but there's actually a shortcut through a wormhole. So secretly they're actually right next to each other. And then when you do something on one and it affects the other, perhaps it's not so surprising because through the wormhole, they're right next to each other. Anybody that would discourage you from discussing these kind of very strange ideas and expressing them that way, you're going to discourage curiosity. Which is going to discourage interest in the field, which is going to discourage people to become physicists because it is fascinating. And when you're talking about this concept of spooky action at a distance, you're talking about wormholes connecting things together at far distances and things that we don't truly understand, but that you can show mathematically are correct. Like that's amazing. I agree. I agree. And you have to look at the history though. There was a period of time when people who thought about what's really going on got sidetracked. In the early days of quantum mechanics, what really needed to happen was develop the math, develop the equations, make predictions, go into the laboratory, have this handing love approach between theory and experiment so that you have a theory that you have confirmed. And the fear at that time was that if too many people start pondering, what does it all mean, then the progress toward that goal would have been diminished. But we're beyond that. We have quantum mechanics, at least as a working theory that we can use to do wondrous things. And so more and more people are thinking now about these kinds of questions. I think it's kind of a pendulumists' one, toward the more philosophical, toward the more what does it all mean? How can we describe what's really going on here? Whereas if we were having this conversation 10, 15 years ago, I would say virtually no one is really thinking about things in the language that we're talking about. That's really strange because if you think about how long people have been trying to understand the reality of the universe itself and how recent some of these discoveries are, it really makes you think like what are we going to be able to show and prove is true 50 years from now, 60 years from now? Because if you go back 100 years ago, you go to 1921, the understanding of the world itself is so grossly different than what we understand today. Yeah, yeah, no totally. And the other side of that observation, which is exciting and daunting, is think about what science has done more or less to date. It's tried to understand things in the world that naturally form. Stars, planets, black holes, living systems. But from more or less now going forward, we're entering a realm where we are going to start to create the new things that we're going to try to understand as we modify the genome as we perhaps create artificial life as we use physics to create new kinds of materials and structures that would never form on their own. But because our understanding is so refined, we can begin to manipulate objects at the molecular atomic and subatomic level. We can, going forward, be the driver of the new things in the universe around us as opposed to simply being the passive consumer of those things that the universe has given us that we then try to understand. So going forward, it won't only be trying to understand the stuff that has arisen naturally. It's going to be understanding the stuff that we create. And that's an interesting, exciting but also frightening prospect. So that's the concept of using these principles and this understanding of quantum mechanics to manipulate reality itself. Yeah. Yeah. How do you anticipate that playing out? That's a tough one. I don't know. You know, it'll certainly be something that we approach in an incremental way. I'm not suggesting that tomorrow we're going to be developing, terraforming new worlds or creating parallel universes. But there's a pattern that we certainly see playing out throughout the history of science, which is this. You're presented with some quality of the world. You don't understand it. You then experiment. You observe it. And then little by little you begin to understand that you develop theories, mathematical ideas being the most precise ones to describe whatever it is that you're talking about. And once you have those ideas nailed down, you can then use them to manipulate the world. That's what we do with quantum mechanics. At first, we just want to understand atoms, particles and things of that sort. Now we can manipulate the quantum world to create all sorts of technological wonders, the integrated circuit, which is at the core of every technological gadget that has transformed life on planet Earth. This is quantum mechanics in the hands of human beings. And so that pattern of going from lack of understanding to understanding to manipulation is the pattern that will continue to play out going forward. So that manipulation, what will it be? Well, I think we're going to come to a time when we understand the structure of space far better than we do now. The structure of time far better than we do now. Does that suggest that we'll manipulate space and time if the pattern persists? Yeah. Now what does that mean? Will we build our own wormholes? I don't know. I don't know. That's starting to go into crazy land, the wool that we were talking about before. But maybe it won't be wool 100 years from now. Or 1,000 years from now. If we stick around long enough, if the pattern persists that understanding ultimately gives you the lever to manipulate, right now, if you ask me what's happening at the cutting edge or string theory quantum mechanics, it's understanding black holes. It's understanding how quantum mechanics and black holes talk to each other. And what is black hole? A black hole is a weird region of space time. So we're trying to understand space time itself at the deepest possible level. And so the next step would suggest that we will manipulate it at some point in fairly significant ways. So the ways we've used it so far, you mentioned integrated circuits. How is quantum mechanics used to form integrated circuits? So an integrated circuit in essence is a little device and where you want an electron to follow a very specific trajectory to carry out this or that computation or process. Now if you want to control electrons with that level of fidelity, you've got to use the mathematical laws that describe electrons with that level of fidelity. Newton's equations from late 1600s, they won't work. If you think of the electron as a little baseball or a little billiard ball, totally inaccurate. It will not allow you to manipulate their motion. But with quantum mechanics, you can manipulate the motion of the electrons because you understand their mathematical underpinnings. And so it was only by applying quantum mechanics to materials, to structures that could give rise to this kind of control over the little particles that we could build these microscopic circuits. And they work. I mean that's the proof in the pudding, right? And so that's a key example of quantum mechanics transforming the world as we know it. And right now there is work and string theory that is suggesting that this notion of quantum entanglement that we're talking about before. That may be the key to understanding the fabric of space time itself. I mean we use this as a matter of fabric of space time, right? But any piece of fabric, it's stitched together by threads, right? So what are the threads of the spatial fabric if we push this metaphor and try to really understand it more fully? And one of the suggestions is the threads of quantum entanglement that tie distant objects together, those may be the first thing that we do. That's the threads of quantum entanglement that tie distant objects together, those may be the threads that hold together the fabric of space time itself. So that would mean that everything is somehow connected even if it's 13.7 billion light years away, these things are somehow or another directly connected. Yes. Now to avoid that turning into the woo. You have to realize that when you have a lot of material and when you have a lot of time and a lot of space, these quantum entangle connections become so spread out that they become diluted. So it's not as though someone can say, you know, I thought about my best friend in California and then the phone rang, we must be quantum entangle. That's the sort of stuff that this kind of talk can lead to. But fundamentally what you're saying is correct. It may be the structures in space, maybe fundamentally connected through these quantum entanglements and it may be that the substrate space itself. We don't usually think of space as something because it's kind of invisible, but we're within the fabric of space time itself. And that arena may be stitched together by these threads of quantum entanglement as well. So this quantum entanglement will be diluted at a distance. So is that what is the mechanism behind that? It's more diluted by the number of particles that are involved. So if you just have two particles in a pristine environment like a total vacuum and they're entangled, you can move them arbitrarily far apart and the entanglement will not dilute. That's the craziness. You could have two particles on opposite ends of the universe and you measure one and the other. How is that done? Yeah, good. How do you do that? And there are a number of experimental protocols, procedures, but one concrete one is you take an atom, like an atom of calcium as one example. You fire some laser on it and that excites the electron in the calcium atom to a higher energetic state. When that electron falls back down to a lower energetic state, it emits photons back to back. And because those photons were emitted from the same process, the electron falling down to a lower energy state, those photons will be entangled. So that's a concrete way where you can have back to back photons that will travel arbitrarily far apart if they don't... on falling down to a lower energy state, those photons will be entangled. So that's a concrete way where you can have back to back photons that will travel arbitrarily far apart if they don't encounter anything else. That will be quantum entangled. Now, you were talking about integrated circuits. Now, I hear a lot of talk about quantum computing. And I don't understand what that is, but everybody's telling me that it's going to revolutionize computing. How so? Well, as with everything, you have to interrogate precisely what one means by revolutionize everything. Maybe in some rough sense, that's true. But let me just first say what it is and then say what the possibilities are. So imagine that you have a computer that can access, I'll use one particular link, access the many worlds of quantum mechanics. Now when you're carrying out a calculation, you don't have the calculation solely take place in one universe. You have it take place in a whole collection of parallel universes, allowing you in some sense to divide up the calculation and in parallel have it take place across this spectrum of universes. Clearly that will rapidly speed up the calculation because now it's no longer happening in one universe. You split it across many universes. So in some sense, quantum computing is trying to leverage that quality of quantum mechanics. Now that's one language using the language of many worlds. You don't have to use the language. You can also use just the language of probabilities. So if you have a particle like an electron, normally in a classical world, you'd say it's either here or there. In a quantum world, our world, it can be in a mixture of here and there. If it's in a mixture of here and there, you can do calculations here and there. Whereas in a classical world, you could either do the calculation here or there. So it's basically substantially increasing the places where calculations take place, thereby substantially decrease in the amount of time that it takes these calculations to be accomplished. But by what mechanism? What separates quantum computing from regular computing? So in regular computing, you have quantum qualities because like I said, the integrated circuit, you need it to understand quantum mechanics, to guide the motion of the particle through the integrated circuit. But in the end of the day, a traditional computer, a classical computer, if we will, stores information as bits, zeros and ones. So you have one bit that's either a zero, another bit that's either a one and through that, you can store information and manipulate information and that's what computation is all about. The quantum computer changes the bit to the so-called qubit. What is a qubit? A qubit is especially defined and constructed digit that can be in a mixture of zero and one. And specifically, the way we usually do this is we have what are known as spin systems. So an electron has a spin, like a little top, and it can either spin counterclockwise that we call spin up or clockwise that we call spin down. In a classical world, the electron is either this or this. In the quantum world, it can be a mixture. And so literally, these quantum computers have these spin systems that are in these mixtures of up and down simultaneously. And that allows them to do multiple computation simultaneously. That allows them to decrease the time it takes to carry out the computation. That's the essence of the idea. Is the structure of the computer differently? Totally. So Regar computer has a motherboard, a processor, has a hard drive. What is a quantum computer structure? You know, if you see some of these things, they look, I've heard them describe, it's not a bad description, it's sort of like chandeliers. You've got spin systems in arms of the chandeliers and you have cooling systems that are vital to these computers because if there's heat that comes into the system, it can destroy this delicate mixture of up and down simultaneously. So they're far more delicate and it is much more difficult to at this stage have the number of bits. So an ordinary computer can have as many bits as you want. As you say, just put more boards, expand the random axis. Where it's all up to you, the user. For quantum computers, you've got to make sure that all these qubits are working together in order that they can perform these calculations and it's very hard to have a whole lot of qubits maintain the so-called quantum coherence that allows them to work together. So the maximum number of qubits in quantum computers that have been built, it's only at 50. Very small relative to the number of bits that we're familiar with in, we're talking about gigabits when you're talking about your billions of bits. So that is for the future but there doesn't seem to be a fundamental obstacle to building a quantum computer that has a large number of these qubits and in that way, in principle, being able to do calculations exponentially more quickly. That's the rough idea. Are we from implementing quantum computing in daily life? Is it a cooling issue? Is it an issue of just expanding our understanding of how to construct these things? There are those in the field who are careful to say that they don't think that we'll ever have quantum computing in everyday life. The reason for that is largely the cooling issue and it has to do with the difficulty in maintaining the stability of these devices. They're so delicate, whereas you drop your laptop, you make crack it or something, but for the most part you drop your phone and it's fine. And so there are those who say that we will never have these things in daily life. They'll always be highly specialized in laboratories that we somehow make use of as opposed to carry around in our pocket. The same was said about ordinary computers 60, 70, 80 years ago when a computer in those days filled an entire room with all these vacuum tubes, whoever thought that we'd be walking around in our pocket was something more powerful than that kind of device. So I'm 50 years later. Yeah, so I'm skeptical whenever I hear people say never, never, never. But in this case, I'm almost open to the idea because these systems are so incredibly delicate. In fact, one of the hurdles right now in quantum computing is they're not reliable. These qubits, they can flip from one state to another ruining your calculation very easily. So what some of the quantum computer specialists are developing are what is going to quantum error correcting codes, redundancies in the information in the quantum system so that when this kind of spin flip should happen, you can correct it down the line and not have to start the calculation from scratch. It's causing the inconsistencies. Well, it's just the delicacy, you know, the way in which these spins are talking to each other can be disrupted by any kind of environmental influence at all. So it's just power surge, power surge heat, any kind of environmental influence. And so it's just a technological hurdle. It's not really a theoretical hurdle. We understand what's going on. It's quantum mechanics, after all. it's a technological hurdle to realize this possibility. But get into the other question. You said like, what will it give us if we have these quantum computers? And there are certain calculations that on a quantum computer you can do in the blink of an eye that might take years or centuries on a classical computer such as there are certain encryption ideas that have been applied to securing information and banks and things of that sort. And so in the last couple days it was basically you build these huge prime numbers and you multiply them together and it would be the challenge of the person trying to hack your system to have to factor this big number and virtually impossible to do in any reasonable period of time. There's an algorithm that people have come up with that works on a quantum computer that can factor these numbers instantaneously. So that doesn't sound so good, right? It means that information that was secure might not be secure. But of course then quantum computer scientists come along and they come up with a new encryption mechanism that's quantimically based and that one would be unbreakable even with a quantum computer. So that's the kind of development which is actually already starting to happen. A student of mine actually works for a company that generates quantum random numbers. You need random numbers in order to be able to have the security that nobody's going to know what number you actually have. And there are quantum mechanical devices that have already been built to generate those kinds of quantum numbers. But the overarching from 30,000 feet view is that we'll be able to take on calculations that we could never even imagine doing before and that could revolutionize artificial intelligence. I mean what is general artificial intelligence about looking out at the world and seeing patterns, right? You know, AlphaGo, you know, this wonderful system that learned the game of Go and could be, you know, masters in the world, how did it do it? It looked at a huge number of games and saw the patterns in that huge number of games and with that gained an expertise that allowed it to become the champion Go player in the world. So it's all about pattern recognition. It's all about finding patterns and that's what a quantum computer and principle could be incredibly powerful at. So artificial intelligence and principle could take an incredible leap forward. Simulating various quantum systems that we want to understand better now when we simulate them on a computer, we're simulating them on a classical computer trying to mimic quantum mechanical behavior. Now, if you had a quantum computer, you could actually simulate it with the very physical ideas that are happening in the real world. And I have a confluence between the methodology of the quantum simulator and the real world allowing you to do things that you can do before. So it's just to say that in principle, there's a whole lot of understanding of the external world that these devices could give us and that's why people have become so excited about it. I think it's so interesting that we look to games to find out how intelligent and how powerful computers really are. Like for the longest time, it's could a computer beat a chess master. And now that that problem has been solved, like not only can a computer beat a chess master, but they always will beat a chess master now, which is really fascinating. Yeah. It totally is. And there's a way in which that makes a lot of sense because what is a game? A game is an artificial universe with very simple rules and therefore it's a simplified version of reality. It's also a well-posed game. I mean, tick-tack-toe versus chess, right? The difference is in tick-tack-toe. It's so simple that there's no creativity involved. You know, if you play correctly, you'll always have a draw, right? But in chess, because of the great number of possibilities, there's a lot of creativity that comes into play. So it's a universe with a fixed set of rules. It's simplified and it has the opportunity for human beings to be creative. And so it's a wonderful testing ground for computers because if a computer can beat a human in that domain, now we can say, aha, that computer in some sense is creative. And the thing that we usually look to define ourselves as human beings. How do we differ from other things in the world, the inanimate world, we're creative, we can come up with ideas, we can come up with novel, innovative ideas. That's kind of how we define ourselves. And so when a computer starts to do that, it starts to challenge our humanity. And I think that's a good thing, right? I don't think that we are as different from the external world as we perhaps like to think. We are collections of particles governed by the laws of physics. And I think it's spectacular that a collection of particles under the ironclad rules of physics can be creative, can come up with ideas, can figure out quantum mechanics in general, like how spectacular is that? But all we are are big collections of particles governed by those laws. And all the computer is big collection of particles governed by those rules. So I full well anticipate the possibility for a computer to get to our level of cognitive power and beyond. And I full well anticipate that there will be the artificial systems that say to us, I have an inner world. I have conscious awareness. Now how will we test that computer to see whether it was programmed to say that or whether it actually is having that inner world? I don't know, that's a tough one, but it's a question we face all the time. Like I assume you have an inner world inside your head. I don't know that for a fact. I assume we're making the same assumption about me. How do we come to that? We come to it based on the fact that we're having a conversation and we observe each other's behaviors. And all of that comes together to suggest that we are each roughly the same and therefore I assume that what's happening inside your head is roughly the same kind of processes that happen inside of mine. We have to infer it. And we're going to have to infer it for artificial systems too. And if you walk down the street and there's an artificial system sitting on a park bench, you know, hand on its head saying, I'm so worried. What's it all about? What's life? What's it? And if it's real, you're going to say, wow, that computer is having an existential crisis. And there's a real inner world happening in there. What other conclusion could you draw? Yeah. I think we have an internal bias about our own uniqueness in terms of our ability. Because we're so unique in comparison to all the other animals and our ability to manipulate the world and our environment and our use of creativity. Yeah. But it's really just variables. Yes. And if you took into a computer specifically a super powerful computer like what we're assuming a quantum computer could become could take into account all the things that have ever been said by any human being ever, the motivations for those things, whether it's love or emotions or jealousy or narcissism or whatever these weird human quirks are. And they could figure out a way to create works of art. They could figure out a way to do things that are uniquely moving to us. And that's what's going to be really weird. If a computer can write a book that blows you away, a computer can write a better version of the great Gatsby. Right. You know, it's going to, I think it will happen. There's a look. Yeah. I mean, what is it that distinguishes us as a species? Many people will point to different things. But one certainly is that we are deeply social as a species. And because of that, we've been able to learn from each other and therefore not had to start each generation from scratch. Many other animals in the animal kingdom, they basically each generation kind of start from scratch. They don't have books that they can read about discoveries of an early rage. They don't have teachers. I mean, some do, but they don't have teachers that can give them the corpus of knowledge going back hundreds of years. They probably don't have universities where they can learn about what happened over the last 500 years. And therefore not have to start from scratch. And so when you talk about the capacities of artificial systems, they will be far more social than we why, for exactly the reason you're saying, we typically learn from a handful of masters that had Albert Einstein's work, all physicists learn about it. Artists maybe learn about the work of Rembrandt or Picasso, the masters. But an artificial system can learn from every single other artificial system. There's no limit to the connectivity between those systems. So whatever pattern, a given artificial system figures out, they'll all know about that pattern simply by communicating among themselves. In our environment, we only communicate with a small number of other human beings of the course of our lives. And again, some of that knowledge is stored and therefore it becomes widely accessible. All knowledge, gleaned by any artificial being within the network, will be immediately shared by every other artificial being within the network. And therefore the very thing that makes us special, the collective culture that allows us each generation to build on the insights of the previous and not have to go back to the beginning, that will be amplified enormously for artificial systems. So why wouldn't they be able to create the greatest work and the greatest novel? I think that will absolutely be the case. Yeah, we have information that somehow or another passed from parent to child, somehow through genes. And we see it not just in us, but we see it in the animal world. Like you can have a dog and for whatever reason that dog knows it's supposed to lift it's like the piano tree. No one has to teach it. And there's other weird behavior. Like I have a golden retriever. He loves bringing things back. He throws things, he gets some, he brings them right back. Some dogs, it's hard to get them to bring things back, not golden retrievers. He's got it somehow or another in his system to bring things back to you. It's natural. There's this whole area of evolutionary psychology, which applies the ideas of evolution by natural selection, not just to the physical system. That's where we normally learn about it in school. We see how a given species changes over time because there's a random mutation and that mutation allows that individual to better adapt to the environment and therefore that particular morphology, that change spreads widely through subsequent generations. That's normally how we talk about evolutionary and natural selection. But as you're saying, it also applies to behaviors. There are certain behaviors that allows an individual to better navigate in the ancestral world and that behavior, if it had some genetic basis, can be passed on to the next generation and passed on to generation still. So yeah, lifting up the leg to P is one example of that, but there are many other behaviors. I mean, a canonical example is we have a predilection. We like sweet things. We like fats, right? Why? Well, the evolution of psychologists have noted that in the ancestral world, those of our forebears who had a tendency to eat ripe and fruits or to eat nuts, they stored up in calories so that when times turned lean, they were the ones that survived and therefore they passed on that propensity to enjoy sweets and fats and we are the recipients of that long chain of behavioral predilection. So that's certainly the case. But the thing is, we then go beyond that. We are able to store culturally information and breakthroughs from an earlier generation that may not have any relevance to our DNA and yet we can pass that knowledge on, right? So Newton's ID is an Einstein's ID is we will continue to pass these ideas on and I presume they're not going to be imprinted in anybody's DNA. Maybe one day they will be, but certainly at the moment they're not. Your golden retriever, that kind of dog is what you're saying was a gold. You can't do that. The mother of your golden retriever and the mother of that mother and going all the way back, they pretty much all lifted up their leg and peed and there wasn't a whole lot else that got passed through from sort of cultural heritage of things that one dog discovered that could then pass on to subsequent generations. So it makes a special as we certainly have behaviors that are passed through the lineage in this manner of evolutionary psychology. But we also have culture and culture allows us to store the insights to break through as a mature age, allowing us to get to where we have gotten. I've often wondered if I've got stuck on a desert island. How much of the world would I be able to recreate even how much of the world of physics? Would I be not much? Right? Because I have assumed so much from earlier generations. I don't know that I couldn't build an integrated circuit. I couldn't recreate a computer. I could write down the laws of general, activity and quantum mechanics and I could work out for them the mathematics of black holes and entanglement, that sort of stuff I could do. But there's so much of the culture. I have no capacity to reproduce and that's our collective socialization that we're able to benefit from the fact that we all talk to each other and we all know about things that happened in an earlier age. And that is what makes us special. And that is what we will also pass on to artificial systems because they're going to be able to do that too. It seems like almost a race in time to see if we can get to this quantum computing level on a personal way that you can use before we destroy ourselves. Because if you go back to think about culture and the way we interact with information, how much it's changed since like the 1700s and 1500s when things had to be written down and the invention of the printing press and all these different steps that have allowed us to access information more readily and easily to the point where we're at now where you have a phone in your pocket, you literally ask your question to and it'll Google it and come up with the answer for you. It's amazing. I mean when we were kids that would have been just a mindblower, a device in your pocket that you could ask a question to and it literally has like knowledge beyond your wildest dreams access to scientific papers, thousands of years of people pondering the universe and you could have the answers to almost any subject right there in your hand but that's the tip of the iceberg. Yeah, no it's crazy. In fact, when I was a kid, not to bring up Star Trek again, you're going to sell on your truck. Oh, you do. Well, I'm not actually much of a Trekkie, but it's just one more reference. When I was a kid, I remember thinking about what aspects of this television program are the least likely to ever happen. Okay, you got the transporter, you got the faster than light trout. To me, it was the computer that you could ask any question and it would give you the answer. I was like, that will never ever happen and here we are. Did he, what did they ask it? Like did they say computer? Yeah, that's right. You did it. In fact, Kirk would do it just like that. Computer, you know. That's right. And the computer with yes, you know, you know, Jane Smith from 1920, you know, they just come up with the answer and I was like, that's crazy. That will never happen. I love using Siri to make notes. I always feel like I'm in the future when I can use Siri. Siri make a note. What would you like it to say? I've never used to read that way. How about this? We'll do it right now. Hey Siri, make a note. See, it's a quantum Siri. Oh, wait, go do it again. Oh, okay, I'll do it again. Hey Siri, make a note. Oh, why didn't do that? Oh, you know why? Because I didn't do Hey Siri, I pressed the button. Hey Siri, make a note. It's a fuck bitch. Hey Siri, make a note. All right, now it's not working. See, I stepped on your demonstration right there. Hey Siri, make a note. It's not saying it. Wow. We got to call the genius bar. But it did it before, right? Yeah, I did hear it. Maybe it's, oh, maybe the phone has to be closed. Hey Siri, make a note. Jesus. Wow. Use LaSaca, shit. There's Captain Kirk. Oh, wait a minute. Okay. It's on, do not disturb mode. Hold on. Let me take it off of that. See if that'll help. Hey Siri, make a note. Nothing. Oh, man. What the fuck? What, what did I find? What did I find? Maybe it has to be on the broken one. It's a piece of shit one. It's brand new one, God damn it. Hey Siri, make a note. Hey Siri. Jesus. How does that work, Jamie? Hey Siri, make a note. Yeah, my sister's what you wanted to say. Hey Siri, make a note. Mine is not listening. It's because it knows I'm talking to Brian Gray. And it's like, fuck you bitch. How do you turn that on and off? Is that in general? I did it. Where do you, what do you find Siri? Yeah, it's in settings. I don't know. Wow. Might have to find it at the right way. But mine did it too. And then it stopped doing it. It's like you're just too weird. Man, if I were to just shut up, we would have gotten through this. I know. Here it is. Oh, Siri and Siri. Here it is. Dada, dada, dada, listen for Hey Siri. Shut it off and turn it on. Continue. Hey Siri, make a note. Hey Siri. Hey Siri. Hey Siri, make a note. Oh my God, it's useless. Wow. Hey Siri, make a note. There you go. There we go. Oh, Brian Green that he's got to start eating eggs. And he should exercise to strengthen his back. I see it. Okay. Super helpful. Real convenient. So I had to shut it off and turn it back on again. Well, that's it. Can Kirk do it. Let's see what history files subject. Oh my God, when a code of stuff tosses for also known as code is the executioner. After that background on actor Anton Caridion. So slow. Piece of shit. It's like Siri. Oh, no, no, no. More than 20. You should be able to get that for Siri. That voice, you know, because Siri could be like an Australian lady. You could have her be a bunch of different things. That'd be a good app. Yeah. Yeah. Before we go too far away. Did you see you were talking about this? This is the very crude version of what you're saying. Did you see this come out the other day? This team created four new songs from using AI from Amy Winehouse, Kirkobeyn, Sasha Nirvana, the words that you've been 100. Did you listen to them? Yes. The final one sounds a little bit like shit, to be honest with you. But any Winehouse one did sound pretty good. Can you play us a little bit of it? I'd just say. I guess, yeah. See, we're good. So I'll play the Amy Winehouse a little bit. Yeah, give me a little bit of it. I know I did. Holy shit. I'm not saying I'm pretty. It's all right. And I like to get on go away. But that's all computer. So the way I read that they did this was they took MIDI files, which would just be a computer-based audio. Yeah. To recreate the music you're hearing. And then they did what we've heard done to your voice with fake speech patterns. Yeah. It took like 30 songs to create the lyrics. Jesus. That mixed those together to create a decent sounding song. So how do they construct the way the song is put together? That's what MIDI, so they took like on a pro. I think it's like 30 to 40 different, you know, probably Amy Winehouse songs. Yeah. And you find patterns. And yeah, I just found like you find patterns. You manipulate the patterns to create a new version of that kind of pattern. It's a nice place to get there. So to say the Nirvana one we can play just it's you've heard a lot more Nirvana songs so that sounds a lot. I'm a big Amy Winehouse fan. That's why I thought if I haven't heard enough of her to know, play a little bit more of her. OK. That is bizarre to me. That's amazing. That could pass. There you go. Yeah, it could pass. That's good. You hit a Nirvana one for some of the songs. Yeah, let me hear. Let me hear some of the Nirvana. I thought this was a little like this. They got to be able to recreate heroin and suicidal thoughts. The music doesn't sound as solid. That's a little more like a good guy. We create heroin and suicidal thoughts. The music doesn't sound as solid. It sounds a little more like a good guy. It sounds like a shitty, neurotic cover band. It sounds like it's Portland. It's not as good. That's why I didn't want to say it. But you had the doors there too, right? Yeah, let me hear it. There's a Hendrix one too. There's, I did not listen to that. It'll give me some Hendrix. Because I'm a giant Hendrix fan. I'll tell you if this is horseshit. That's pretty fucking good. They may have had an audio engineer that someone knows how to mix music to add to how good this sounds. Because maybe we can do that. But even that, that will, is again, pattern recognition putting things together. So look, that's a great example. That's all that we do, right? That's what we do. So why can't all we do is mix match patterns, modify patterns, that's all that we do anyway. That if I'm being cynical on an off an amp, that is what's going to lead us to become some sort of a symbiotic creature, some sort of a integrated computer slash biological entity. Is that a bad thing? I don't know if it's a bad thing. Yeah, I see. I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing. Oh, you're one of those. I don't know. You might be right. Look, and you know more about the shit that we do. All I'm saying is we've been on a particular evolutionary trajectory. And for a long time, it's been thoroughly biological and thoroughly by random mutations. If that now moves to a new phase in which we've got new kinds of materials and new kinds of ways of modifying the system, that's not just random mutation. And natural selection, so bad. Yeah, it seems like that's inevitable. When you think about how we have the sensational desire to innovate, it seems like it's inevitable. And I'm sure you're aware of Elon Musk's neural link. Yes, sure. And they're initially going to use it for people that have injuries and diseases and neurological conditions. But that's how it always begins. But it seems inevitable. It seems like if we can manipulate matter and with CRISPR where we're manipulating genetics, it just seems inevitable that we're going to one day be something unrecognizable. Right. And that will happen in any event. It'll just happen more quickly. Because even the evolutionary selection takes you to an unrecognizable place. We just have to wait a very long time. Now we're simply speeding up the process by taking the reins of change, as opposed to allowing it to be this or that cosmic ray particle banging into that particular genome and causing a mutation. And I often wonder about social trends. And there's almost a frantic desire to escape from a lot of the biological constraints that human beings are saddled with. Of course. One of them being like death. Being one of them. Death is a great example. The other one being aggression. We call toxic masculinity. We never heard of toxic masculinity 20 years ago. It was a desirable trait. And now it's considered toxic. Like more when we think about aggression and war, it's more abhorrent now than ever before in human history. And as we move further and further, not just that, but even cruelty, bullying. There's all these things that are in the forefront of the conversation that we have about what's desirable and not desirable, what we tolerate, and what we won't tolerate. And that these things, bigotry, racism, homophobia, misogyny, all these different, but if you break down what they are, they're singling out individual groups for what some people who are ignorant, deem as undesirable characteristics. And a lot of us biologically based. And we're moving away from that. We're less tolerant of that than ever before, even within recent memory. And this is moving towards, and also people are really concerned with mindfulness, being in the moment, being not externally motivated by negative thoughts and feelings. And we're moving towards some weird understanding of what we would deem to be our own ability to achieve some semblance of enlightenment. And that will be encouraged along by new technology that maybe can eliminate some of the problems we have. And then I think, and this is where it gets really weird, I think some of the problems that we have are biological sex based problems, meaning our desire and ability to procreate and to attract mates. What if they come up with some new method of replicating, some new method that doesn't involve biological sex? I think it'd be helpful to many physicists, but you get more work done. Or you'll be able to find mates easier. Or you'll no longer be a problem. I think I'll be above. But the other question that that brings up, at what point do you see decision-making? What point do you see decision-making to another structure and artificially intelligent? As soon as it's far better than what we're doing. When do you stop walking across a mountain where you can fly over it in a plane? Right, but the difficulty, of course, I mean now we actually face this in a concrete way. I mean, do you allow an artificial system to have the right to choose who it kills? If there's systems of that sort of, yeah. Well, once the thing that it's deciding to kill are the other, like the old representation of a human being that is damaging the ocean, polluting the atmosphere, all these different things that come along with being a person who has access to these incredible technologies that we don't have the discipline to utilize these things fully. And one of the reasons for that, I think, is that we haven't invented them personally. Like you can just get a gun, right? You just go randomly running around shooting people. If you maybe have you developed a concept of gunpowder and figured out how to put it inside a shell casing and figured out a bullet's trajectory and figured out rifling on a gun and all these different, maybe you would have a greater understanding of what you've created and you'd feel more responsibility to be more cautious with it. Yeah, I feel that same way though, when it comes to the software talking about before being vegan, I feel like so many people eat meat, but they're not part of the process by which that meat gets to their table. And I think if they were, they would probably approach it differently. I think so for sure. That's why I started hunting. I went from, do you hunt your own meat? Yes, I hunt. I do it every year, I hunt, and I hunt elk, which is a large animal. So when I get one of those, I can eat it for most of the year. And see, I just hunt tofu. That's all I do and just freeze it up and you had it for the whole year, so you're processed. Do you have to have some processed protein, right? Like, would you take powders in? Do you have a lot of protein powder, but tofu peanut butter? And I think the amount of protein that people think that you need, and if you don't have it, you're somehow gonna fall apart. I don't know, I don't think that much about it, and I survived to this point. Now, maybe inside I'm corroding. No, I don't think you can do it correctly. If you do it correctly, it could be done. You really do need to have some algae, like we were talking about before, the podcast started, that's a big one for B12, or supplement somehow or another for B12. The thing is, what are your requirements? Like, if you're trying to maintain a lot of muscle mass, it's very difficult to do that. But clearly I try to do that a lot. Obviously, clearly getting jacked. But it's depending upon what you're trying to do. Most people that go vegan slim up, like they lose muscle mass, but some of them, they feel better that way. Like, the more mass that you have, one thing that it's got more of a cardiovascular requirement. So it's more difficult to do long distance things. When you have more mass, and there's a lot to be said for slimming down, depending upon what your activities are that you enjoy, what you're trying to do. Yeah. Yeah. And for me, it's mostly sitting at the desk, typing away, doing physics. Well, as you have energy, most certainly can be done correctly. But that's why I was encouraging you to get eggs, because eggs are really, like if you have your own chickens, and you live in a place where you can do that, chickens, it's a really great deal. You have with the chickens. They're like your pets, but they give you food, and you don't have to hurt them or coerce them. In my chickens, I would just come up to them, pick them up. And then they would be cool. I was picking them up since the time of their chicks. So they'd be like, oh, that dude's gonna pick me up. Like, there was no weird issues. I'd pick them up, take an egg, touch them on their little head. Everybody was good. Like, and they got food for me, and they gave me food. They made food. And how many chicks did you have? At one point in time, I had 22. They were killed by my dog and by coyotes. It's a long, complicated story, but the coyotes at one point in time, honeypotted my dog and tricked him into killing chickens. Cause I had a huge dog at the time. I had this massive, his name was Johnny Cash, and he thought the coyote was his friend. And he thought it was a dog. He was like, hey, little friend. And he was so big, the coyote knew I can't kill this motherfucker. But I think I could trick this dummy and to break it into that cage. Cause he's so big, he broke through the chicken coop. Wow. And at the time, one, chickens do a thing called molting. Do you know what that is? I think it is. And isn't that one all the feathers or? Yeah, not molting. Grooding. And what brooding is, chicken, a chicken gets this idea that this egg that they're laying, even though there's no rooster. Cause chickens lay eggs with no rooster and those eggs are in there. They never become an actual chick. But the chickens get this idea in their head that this egg they're sitting on is going to become a live chick. Because that's what they're supposed to be doing. They're supposed to breed with the rooster. And the rooster gives them a chick and it comes out of the egg. So the chicken will just decide this little pulled or feathers off and they'll sit on this egg and they'll do it. They want to do it for like a long time. And if you come anywhere near them, they'll peck at you. So you have to take them out of their little cage where they're sitting on this egg. They were in a large chicken coop that was bigger than this room. And they also free range. Like I would open the chicken coop in the morning and they would run around the yard. But I'd have to take them out and put them in a separate smaller cage where they have to stand on a rail. And you just have to do it for a couple of days so they get it out of their head that they're raising a chick. It's just some weird process in us. And if you don't go through that process, then it takes them like a full cycle of like 20-something days before they get out of it. But they injure themselves, they pluck all their feathers off, they get real weird. It's like some system happens in their head. So I had to put them in a smaller cage. And the coyote tricked the dog into smashing this cage. So me and the kids and my wife were playing some board game. I forget what it is. We're sitting in a living room and I see this fucking coyote run through the backyard with a chicken and its mouth running. And then I'm telling you, dude, I had a fence that was like six feet tall and this coyote jumped over that thing like it didn't exist. It was so elegant. So graceful. I never saw a coyote do that before. So I thought, well, fucking six foot fence and I'm getting through this. Dude, it was like this. Going to the top, being their feet landed on the top of like a cast iron fence or a wrought iron fence right there. Landed on the top and bounced right over it. Like it didn't exist. And then I go, how the fuck did he get the chicken? And I open up the door and I go in the backyard and there's Johnny Cash, the Mastiff, standing in front of this smashed box. And I'm like, you dumb motherfucker, you smashed that. So the chicken could get, the coyote could steal the chicken. So then unfortunately, he had it in his head and said it's funny kill chickens because the coyote did that. So, and then he looked at the chicken coop, not that day, but like a couple months later, he was like, I think I can just run right through that fucking thing, because he was big. And so he just used his paws and smashed a hole through the chicken wire, because chicken wire is not going to stop a 140 pound Mastiff. And he just tore a hole through and just went on a rampage. And he killed them? He killed a bunch of them. But then we fixed the cage and then kept him from that part of the yard and then a fire camp. And then the fire burnt the chicken coop down. And there was some chickens remaining, they didn't die in the fire. They actually escaped once the fire started burning the chicken coop, it kind of fell apart. And they all, they actually lived. But then we put them in a smaller chicken coop. There's a long fucking story. Then the coyotes figured out how to get into that chicken coop and they killed them all. Right. So that was it. But that fire that you referred to right there, going back to our evolutionary story, that's a critical moment. I mean, fire, you say what made us human? The fire made us human. Right. With fire, all of a sudden we could outsource digestion, cook the food externally so that we could have the amount of calories and nutrition that otherwise. To my parasites, yeah. Totally. Yeah, so things became edible. So just another example of these moments in our history that are pivotal that you don't focus attention on is necessarily that thing that made us ultimately who we are. So what things we're doing today, that generations of future or millennia and the future will look back on a hot. That's when we went through the transformation. It's very hard to know. But these things can have a ripple effect that is of profound consequence. And computing for sure has the biggest ripple effect of our lifetime. I think that's for sure. And the other thing is, I don't know if you're familiar with this, but there is now a connection between quantum computing and black holes. Yeah. What's that connection? It's a weird one. So it's all weird. Well, this is like a hyper, this is like weird squared or something. But work over the last 20 years has established that when you have a black hole, actually even more general systems, but talk about a black hole, there's an alternate description of a black hole in terms of what's known as the holographic description. It's as if there's a two dimensional world that surrounds any given three dimensional world that has exactly the same physics as the three dimensional world that we're familiar with. And yet it describes it in a completely different language. So a black hole gravity is obviously essential. That's how a black hole forms. But in this dictionary that physicists have developed, there's a description of a black hole that doesn't involve gravity, only involves quantum mechanics. And the beautiful thing is the quantum processes in that quantum world mimic the kinds of processes that people have been developing for quantum computing, or quantum error correction code. And there's a dictionary that people have proposed for that quantum language on the holographic boundary with physics in the interior. And the dictionary shows that the quantum error correcting code may be the reason why space time itself holds together. So there's this bizarre way in which everything that we know about in the world around us has a translated dictionary version in a different world that lacks gravity but has quantum mechanics. And so people are using some of the insights from quantum computing to understand questions about black holes in space time. So as that's strange. That's so strange. So as quantum computing expands, much like as computing expands, if you go back to the early NASA computers that filled up a whole room, we can extrapolate that as we get better at this and you look 50 years down the line from now, quantum computing will be the standard, it'll be the norm. And it will probably radically alter our understanding of everything. Including black holes. Including black holes. That's right. So there's a real possibility that the language that we use for space time and black holes may bear a profound imprint of the language that we are developing to understand quantum computing, quantum computers. I was just reading some article about black holes roaming through the universe. And some of them, they're detached from galaxies, right? It can be. I mean, oftentimes people think about black holes as these gargantuan structures that form from collapsed stars. There's a big one in the center of our Milky Way galaxy weighs 4 million times out of the sun. The photograph of a black hole in the galaxy M87 that got the world excited a couple of years back. 55 million light years away, billions of times the mass of the sun. But the reality is anything, if you compress it enough, becomes a black hole. If you take an orange and you squash an orange down sufficiently small, according to Einstein, it becomes a black hole. So these things don't have to be gargantuan. The flip side of it is, we also typically have an intuition that black holes are really dense, right? That's usually the way we think about them. But if you make something sufficiently large, regardless of how low its density is, it will also become a black hole. So you can make a black hole out of air by just having enough air. sufficiently large sphere of air, it would become a black hole too with the density of air. So all the intuitions that we typically have about black holes that they have to be dense and they have to be gargantuan. Not right. So black holes are just a part of the elemental structure of reality itself. Yeah, when you look at Einstein's equations, right in his mathematics, there's a little formula that you can see where it says, if you have any mass m, whatever mass you want, and you squeeze it into a radius r, that's less than two times Newton's constant, two g times m divided by c squared, speed of light squared, a formula, details don't matter. But you take any mass, if the radius within which that mass sits is less than two gm over c squared, it is a black hole, period end of story, according to Einstein. Now Einstein left out quantum mechanics. Weirdly, right? Because his Nobel Prize was for quantum mechanics. It was for a paper he wrote in 1905 about the photoelectric effect, but he never really believed that quantum mechanics was the true description of the world. And when he was developing the general theory of relativity, he was just thinking about gravity and not quantum mechanics. Stephen Hawking came along in 1974 and started to inject quantum mechanics into our understanding of things like black holes. And that's where Hawking proved that black holes were not completely black. He showed that black holes allow a certain amount of radiation to leak out of their surface, leak out of the event horizon or leak out from just beyond the edge of the event horizon. And so yes, when you think about black holes, as far as we can tell, they are a fundamental quality of the world, but you have to include quantum physics to truly understand them. And that's the cutting edge of what's happening right now. So they're a fundamental quality of the world, but they're also in the center of every galaxy. It seems to be the case. The Sloan Digital Sky Survey did a wonderful study of vast number of galaxies. And I've seen these wonderful images where they put like a little red circle around all those galaxies that have a black hole in their center. And there are red circles all over that imagery. So it seems to be a ubiquitous quality that black holes are at the center of galaxies. And those are typically gargantuan black holes. Millions or billions of times the mass of the sun. Do we know why they existed the center of a galaxy? There's still a lot of uncertainty about galactic formation. Some have suggested that early stars, which were quite large, compared to more modern stars, when they exhausted their nuclear fuel and they collapsed in on each other, they created black holes that were large. And then they continued to suck in more material from the environment. They grew larger and larger still. So that's one rough way that people think about how these massive, enormous black holes may have formed. But it's uncertain. LIGO, this laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory, gravitational waves. It took headlines a few years ago when it detected the first ripples in the fabric of space. It detected them from two black holes that were 1.4 billion light years away. Like 1.4 billion years ago, rotating around each other, going near the speed of light, slamming into each other, creating a tidal wave in the fabric of space, that ripples outward at the speed of light, part of it, race toward planet Earth. There wasn't anybody on planet Earth to see it at the moment, but it had 1.4 billion year journey to traverse. It raced toward planet Earth when it's about 100,000 light years away, grazes the Milky Way galaxy, continues to race toward Earth. When it's 100 light years away, a guy named Albert Einstein writes down equations that suggest there could be these gravitational waves unknown that one is already racing toward the planet. And they continues to race on, we're two light days. It's two light days away when they turn on the newly refined version of the LIGO detector. And two days later that wave rolls by planet Earth shakes to two detectors, one of the Louisiana, they were Washington State giving us the first direct detection of ripples in the fabric of space and establishing that the story that I told you is true. So these things are real, they're out there. That is wild. And before the direct radio telescopic imagery from the event horizon telescope of the Black Hole in M87, that ripple in the fabric space was the most direct evidence that Black holes are real, because when you took the wave that the machine in Louisiana and Washington it twitched for just a tiny fraction of a second, when you figured out using supercomputers, what the cause of the wave must have been, you are led to two Black holes that are 28 and 31 times the mass of the sun, or 36 times the mass of the sun, numbers of that sort. And that was the only explanation for the data. And so there's this beautiful indirect proof that these stellar size Black holes are actually out there. And then of course we take a photograph of one in nearby galaxy. So do we know why Black holes would collide with each other? Are they attracted to each other? Because of their mass? It's a good question. Yeah, so certainly that is part of it. So binary star systems are not uncommon. They're fairly common, or two stars will be orbiting around each other. If those two stars exhaust their nuclear fuel, they can each collapse to a Black hole. So that's one possibility, or could be a Black hole's wandering through and captures another Black hole. It's a possibility too. I mean, I think go ahead and ask you a question about this one point I want to make as well. Which is, yeah, well, it was just that many people have in mind that Black hole sort of reach out and grab everything in. But a Black hole of mass M, a Black hole whose mass is the same as the sun, has the same gravitational pull as the sun. It doesn't pull any harder than the sun. It's just that you can get closer to it because it's so small. And therefore you can experience the gravity more strongly. But a brick of mass M and a Black hole of mass M they exert the same gravitational pull. OK, so we have this misconception that Black holes are always these super massive objects that have incredible amounts of gravity. And they're sucking in planets and stars, turning them up. Because we're thinking of massive black holes, like the super massive black holes are at the center of the galaxy. Which is like what, one half of 1% of the mass the galaxy? Well, let's see. So if our galaxy has say 100 billion suns, you know, and that guy is about 4 million times the mass of the sun, yeah, he's here talking about 1,000th or something of that sort of deal. Isn't that crazy when you say that 100 billion suns and you have to wrap your head around the idea of 100 billion stars? And that's just our little puny little galaxy. That's a thing. And they're crazy. There's at least 100 billion galaxies. And this is just in the observable of a universe. I mean, do you know if you take your thumb and you put your thumb on a nice clear night and you block out a thumbnail worth of the sky, you're blocking out about 10 million galaxies. It's so crazy. It's so crazy when it's because those numbers, I hear you say those numbers. I can repeat those numbers. But I don't think I'm really internalizing them. Can't because they're so non-human scale. We've just never experienced anything like that at all. And it could be that it's infinite. Space could go on infinitely far. It could be that the galaxies continue onward infinitely far. And therefore the numbers we're talking about could be minuscule on the scale of the fullness of reality. And that, of course, that leads people to the conclusion, well, there must be other life out there. There are all these planets around all of these stars, all of these suns that are out there. And I'm sympathetic to that perspective. But on the other hand, there are some pretty iconic qualities of our environment that allowed life to form. And intelligent life to form is yet another special event on top of the un-lactiness of life itself forming. So who knows? If a meteor hadn't slammed into the Earth 65 million years ago, it's still be the dinosaurs walking around. And who knows? Maybe they developed to a point where they start to contemplate these things. But I doubt it, right? And so there could be life out there. But if it's not intelligent life, it would be interesting. We'll learn a lot. But it's unclear that it's going to really change our sense of cosmic loneliness, which is really where we're at at the moment. Yeah, it's one of those things that are, it's probably one of the biggest questions that the human race has ever contemplated, are we alone? And if we are alone, is that good? Is it bad? Is it sad? Is it lonely? Like if life really is so difficult to cultivate to the point where it gets to be able to alter its environment the way we do. If this really is a one in 100 trillion opportunities. Well, yeah, to my mind, that gives us a certain profound responsibility. Yeah. Right. I mean, we could be. We could be the only intelligent life in the cosmos. And what are we doing with our time? Well, some people may want them computers that may revolutionize what it means to be a person. But if that's happening all throughout the galaxy, that's when things get really strange. If there's multiple examples of this, but not where we are, maybe 500 years ago, and maybe 500 years from, and maybe a million years from, depended upon the vulnerability of their solar system. Yeah. And some people find that frightening, right? Some people worry that, I mean, you know, the James Webb Space Telescope is supposed to launch in October, I think it is. And it's going to have this refined capacity to look at planetary atmospheres. As planets go by their host star, they're going to observe the spectra of light that's absorbed by that planet's atmosphere. And so there's a chance that you might find biomarkers. Right. In nitrogen. Yeah. You know, methane and carbon dioxide and so forth. And so the question then is, let's say there's some unmistakable signature that there is some light. And that first of all, it may not be intelligent life. But do you take a chance that it is? Do you try to make contact? I mean, Stephen Hawking famously was like, don't contact the aliens, right? He was like, every time a civilization encounters another civilization, it's not good for one of them. Right? We see that on planet Earth. You know? But we're crude. Like, when we're saying that, we're talking about crude territorial apes, encountering other crude territorial apes. throughout history, right? When human beings have encountered other human beings, they've gone, what do you have? You have gold, I'll take that. Give me your women, give me this, give me that. And you know, I'm a light everything else on fire. But that's just humans. If we can get past this, like what we were discussing before, that the human race itself culturally is moving pretty far away from where we were when we had to worry about pirate ships growing up through our docks. And that if we continue to go on this path and we get to the point where we all look like those gray aliens with the little feeble bodies in the giant heads, I think that iconic image, I think that's almost like we understand where this is going. Right, so the benign alien that we will one day become, if that's who we'd be contacting at some distant planet, then maybe it would be fine and look, how spectacular would it be to encounter another life form? First to see whether the biochemistry is the same, is life this one-off chance that happened only on... encounter another life form. First to see whether the biochemistry is the same is life this one off chance that happened only on these two planets because there's some coincidence or is it that there are many ways to get living systems and many ways to get intelligent living systems that is the first data that we'd ever have of that sort for sure. But yeah, I mean the question is will we get to a place where they're not afraid of us? Perhaps they're that much further ahead of us at the moment. Have you paid attention at all to the Pentagon's disclosure of these unidentified flying objects or what do they call them unidentified aerial phenomenon? Anytime I hear that stuff my eyes glaze over I have to tell you. It's not that there can't be alien life. It just feels to me so unlikely that they'd come all that way and hide. They come all that way and just as we're about to make contact with them they turn on the cloaking device or something of that sort. If they're able to travel that interstellar distance they're not going to be afraid of us. They meant to be interested in us. Why wouldn't you assume that they're curious and observing and making sure we don't blow ourselves up? Well, you know if they're able to do that I think that they'd better be better at cloaking themselves that we have no evidence that they're here whatsoever really. Wouldn't you think that the best way to acclimate people to the concept of extraterrestrial life is to slowly expose people to things. I don't purposefully. Yeah, I don't know that I would do it in sort of a mystery manner. If I was designing that level of sort of of version therapy to try to get the mutes to this idea that there's other life in the universe. Nor would I take the approach say of the Twilight Zone episode, the famous one, to serve man. It's a cupboard. It's the other approach. But the other thing to bear in mind that I think puts us in a slightly funky context and brings us full circle. If space goes on infinitely far, which is a certainly a real possibility, then you can mathematically argue that not only is there other life definitely out there, there copies of us out there. I mean, you can argue this. An infinite number of copies because there's in any finite region of space with a finite amount of energy, there are only finitely many ways that the particles can be arranged. And therefore, if you go on infinitely far, the particle arrangement has got to repeat. Right? I mean, it's like you have a deck of cards. As you shuffle the cards, you get this order that order the next order. But you and I know you shuffle it enough times. It has to repeat because there are only a finite number of different orders of the cards. So if you shuffle enough times, you're going to have to come back full circle. Similarly, you're going to have to come back full circle with a particle configuration if they go sufficiently far away. And so that would say that, yeah, of course there's other intelligent life out there. We are out there. I mean, literally, we in the sense of our configuration would be among those particle arrangements out there in this infinitely large universe. So it's a very strange idea. But there's an infinite number of you and I having this conversation. Yeah. In fact, in some of those, you know, there's a difference between what we observe here and what's happening out there. Infinite variability is infinite. Again, is anything that's allowed by the walls of physics? Any configuration allowed by the walls of physics in principle would happen out there. So, you know, some would argue that that means space does not go on infinitely far because the conclusions to absurd, you know, to accept. But the world- I don't think that's absurd because the world's observed. Well, I would say that the world isn't constructed by our definition of absurdity, right? The world just doesn't care. It is what it is. Right. You know, so that's, but it's a mind-bending possibility, which, you know, it doesn't really reflect on the question of whether there's life out there in the usual sense because we mean in the observable universe that we have direct access to and these regions would be too far away. But in that sense, we would be guaranteed that there would be life out there in this wider landscape. As we talked about, the concept of hundreds of billions of suns is so difficult for us to wrap our brain around, but that's nothing in comparison to the idea of an infinite number of universes, an infinite number of the exact same thing that's happening on earth happening all over the universe. Because it's so big. Yeah. That's, that's so, it's, you know, 100 billion is impossible to wrap your head around. But that is beyond impossible. Right. And you're just saying it, but my puny little brain is just like spitting out the words in the correct order. That's all I'm doing. But it's, it's kind of the best that we can do because, again, the only things that we have intuition for are the things that we have experienced. And infinity is something that we have never experienced. So it's a concept that we kick around fairly freely, but it's, it's a hard idea to really wrap your mind around. But we're talking about, in terms of distance, right? We're talking about infinite distance and through this infinite distance, infinite possibilities and through those infinite possibilities, there would be what we're experiencing here in infinite forms and infinite variability is all throughout the universe. But when you're talking about the many worlds theory, yeah, you're talking about it occurring not in a distance. Yeah. But you're talking about it almost like in a sort of a separate realm. Yeah. Normally talk about it. And those parallel worlds are somehow in existence, but they're not touching us. They're not like directly connected to us. And even those parallel worlds have infinite universes attached to them that are different. That's right. That's right. Now the weird thing that happened some years ago, and it's an idea that still in development, some physicists have suggested that the infinite worlds of the many worlds interpretation and the infinite worlds of infinite space, you know, that we're talking about from just having the reality extent infinitely far, they may be connected. There may be a connection between those worlds. There may be the same ideas just described in a different language. So it may not be that you take the infinity of worlds from infinite space and then add the infinity of worlds from the many worlds interpretation on top of it. It may be that secretly those two ideas are the same idea just described differently. So the same idea described differently. So somehow or another, these infinite versions of us that appear all throughout the galaxy are us. And they are the, they are the worlds demanded by this particular version of quantum mechanics. And somehow or another, we're interconnected with those worlds. Yes, through this sort of quantum wave function that's when people get real woo woo, they open up the possibility that every decision you make changes reality itself because you're now in a different timeline, you're now in a different version of what the universe is. Yeah, but for any individual experience, as far as we know, each individual psyche traverses one particular trajectory through this reality. So while I can imagine, there's another version of me who did something else in some other world, it's not something that impacts me in a profound way because my experience is limited to the particular trajectory that I follow. Your day to day. My day to day, you know, so is it a mind slapper to imagine that there's a version of me out there? Yeah, if I allow myself to fully take that in, it can even be distressing. It's like, who am I? You'd be into wonder what kind of identity, what kind of personal identity you have in a universe where there are multiple versions of you out there in the wider cosmos. But who can keep that in mind for more than a split second? Again, we go back to Brian, make the dinner. I take out the trash, man. You know, yeah, you have to have reality and truths. But there's also this faith that we have to have that the reality that we experience we wake up every morning is the reality that we've been experiencing our whole life. You know, we shut off and we turn back on again with memories and ideas. We just have to assume that this is all linear. Yeah. Yeah. And it was all based on memory. Yeah. I mean, memory is the thing that really defines us both as an individual and collectively as we're saying as a species. You know, it's like when we lose that capacity to hold on to memories, we lose everything. Yeah. We lose everything that defines who we are. And that's one of the saddest things about people that have memory disorders when you start to see them slipping away and not recognize their own children and not not understanding what's going on or where they are. Yeah. Now my wife's mother, you know, hope is not too personal, but she has, you know, Alzheimer's. And yet she no longer recognizes her kids. And it's profoundly sad. You know, it's there's a shell of an individual who's left, but without memory, there's no sense of who you were as a person any longer. Right. You just sort of existing in this fragile state, yeah, dependent upon all the people around you to use their memory. Yep. To sort of keep you going. And if you think about it, again, it's a whole distinguishing quality of being a human. Right? Yeah. Most life lives in the moment, sure. I mean, all life has some degree of memory. And I'm not saying anything other than that. But most life lives in the moment in terms of the goal oriented behaviors are fixated on solving an issue of the moment. Get the food, get the shelter, escape that predator. Right. We are the among the few species. And certainly we have the most refined version where we can lift ourselves out of the cosmic timeline. We can imagine the distant past. We can make predictions about the far future. And we can see our lives within a temporal narrative that most other animals just have no awareness of. And to my mind, that comes with power. We can understand things so much more deeply, but it's also tragic because we're also the sole species who really understands death. Yeah. Right. I mean, some people say to me, what about elephants? And I say, yeah, elephants, they do have morning rituals. I mean, I'm not saying that they don't respond to death of a member of their group. But that is again, responding to something of the moment. And sure, they for a few days will carry out a ritual behavior. We live our lives constantly aware of the fact that our time is limited. Our time is finite. And so that drives this search for meaning that many of us are on. That drives this search for purpose. And so that singular capacity of our brains to stand outside of the timeline is what to my mind defines what it is that makes life worth living. And to artificial intelligence can replicate that and do it in a much better and more efficient way. That's right. So we may be at an inflection point where we're no longer the special species in that way. You're absolutely right. I've always said that I think that human beings are the electronic caterpillar that gives way to the butterfly. Yeah, because we are we're doing something, you know, caterpillar doesn't know what it's doing. It's making a cocoon. We're buying iPhones and you know, and new televisions and this constant need for the newest best stuff. And even materialism in general, like materialism in general, in general fuels innovation because materialism, it makes you want the newest, greatest things. And the newest, greatest things are pushed by the fact that people are purchasing them. It becomes the big industry. If you looked at human beings from afar, like if you were objective and you looked at us like if we were something completely different than a human being observing us, well, what do these things do? All they make stuff, they make newer, better stuff. So they're things that they desire and that they create are better and more efficient every year. That's what they do. So they're just constantly innovating and creating, whether they're innovating personally or whether they're using their labor to fuel with the monetary success that they have from their labor and using that to fuel this innovation. But overall, the species, right, just like bees make beehives, people make things. Yeah. And that will ultimately be our undoing in a way that maybe cause or doing this sensitive maybe positive. We may transform to another level of being and we can look back at this era as the caterpillar stage that allowed that to happen or will just be gone. Yeah. How did Marshall McLuhan say? I said human beings are the sex organs in the machine world. I have to think that went through. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good one. It's a good one. And that he think, I think he said that in like the early 60s. Really? Yeah. Was that media matters? Was this a forget the book? Yeah, that it does ring a bell. I forget the book. Yeah. But there's something going on and if we keep going, he said, well, where's this lead to? It leads to like a doctor Manhattan from like the watchman that leads to some super powerful version of what a human being is. It's almost unrecognizable from a god. Yeah. Well, it's all the question of what energy we're able to conquer and bring within our capacity to control, right? Right. And when we controlled fire, we had a new energy source and a new energy source allowed us to cook food as we were talking about that cook food allowed the brain to grow. And as the brain grew, it allowed us to work together in groups to get bigger animals. And in that way, there's this wonderful cyclical loop whereby there's this relationship between energy control and evolutionary development. Right. So right now, where are we? Well, we're able to use some of the sun's energy. We haven't been able to use all of the sun's energy. Most of it goes off into space. But at some point, we'll fully be able to use the sun's energy. Maybe we'll surround it with, I don't know, a dyson sphere, this sphere that would capture all the energy and then beam it to wherever we needed it. So that will be a solar system level energetic control. And then at some point, we may go beyond that and be able to control the energy of many suns, maybe all suns in a galaxy. Is that really feasible to control? Well, to make some sort of a sphere around the sun. Well, Freeman Dyson, who is a very creative and brilliant physicist, again, one of the pioneers of quantum mechanics, yeah, he he imagined either you build a sphere, or he also imagined a version we'd have all these satellites in a spherical configuration around the sun. So maybe it wouldn't be a solid sphere, but it would be a spherical configuration. And so the sun's energy, which is mostly just radiating radially outward from the sun, could be captured. And if you could capture all of the sun's energy, then the things that you'd be able to do with that energy are radically different from the things that we're able to do with the energy sources that we now have. In fact, there have been at times it was always hype, I thought, but there have been times when people suspected that certain anomalous astronomical observations might be an advanced civilization having built a Dyson sphere. And we were seeing a signature of that in the sky. Not seeing that thing. But but at least in principle, you can imagine that if you demarcate the moments in the species by the energy that it can control. So fire, then we can control the energy of an atom, right? We can certainly control that through fish in. Well, at some point, maybe get to a place we were continually controlled through fusion. Now we built stars in the laboratory, if you will, then we'll control fusion on stellar scales, say through a Dyson sphere. And then we can keep on going. Now, where does that stop? I don't know. But if it doesn't stop, the ways in which we will evolve. I mean, just think about what fire did for us, right? The ways in which you're going to evolve, I think are going to be utterly stunning. And of course, we'll be controlling that evolution by that point through the control over genomic systems or through our merging with artificial systems. So yeah, you're right. This is, do you ever contemplate what that looks like are merging with these artificial systems? You know, I know not in any particularly creative way. I mean, I follow what people have done. And you know, it's, it's jaw dropping. The interfaces that people have developed between brains and artificial computational systems. So where's that headed? I don't know. It's enormous exciting, potentially frightening. But you know, that's what we'll have to see where that goes. I think ultimately we have to release our grasp on who we are now versus who we're going to be. We will have to do that. Yeah, right. Exactly. I mean, you can fight it. And, and I'm not by any means saying that we shouldn't try to have restrictions and controls that guide the way that artificial intelligence merges with humans and assist humans. I think we need to be mindful of that in order that we perhaps can have the most fruitful partnership as we go forward. But yeah, I do think at some point we'll have to give up an archaic sense of who we are in light of the capacities that these partnerships, these collaborations have put in the most positive light will yield. In a way, that's what the unabomber was terrified of, right? Wasn't that true? Yeah, he was, he wanted to stop technology. He thought that human beings are being foolish in their advancement of technology and that technology, I'm pretty sure that was part of his manifesto. The technology was going to replace us. Yeah, had an interesting way of expressing himself. He was a mass in a lot of different ways. He was a great documentary about him that I just watched recently. It was really, it was really, it was really, it was a technique. Yeah, right. You know, he was a part of the Harvard LSD studies. Is that true? Yeah, they'd dose that guy up with acid. You're kidding me. No, not at all. No, and they did that to quite a few people and a lot of them that mad and he was one of them. He became a professor, but just for a short period of time, so he could gather up the money to buy this cabin and then start his attack on people that created technology. Huh, I did that. All the people he blew up, all the people that he sent these bombs to, they were all related, I think most at least, were related to the propagation of technology. Huh. That is, that is fascinating. It's crazy. And he had all the elements too, like a very hateful, like from the time he was young and was abandoned by his parents, not abandoned in a way, but left alone, because he had some sort of a disease when he was young. And so he's left in this hospital system with no contact with human beings for weeks, and I believe even months at a time, and it apparently really fucked up his personality. Really? Because it was at his developmental stage when he was very young at a baby and just, you know, you need your mother, you need to be touched and they had him in some hospital for a long period time and then his brother, who was the one who recognized that he was the author of the manifesto, because he knows how crazy his brother is and he knows how he writes. He recognized the manifesto and recognized the language of it and then he relayed to things that his son had, yeah, and he relayed the thing his brother rather had gone through with his parents, very cold parents and like the whole, the whole deal was really, there was a lot, a lot of elements that were in play to create a Ted Kuzinski, but one of them was that he was a part of the Harvard LSD studies. I mean, it's sad and tragic, but you know, I don't know how you feel about it, but you know, the fact that we got this incredible paranoia about psychedelics and maybe it was stories, I didn't hear, I didn't know about the Ted Kuzinski connection, but certainly there was this irrational paranoia that emerged, you know, I guess in the 60s and 70s and shut down what was incredibly promising research. I'm not saying the Timothy Leary approach, but I'm saying there were people who were taking a very considered approach to psychedelics to deal with very specific issues and now it's starting to come back, which I think is enormously powerful because look, you know, everything that we've spoken about here, everything that we know about the world is filtered through the human brain. Right? So when we talk about quantum mechanics and general relativity, we're talking about we look out of the world, we process it through this particular conscious state and using that we're able to come up with ideas that explain things that we observe, but there are other states of consciousness. I mean, ultimately, I think that we create, I mean, I believe there's an real external reality, but we create our own narratives about that reality. And if with some additional substances, we can modify or enhance or enlarge the kinds of narratives that we're able to tell, the kinds of coherent stories that we're able to overlay on our experience, I think that's a vital thing. And psychedelics can help us get to that place. I think that's a vital role that they can play. I think the problem with psychedelics is when they're utilized without an understanding of the consequences of utilizing it. Of course, without discipline, without, you know, that's where we've really been robbed is that if they didn't pass the sweeping psychedelics act of 1970, where everything turned into a schedule one, even things that weren't psychoactive, they didn't pass that. We would have most likely entered into a stage of our history where we were running legitimate studies. And we got an understanding of the benefits of them like they're doing now with PTSD studies with MDMA, where they're realizing like, well, you know, this ecstasy stuff's not just a party drug, it actually can really help soldiers recover from some of the psychological wounds they have from combat. And then you've got what Johns Hopkins is done with psilocybin. There's psilocybin studies. And they're about to enter into some of them with UFC fighters now. Oh, is that right? Guys who have had traumatic brain injuries and been knocked out and had head injuries because neurogenesis that occurs through psilocybin, it's very unique. Like psilocybin allows the brain to regenerate neurons. It's one of the rare things that does that. And they think there could be some therapeutic uses of that for people that have been in car accidents, people, soldiers again who've experienced head injuries, football players, the right, anybody that's had like problems with cognitive function, maybe even neurodegenerative diseases. And all these things are just we know that there are some mushrooms like lions, Maine that have some cognitive benefits and neurogenesis properties. And they're they're hoping that there's some real therapy to these things. And they were denied the use of them for decades and decades. And based on ignorance. Yeah, no, I totally agree. It's interesting, you know, when people hear me, I suppose my view that all we are are particles governed by physical law. A number of people who have had psychodelic experiences contact me and say, I've got proof that that's not right. And of course, they'll communicate some kind of experience they've had under the influence of some kind of psychoactive substance. And it's interesting because, you know, I usually don't respond, but on occasions, I felt the need to respond. And it all comes down to do you view what happens during a psychoactive experience is tapping into some other deeper reality, or do you view it again as just some product of this amazing thing inside of our head when it is influenced in an unusual way by some kind of psychoactive substance. And to me, it just seems dead obvious that there's nothing beyond the particles and the laws. And if you change the particles, keep the laws the same, the experience is going to be a little bit different. And you're going to enter into a space that's unfamiliar, maybe terrifying if it's a bad trip, maybe thrilling if it opens up some unification of reality. And you feel one with the cosmos fantastic. But to me, that's the miracle of the brain as opposed to tapping into some other kind of reality. And I guess that's the sticking point for people who think that there's got to be something more than this physicalist perspective of stuff and laws. That is a bias that we have. We want there to be something more. We don't know what that experience is. However, it's indistinguishable from the experience of entering into another realm. Like the problem is trying to put it on a scale and say, nope, this is what it is. Because you're having this experience that's what you want to call it a hallucinogen, hallucinogenic experience, are you hallucinating? Like whatever word you want to use, whatever that thing is when you take these substances, it's a like if you are really being transported into another dimension and communicating with other entities and then coming back to earth or whether or not you're imagining it, the experience is the same. That's where it gets really weird. Yeah. So like maybe everything happens in the mind. Right. And so there are versions, theories of the world where the only thing that's real, this consciousness. Yes. And the only thing that we do is we overlay experiences within our own subjective consciousness and we wait them as real or not real. But that's all artificial because it's all just in the mind. That's what I was going to get anyway. What do you think about that? I think it's nonsense. And it's not that it's crazy talk. Right. In principle, you could imagine the world being constructed that way. But I do firmly believe that there is real stuff that's governed by real laws. We may not have those laws. We may not fundamentally know what the stuff is. But I think there's a real external stuff. And when that stuff is configured in the right pattern, such as a human brain, it can begin to have an inner world and inner experiences, which is itself wondrous and mysterious. Don't get me wrong. But that inner world is not tapping into anything beyond its own inner experience. It's just as an experience as infinite and its possibilities or nearly infinite possibilities. I mean, and so where do you draw the line? I think it's a real question between reality as experienced in the human brain and experiences in the human brain that you want to call reality. And it's a tough question. It's a very tough question. You have to at some point have a means of saying there is real stuff in the world that our brain is experiencing and filtering in some way versus stuff that's generated from the inner world itself. And that distinction is hard to make precise, but I think it's utterly profound. Have you had any psychedelic experiences yourself? Yeah, we discussed this once a little bit. Forget your answer though. Yeah. So a couple, I don't consider myself well versed in this world. Do you feel like that's something you're missing I do actually. And I think as I get older and I become more aware of my own finite nature as the curtain begins to start to roll down from the rafters. I do hunger for a distinct kind of experience. There's a book that I think everybody should read up. Maybe you've read it. William James' book, varieties of religious experience. It's old written back in 1902. William James' great psychologist. He gave some lectures in Scotland, I think it was at the turn of the century. And he interviewed a whole host of people in order to get a feel for the kinds of religious experiences, but really the kind of spiritual experiences that people would have. And some of them were generated through some kind of psychoactive substance that people were using at the time. And his descriptions are so vivid that I feel like I've been there on some of these excursions, these mental excursions. But I do have a hankering. I do have an urge to enlarge my own sense of what reality is through that experience. And look, the thing that we once discussed was something that happened in Amsterdam, and it was probably very mild compared to other things because I don't really drink. I don't eat meat. I'm pretty clean in that way. So I'm pretty susceptible to these kinds of influences. And I did not enjoy the experience that I had. It was pretty awful. However, back when I was in college, I had some other experiences on other substances, again, all relatively mild. And those were far more enjoyable and mind-expanding. And I can see both sides. and those were far more enjoyable and mind expanding. And I can see both sides and I'm definitely, I feel compelled to explore more. And I think the world's getting to a place where it will become more amenable to people doing that. Yeah, they're starting to legalize siliceye, been in a lot of States. That's the real gateway to these experiences. Once they make that legal and then you develop, what we really need to do is develop places where you can in a professional setting where people actually understand the dosage based on your weight, based on how much siliceye of in whatever substance you're taking or whether it's synthetic or whether it's in mushroom form because it's very strong siliceye and based mushrooms and other ones that are more mild. And once there's real legalization, you can go into a marijuana store, for instance, in Los Angeles and you could buy marijuana based on the THC content. So you could say, what do you have as mild? And then we got some of this. What do you have that's like crazy? And they'll have space weed that really fuck you up. And then they have edibles, which are a totally different animal because your body process is through the liver and it produces a completely different psychoactive substance. So like we know all that now because marijuana has been essentially legal since the 90s and legal legal since 2016 when it was voted in in California. So we have much more of an understanding of the real psychoactive effects and you can actually control it much more. We need that with everything. And when I've read it and some of these studies, the people who are like newcomers to this, they actually have an individual who's experienced that sits with the individual and guides them on their journey. Oh yeah, they have services like that. Yeah. California is much more advanced. And so is Colorado and so is Washington State. And there's a lot of state, but here in Texas it's still illegal, which is kind of fucking hilarious. Yeah, you see my view is, so what do we do is physicists? We tell one particular story of the world that the level of particles and laws. The chemists comes along and takes our understanding and builds molecules and atoms from it. The biologist comes and takes those structures and builds cells and living systems and that kind of domain. And then ultimately you get up to the neuroscientists who studies the brain and the philosopher who's trying to see meaning that the brain is striving for and so forth. What it all amounts to is a variety of stories that discuss distinct qualities of the world. And the richest experience you get is from layering all those stories on top of one and others so you can see the biggest possible narrative of all. Now if these kind of psychoactive substances can give you new stories that you wouldn't have access to through the traditional means, the academic means of say of science or through the philosophical means or artistic forays if these psychoactive substances can bring in a new narrative. How wonderful could that be for all of us to be able to layer an additional story or multiple stories upon our understanding of the world? Well you know who had that belief, Carl Sagan. Is that your Carl Sagan? Was a giant fan of marijuana. I didn't know that but I didn't. I've never seen any quotes where he's actually speaking about the experience. Yeah, of Xi Jinping, Carl Sagan on marijuana because he had a direct quote that was very similar to what you were just saying that he believes there's certain thoughts that you achieve and states that you achieve on marijuana that are impossible to get to without it. I see paraphrase. Right, yeah. He was a heavy duty pilot. As you can imagine, someone is fucking staring at space all the time, like man this is crazy. Well not everybody does but from a different time. Yeah, right. You know I mean he's traveling all these circles with all these like musicians and artists and all these different people because he was not just an astronomer, he was also like a Neil deGrasse Tyson. Yeah, it's a good time. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Promoting it in a way. Yeah. And he did a brilliant job of doing that obviously. And totally, I was inspired by him. I mean Neil obviously was. I was inspired by him too as a kid. You know, this idea of the wonder and the majesty of the cosmos is opposed to just sort of the test that you had to take in third grade on something you're meant to memorize. Also his elegant use of the language to describe it in a way that was so inspiring and so it was so moving the way he would describe the cosmos. Here it is. The cannabis experience has greatly improved my appreciation for art, a subject which I had never much appreciated before, the understanding of the intent of the artist which I can achieve when high sometimes carries over to when I'm down. I guess that's where they would call back then, when I'm down. This is one of the many human frontiers which cannabis has helped me traverse a very similar improvement in my appreciation of music has occurred with cannabis. For the first time I've been able to hear the separate parts of a three part harmony and the richness of the counterpoint. I have since discovered that professional musicians can quite easily keep many separate parts going simultaneously in their heads. But this was the first time for me. He also thought it dramatically helped improve his sex life as he analytically explains here. Cannabis also enhances the enjoyment of sex. On the one hand it gives an exquisite sensitivity. The actual duration of orgasm seems to lengthen greatly but this may be the usual experience of time expansion which comes from cannabis smoking. And lastly he argues for outright legalization in light of these benefits. The illegality of cannabis is outrageous and impediment to full utilization of a drug which helps produce the serenity and insight, sensitivity and fellowship so desperately needed in this increasingly mad and dangerous world. This is only one of many quotes that he's had on cannabis because this is not... Scrops it's how about that? You get a whole essay on it. Yeah. There's a bunch of stuff to see. Yeah, so that was... Oh, he had a book called marijuana reconsidered. He did? I don't know. Oh, and it's a book. In a book. Okay, so is someone else's book. And all those who scroll back up, he called himself Mr. Axe. Oh, he wrote under a pseudonym. Interesting. I mean, I agree with the conclusion about legalization. I'm not sure the argument there is this drawn as one. A lot of Carl Sagan's sex life and his ability to hear art and music is the best argument for legalizing marijuana. No, it's not the best argument. But it is an argument for it. And it's an argument for it. Yeah. Not just the use, but the enhancement of life through it. Yeah. But the other argument is it's something that we can control as a society as opposed to eliminate. And if there is an option of that sort in general, that's the right way to go. Well, the war on drugs has been lost. Thankfully. Well, part of it is like part of it. Yeah, well, part of it was misguided. Right. He was a misguided war. Yeah. In fact, I think New York just legalized I believe I'm mistaken. And I was wondering, is that retroactive? I mean, somebody who... It should be. Yeah, but is it? Yeah, no, it's not. There's a lot of people that are in jail with the rest of their lives for trafficking marijuana, which is incredible. Yeah. And it should look, it's just a plant folks. And it's not toxic and doesn't kill anybody. And it's not even addictive. In very rare cases, there seems to be some people that purport some physical addiction to cannabis, but there's no real mechanism for it that's widely understood. Like the mechanism for benzodiazepines being addictive or alcohol, whereas you get off of them, there's actually a real possibility you could die from withdrawal. There's nothing like that with marijuana. The addiction seems to be mostly psychological, but again, the biological variability of people, like some people have weird reactions to stuff, and some people may become actually physically addicted to marijuana, but it's super rare. And way more rare than a lot of things that we can buy readily everywhere all the time, whether it's cigarettes or prescription drugs. I mean, cigarettes are a great example. Yeah, it just doesn't make any sense. I think now 12, 13 states, it's legal. Yeah, I'm an enthusiast. I love the stuff. It's heading in the right direction. Yeah, I don't. I don't. I mean, it happens so long. Well, maybe that's a problem, bro. Maybe we should just park one up. We can get on this. We should have a trip. It's legal in New York now. It is. Yeah, but you got to fucking have a vaccine passport to go anywhere now. They're doing weird shit in New York. Mario Cuomo guy or Andrew Cuomo. His son, that guy, Jesus Christ. It's just these people. It's amazing how people are exposed in their ability to navigate or not navigate the pandemic and like what it's done in terms of like different cities and how different places in the country have embraced freedom or embraced regulation and what it's done to in terms of like the impact that it's had on the businesses and then in turn the economy and in turn people's lives and the log addiction. But the thing to bear in mind too is everybody's situation is different. That will impact their views. So for instance, if I told you what we did, you'd probably think I was an extremist. We left New York City. We went up to the mountains and the Catskill Mountains. We cut ourselves off. But as I was mentioned, I was with my 92-year-old mother and I was with my son who has an auto-immune issue. Well, that sounds like a great thing though. That's what I'm saying. So when has to always gauge response to say for sure, but on circumstance. That's not what my concern is. My concern is government over. Yeah, my concern is not personal decisions. I think your personal decision was an excellent one. First of all, I think if you can go to the Catskill and live there, that's a good move period. I mean, it's beautiful up there. Yeah, though my kids are hankering to come back to civilization. I'm sure. Yeah, I'm sure. But ultimately I think when they look back on that experience, they're going to look back on it. I think so. I think so. Yeah. My son already realizes that. I mean, the fact that you have a year to spend an unusual circumstance where you rely on each other in a different way, when do you ever have that possibility? For instance, we never would eat dinner as a family. We'd always be this chaotic thing in Manhattan. Everybody would just eat it through our moment. We ate every meal together. And I cooked every meal for 350 some odd or 70 days or something. Wow. So it was different. It was definitely different. So you got to expand your culinary skills? I did. Absolutely. What is that? Anybody vegan by whole family vegan? They're not. But when I cook, I cook vegan. So they are eating vegan, even though if they make their own meal and we had things in the refrigerator, they're not vegan. So it's up to them. Yeah, my family got together every night from movie night. We went through the entire Adam Sandler catalog in the first couple of months. We said we were going to do that movie night somehow. It never fully happened. It was great. And I got to introduce my kids to movies that I saw, that they had never like the Zohan, which is one of my favorite movies. I know that movie. Oh my God. Never see that? No. Oh my God. It's one of Adam Sandler's greatest movies. Don't mess with the Zohan. It's fucking amazing. It's called the Larry. I think it's his best movie. Other than Uncut Gems, which I think is fantastic, but in a completely different way. Uncut Gems is just this wild chaotic movie that gives you you see Uncut Gems? No, no. My son saw it. That's fairly recent, isn't it? Yeah. Couple of years ago. It gives you anxiety. You're watching, going, Jesus is about a guy who's a hardcore gambling addict who, you know, I don't want to spoil it, but it's amazing. It's a really good movie. But it's so different than all of his other films, which are these like light hard and silly movies. Yeah. But don't mess with the Zohan. It's fucking hilarious. All right. It's really funny. Going to check that out. Yeah. I'm a giant Adam Sandler fan. Because his movies are just silly. They don't have some crazy message to them. There's no wokeness or no social responsibility. They're just madness. But you know? I love Jim Cair. Yeah. Me too. Yeah. I love especially some of the early stuff, you know? Dumb and dumber. Oh, yeah. It's great. Great. I thought I heard the new one suck though. They're going to be doing a three and the one was really good. Oh, wow. How was two? Was two any good? Yeah. When is your cause? I never saw two. Yeah. Oh, that was a bad reason. It was like, I mean, not recent. Next to the original one. Oh, yeah. You're close to him. Yeah. Yeah. I never saw that. Dumb and dumber too, supposedly sucked though, right? Correct. Well, the opening was a good scene. Dumb and dumber too. The catheter scene, wasn't it? How? Is that dumb and dumber too? I have to maybe I'm getting out of film. I don't know. But it was just interesting to expose my kids to different things. Sure. But limited to 10-year-olds, not in anything scary. I have to be careful. Right. So their experience of the pandemic was fairly ordinary because they were going to school and you were here. Well, in the beginning, they were not. Because we're in California. They were going to Zoom classes. And then once we moved to Texas this year, it's all been in school. And they both got COVID eventually. But mild. Very mild. Yeah. Like one of them barely knew she had it. I was like, I want to get you checked. Because like, you got to, like, you got to headache. And I'm like, why are you having a headache? What's going on? And so because I have access to testing, I have access. I have a machine at my home. How you doing? And I have a machine here. Yeah. Because when people come over the house to do work and stuff, I was like, let's just test everybody. Because if you have someone coming over the house or someone doing things in this way, also, I knew like if my parents are going to come over, I want to make sure that everybody's, my wife's parents, make sure that everybody's OK. So we tested her. And like, Bingo, she had COVID. And then eventually my other daughter and my wife got it. But I never got it. And then, but did you quarantine them at all? Did you change anything when they happened? Yeah, I kept them. Yeah, I was quarantine them and made sure that we tested them up until the point where they were negative. And then when they were negative, we gave them three days of testing the road. Make sure that they're, you know, you want to make sure they're actually negative before you. Of course. But it was quick. I mean, my one daughter, the first daughter had a headache for a day. And that was it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I don't think I've had it. But the curious thing is I was in China in December. And then in January, I suddenly got 104 fever. And I went to Columbia Presbyterian Hospital. And they asked me, you know, where have you been? I said China, they kind of freaked out. And they put me in an isolated room by myself. And this is when I had the backache, those actually before our previous conversation. Did they even have COVID testing? They didn't have, they may have had the possibility to send a sample, someplace else, but they didn't. Did you ever get tested for anybody? No, I have not. And my wife keeps telling me I should have tested curiosity. Yeah. But that was like early January. Shit, we could have tested you here. You got to end the competition. Yeah. Anybody tests? Yeah. The nurse would have tested you for that as well. I mean, the nurse who did the nymphoswap? Yeah. Well, well, Jamie still has antibodies. He got COVID in October. Look at him strong. Jamie's not strong in anybody. He's not COVID. Yeah. I mean, it's amazing. His antibodies are strong. Like you look at it's a thick line. Because some of my friends who have had COVID, their antibody tests, we've done it with them. And their antibodies are pretty low. I see. And they're not in anybody. And without the vaccine. No vaccine. Yeah. No, Jamie's fucking bulletproof with it. He's got a thick, fat line for the antibodies for whatever reason. And that's it's very so much, depending upon the individual. Yeah. And how is your wife's case? Not bad. She might wife has allergies. And she gets these shots. And that's what did her in. The shots always get her exhausted. Because she's alerted to fucking everything, like grass and horses. I don't cause a shit. So she gets these, she goes to an allergist to get shots. And it's radically improved her ability. But every time she goes that day, she's wrecked. She's like, oh, because your body's like overwhelmed with her. So your immune system is overwhelmed. And that's what develops is the resistance to these allergies. But that night, she started feeling like shit. But before that, she worked out that day, felt great. And then we tested her the next day. And she had it. Yeah. But it's obviously, it's dependent upon your health, dependent upon how much you exercise, what you eat, how well you take care of yourself. And then also what preexisting conditions. Yeah. And that was going to be what you variant too. Right. I mean, that's what's weird is that this variant coming out of Brazil, they're worried about, apparently, this variant coming out of Brazil is virulent. Yeah. So some people say we should consider it sort of a separate disease. Yeah. I think we're going to probably deal with the shit every year from now on now. Yeah. But look, I mean, January of last year, they had the vaccine. I mean, there's that amazing thing. A few days after sequencing the virus, they were able to develop the vaccine. So that, I mean, it wasn't available. Right. But now we have that knowledge, presumably next go around, the duration of time between identification and delivery will be much shorter. Yeah. I would like them to really concentrate on, I mean, it would be really nice. I know this is a time where no one wants to fat shame, because everybody's worried about body positivity and letting people think they're OK, no matter what you are. But you're not. Your body, when it's obese, is much more likely to be susceptible to all sorts of ailments. And 78% of the people hospitalized for COVID were obese. Yeah. I didn't know that number. Yeah. So it's a terrible number. If you think about it that way. That presumably you could have avoided 78% of the hospitalization I mean, because it is a thing that a person can't avoid, it is physically possible that you could not be obese. It's not something like you're born blind, or you're born with leukemia. This is something that you buy a virtue of your actions or your diet or your genetics. You're more predisposed to being heavy. It's unfortunate there's no emphasis on that. That all the emphasis was about staying inside, where three masks keep away from each other. That's all well and good. But there should have been more emphasis on taking care of your body, taking care of your health. And it's just there was almost none. Almost none. The CDC didn't even have anything on their website about vitamin D until fairly recently. Is that true? Yeah. Well, until recently the CDC was neutered. Yeah, and that's crazy. Yeah. It's really crazy that the former CDC director coming out and saying that it's more likely than not, that this was an accidental release of something that they were working on the Wuhan lab. And this is because of Trump, because the guy's such a polarizing figure that anything that he said, everybody was like, well, fuck whatever he said. If that wasn't the narrative, if he didn't have this constant desire to call it the China virus, and the people didn't hate him so much, people would have probably looked into that much more readily. Because it means not out. I mean, you're talking about a level four lab that is in the same area where the breakout occurred. And in that level four lab, they work on, wait for it, coronaviruses. And then Newsweek now entertaining the idea and the CDC director, former CDC director, he comes out and says it's much more likely than not. Yeah. It's interesting. I don't know anything about it, but all I can say is that as a scientist, the move from an era when nobody paid attention to facts or denigrated facts or denigrated expertise, at least moving in the direction where hopefully these facts and expertise actually matters. I think that's a vital move. Yeah, it would be really nice if the facts only, and that's it, where what we discussed and expressed. Do you think that is there enough funding for the type of research that you do, for the type of things that you're interested in? Would we be better off as a civilization if there was more money allocated to the study of? Yeah, absolutely. I mean, it's not as though the kind of science that we do is particularly expensive. I mean, those of us on theoretical end of the universe don't need big equipment. But we do need students. We need the next generation. We need the postdocs and the graduate students. And now we find ourselves in like a zero sum game where we're like, well, if we take that student, we can't take that one. Or if we take that student this year, then for the next two years, we can't take any other students. I mean, these are the kinds of calculations that literally are being done right now. Really? And compared to the amount of funds that we spend, I hate to frame it as a zero sum game. But you divert some military funds to this kind of research. They would never know to the difference. And it would make an enormous difference to the ability of our kind of science to train the next upcoming generation. So the answer is absolutely no, there's not enough funding. And it's a tragic situation because there are these brilliant young minds who want to pursue these kinds of ideas. And look, some will say, some in government will say, well, if that's all esoteric stuff. But those very same Congress people or senators, if they were in their position in the 1920s, I've little doubt they would have said the same thing about quantum physics. It's just esoteric. It's just these guys and women who want to understand strange things about particles. But then 80 years later, quantum mechanics is driving a significant fraction of the economy. Quantum mechanics, as we're talking about, integrated circuits, an old manner of electronic gadgetry so it's incredibly short-sighted to not recognize that fundamental basic science is the engine of economic growth. That's not why I do it. I'm not that interested in economic growth. I'm interested in the ideas and the insight, but put that all to the side. From a pure dollar and cents standpoint, it's a cheap investment for an incredible potential payoff. And we're being short-sighted by not funding it at the level that it should be funded. What do you think could enhance the public's perception of these things other than what you're doing, which is a great thing by these speeches and going on podcasts like this one, or by writing your books? Like what can we do to allow people to understand the significance of this work and how it's really impaired by these decisions that you have to make to choose one student over another student or to be limited in the amount of students you could accept? I mean, it's tough. I mean, certainly as you're saying, you know, books and lectures, you know, television, documentaries, I mean, all these things are really good for getting these ideas out into the public, into the culture, into the zeitgeist. But ultimately, you've got to catch kids at an early age, because it's the kids at an early age who are open to these ideas, without having to be convinced that they might be of interest. And it's only when they get to fourth or fifth or sixth grade, that their attention starts to turn away from science, which feels abstract and difficult, usually because of the way it's taught in the classroom. So one of the things that we do, and I have this nonprofit, World Science Festival, is all about creating experiences for kids and adults that allow them to immerse themselves in all of these ideas, from quantum mechanics to cosmology to nanoscience, to personalized medicine, the whole gambit without it feeling like school. Right. Without it. With that exciting and fun. And with that, it feeling like it's all about assessment. So much of our educational system. I know this is an overgeneralization and all you teachers out there who are doing a great job, you know, fantastic. But it's so much of our educational system is focused on assessment. I mean, my kids, so much of their learning of science and other subjects too. It's all about get to the next quiz, get to the next exam. And once they throw it, the material is gone. It's not there for the joy. It's not there for the wonder of it. And so if we can create experiences for kids and adults, so it's a full family experience, where it's just so thrilling to learn about black holes and the big bang and quantum mechanics and entanglement and all the stuff that we're talking about, then I think you've got a chance that the next generation looks at science in a different way. Yeah. Like what do you think could be done to make it more exciting for kids? Like a documentary for sure is always a good one because a really good documentary excites people in an entertaining way. And one that's structured well and it's got a good pacing to it that sort of stimulates people's fascination with the subject. What do you think about, I mean, I don't know if you've done any work with this stuff, but have you ever messed around with virtual reality? So I was about to answer virtual reality before you reset it. So yeah, so we have a nice partnership that turns out with Verizon, who's, you know, they have this new 5G network and they're trying to find ways to revolutionize things using that. And so we won a nationwide competition, we're one of the handful of groups who create a virtual reality experience for middle school kids using the 5G network. So it's fast. There isn't latency in the system. And we created a virtual reality experience of planet formation and star formation. So the kids, you know, they put on the headset and they go in there and they have these controllers where they can cause little dust particles and rocks to coalesce into a planet. And then they can try to shoot the planet into orbit. You have to have the right angle and the right speed. You know, as it goes crashing into the star. You know, and then they can accelerate the life cycle of the star using their controller and cause it to go supernova or turn into a black hole. You know, so kids who go through this, it's a full body experience of the cosmos. And so if you had a whole bunch of these experience, this is just like a pilot experience. Yeah. Imagine doing the one of these for quantum mechanics. Yeah, that's what I wanted to get to know. Where you can sort of see the quantum entangment and feel the quantum entanglement or imagine doing for relativity where you can experience time slowing down at high speeds or time slowing down to the edge of a black hole. Then I think if that was an intrinsic part of the experience, science would be taken in in like a visceral way. And that's why we call this visceral science for that reason because it's a way in which science can kind of come into you not just through like studying, but through experience. Yeah, that would be an amazing thing. How would you represent entanglement? Like what visual representation of entanglement would you use and how would you make it accurate? Because talking about something that we don't really air quotes see, right? You're just measuring it. Sure, totally. I wish I had an answer for you. And that would be part of the development process to try to find a way. And because you can't literally represent it because as you say, like the quantum probability wave is not something that we literally see. But there might be a way of representing it visually that would not be misleading and yet would give kids a sense of aha. So that thing that I used to consider to be a particle as a dot, it actually has a spread out character from this probability wave. Now those words would be hard to take in their abstract. But if you just saw the wave and it was represented in a vibrant manner, a kid might be able to take in the gist of the idea, not be able to do like calculations but in taking the gist of the idea and moreover. Imagine you have kids that go into this system and it's a real well developed system 20 years from now say and they do it from a really young age. They might develop a quantum intuition that you and I don't have. Like you were earlier asking me, so what's the intuition? Like how does entanglement work? In a way that allows me to wrap my brain around it. Maybe you can't do it because your brain is too old. But maybe if you catch a young brain and they experience these weird ideas from the get go and maybe come part of their way of thinking of the world. And it may be much easier for them to visualize and get these ideas than without this kind of virtual reality experience. So I think there's a huge potential in there. Do you remember those one of the things from what the bleep that a lot of people took on bridge with was the Dr. Quantum cartoon? Actually those are not bad. Not too bad, right? Yeah. They kind of got it right. Not a lot of it, right? But something like that. The shows. Oh for sure. The weirdness of quantum reality or quantum physics. Yeah. So and the thing that I thought was good about those two is especially for the younger kid. It put it in a bit more of a narrative. It wasn't just pedagogical. It was like this weird superhero character I think is what it was. Dr. Quantum. Dr. Quantum or something. So I'm a great fan of putting scientific ideas in a narrative form. You know, again going back to evolutionary psychology, there are many reasons why we learn things better when they're framed in a story. Because experience is story. And so we've gotten very good at extracting information from story like experiences. So rather than abstractly teaching IH bar D side D T equals minus D 2 over DX squared psi plus V of X psi of X rather than writing out the Schrodinger equation of this abstract piece of. actually teaching IH bar d psi dt equals minus d2 over dx squared psi plus v of xi of x rather than writing out the Schrodinger equation of this abstract piece of language mathematics if you can frame it in a narrative. If you can frame it in terms of how it was discovered you can frame it in terms of maybe you follow the life cycle of an electron governed by this equation whatever if you can put it into a story like environment kids and adults are going to get it more fully. What if you can take it and put it inside of a video game that's exciting to play. Yeah. So the lessons of quantum mechanics and quantum entanglement and quantum physics inside some crazy video game where you kind of have to understand what's going on in order to advance. Yeah. So you're speaking my language and you're taking away all my punch lines which is really good. So right now we're working on a little video game where the player goes in and they manipulate the speed of light and they manipulate it by performing certain tasks and to carry out the tasks you have to get an intuition for special relativity how the world behaves at high speeds or in our case as the speed of like its lower the relativistic effects become more manifest in the everyday world. So a game like setting where you have to gain an intuition for the weirdness of physics I think is a powerful combination. Yeah. That would be amazing if there was some sort of a way where you could kind of give them these little hurdles that they have to solve in order to advance. Exactly. But make it make it surmountable. Yes. Make it surmountable so it's not frustrating. Yeah. But make it challenging enough and interesting enough that you try to get to that point and some sort of a visual and exciting way. Yeah. And for instance, when you go near the speed of light, the world around you looks very different. It curves in on you buildings in a cityscape become compressed in one direction and angled and different. It's very weird. But if you then have a challenge that requires you to have an intuition about that weirdness like maybe firing a laser down a street but the street is now angled and curved because of the high speed, you can imagine that you get a feel for it. You get an intuition. Yes. Yeah. And so again with this, so with the World Science, Professor Verizon, we're in the midst of building an experience of that sort. And we'll see how well it does giving folks a sense of these ideas in a game like setting. I would imagine putting something like that together would be incredibly involving like it is. You know, our journey journey has helped along by an earlier iteration of this idea that a group at MIT put together. I think it was called slower than the speed of it. It was a pretty rudimentary video game. How long ago is this? Maybe 10 years ago, I think. And so what we're doing is in a virtual reality environment, upping the experience. And in that way, I think that version, I mean, maybe the MIT folks if they're listening can chime in. I don't think it really caught on. But I think in a virtual reality setting where it's immersive, it can be really, really powerful. Those things must be incredibly difficult to code, right? Like a virtual reality thing. Like what kind of a timeline are you on to do something like this? Well, we created the version of a planet formation and stellar formation. That was about one year, I guess it took. And how long has the experience? It's you can be in there. It branches out. So there's a lot of stuff that you can do. But the typical kid will be in there 20 minutes, 25 minutes. More than that, it becomes, it can become sickening. I don't know how much virtual reality. Yeah. I mean, I'm particularly sensitive to motion sickness. I get sick. I'm like the Staten Island ferry. And most of these things I'm pretty okay with. But after a while, you just start to feel uncomfortable. Is this it? Hey, there it is. Rising demo day. Well done. It's up there on the screen. Yeah. So yeah, so this is from the perspective of a player. And that player goes, and again, of course, this is on a flat screen. Imagine you're in this 3D environment, you know, and using these controllers, you can grab hold of those little dust particles and rocks. You can use it to create a planet as it's happening right here. And so a proto planet is forming. And ultimately, the user will have that planet. And they then try to send the planet into orbit. You know, there we go. This is why. Yeah, yeah, exactly. You know. And as the planet goes into orbit, it then sweeps up more debris as it grows larger and larger, gravitationally pulling in the other rocks and dust in its environment. So this is, you know, this is really our phase one version of this project. We are refining the visuals on this right now. And the black hole has formed. Do you see a black hole? And those are the other one. They're having a chart. The other players. Yeah. Exactly. Wow. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. This is cool. Yeah. And that's the way to do it. Yeah. That's going to get people excited about it. Yeah. And we were supposed to roll this out in many schools, but then the virus hit. So it got put on hold. But at some point, this would be in a lot of middle schools. We rolled it out and cleaved it in a couple schools. The kids love it. You know. So there's a real, real opportunity here to transform the way kids engage with these ideas. That's really bad ass. I love that you're doing that. I think that's such a great way to do it to do it through virtual reality. Because virtual reality, so exciting as it is. Yeah. And to have it in some sort of game form like that. Yeah. Yeah. And that this being one of the first ones of those, it could probably expand like if you didn't get it to the point where something like a fortnight game involves, you know, me something of that level of popularity. Yeah. No, that would be amazing. And that would be transformational. Yeah. But it seems like it's not impossible. No, I agree. I agree. It is not impossible. One of the obstacles, of course, is that there's not a huge uptake on virtual reality equipment yet. That's starting to change as the prices come down. You know, the quest quest to be Oculus. Yeah. Yeah. You know, this was all done on a machine that would acquire a couple thousand dollars for you to invest in the in computer and the headset. But all that will change. Yeah. You know, and then in the not too distant future. But the other hurdle is you really do have to make sure that kids don't get sick. Like my wife, she is epilepsy. She had a brain tumor and the end result was that she is epilepsy. And she went into one of not this experience, but a different virtual reality experience. And about a minute or two in, she started to have a seizure. So from the strobing was a strobing. Not even the strobing was somehow that there was a mismatch between your movements in the real world and your movements in the virtual world because there was all sorts of stuff flying at her. This is an experience around like the rings of Saturn or something. And it was the disparity between her sense of movement in the real world and her sense of movement in the virtual world. And she had to immediately get out of the headset and go sit down and get out of it. That's crazy. Yeah. Now I was uncomfortable, but I wasn't sick in that experience. I had a friend whose wife couldn't look at like a strobing image online. Yeah. Well, if she saw something strobing online, all of a sudden her brain would short circuit. Well, my wife similarly will close her eyes. If ever there is any strobing of that sort. Yeah. So it was a tumor that they took the tumor out and she was 29 years old. So it was, almost three decades ago. Wow. So she's fine. But there's this remnant effect. Or maybe she had this beforehand. No one knows cause and effect when it comes to this. But the bottom line is, yeah. So for kids, you just have to be careful that you're not creating something and that's the other thing that you have to be very mindful of. Maybe as virtual reality gets more and more involved or more and more accurate. It'll be less and less weird. You know, because like there's that thing that uncanny valley. Yes, of course. With, yeah, with visualizations and so on. But the difference here is if you're not actually moving in the real world, but you are experiencing motion in the virtual world, that disparity for my wife's center into a seizure space. But for other people, it does make them feel sick. So the challenge is to find a way because what you really want is you want to go into the virtual world and zip around. You know, you want to go near the speed of light. You know, want to go to a black hole. But most of these systems, they have to be constructed so that the environment appears around you as opposed to you zip into it and zip through it because of the feeling of nausea. What about some sort of a chair? The peers to like have to feed back where it makes it feel like you're actually going. There is a version of that one. And my wife did that one in a virtual reality set up that they had in in California. And that worked okay for her. I didn't want to get on it because again, if I get sick on Staten Island, Ferry, if I get in a chair and I'm like a roller coaster, forget about it. You know, I'm dead. But, but yes, that that may ultimately help. And so yeah, if you could somehow create a consonance between your sense of movement in both the real world and the virtual world, then yeah, I presume you'd be okay. But look, I mean, I there was a there's a museum in New Jersey, a science at Liberty Science Center and they have one of these devices, the spaceships that you go into, hydraulic motion and 3D visuals around you to give you a sense of and as they're closing it up, they they they say, oh, by the way, if anyone, you know, feel sick or panic, you know, there's the escape button at the top and it was all kids and I was just in there with my kids. It closed up. It started to go immediately. I had to hit the goddamn escape button. Yeah, because I was I started to panic. I started to feel sick. And so I walk out of the thing and there's a line of 100 kids waiting for the next ride, you know, and I'm the sole person who walks out of the thing because I couldn't handle it, you know, so there's a ride like that at Disneyland where it's a Star Wars ride. Yeah, I think it's a similar thing. Yeah, it's pretty wild. Yeah. It's really fun. There's actually a new one where you're in the Millennium Falcon and I think this was the Millennium Falcon. That's the new one. There's an older one called Star Tours that's been around for a few years. Yeah. And then the new one is in, you know, they have a whole section of Disneyland. It's all Star Wars experience. Yeah. That they spent fucking billions of dollars on it's really incredible. But the Millennium Falcon ride is incredible. And I used to be able to do it. I mean, 20 years ago I went to Universal Studios. I don't know if they still have a theme park down. There was near Disney and I went on a back to the future. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So that is the Millennium Falcon. Is that the same thing? No. Is it the back to future? Oh, that Star Wars. I'm getting all mixed up. Yeah. But anyway, so I went on that and I loved it. It was spectacular. So somehow I've changed. Oh, no. Yeah. I can't. I got freaked out. I totally freaked out. I mean, my heart started palpitating and I was like, I was like, Brian, hang on. Like for the kids just hang on. Like I can't do it. I can't do it. Boom. I hit the escape. Wow. That sucks. Yeah. Well, listen, Brian, really appreciate you coming in here and I appreciate your work and you're an amazing communicator of science. I really think it's awesome the way you describe things. You make it very accessible and it's really fun. Well, thank you so much. Enjoy the conversation. And your book is out right now. Paperback, tell everybody until the end of time, mind matter and our search for meaning in an evolving universe. Did you do the audio book as well? I did the audio book. Oh, that's so important. I hate when actors. Yeah. Other people stuff. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Brian. Appreciate it. Thank you. Bye, everybody.