[Music] So, if you ever had questions about the nature of lost civilizations and like the whole mysterious time period, like that's what I do. >> Okay. >> To a very deep level where I take it from a very serious academic level though, >> right? Okay. >> Always evidence- driven. Um, work with I'm working with a lot of archaeologists around the world to to to uncover this. Yeah. So that's where I I blur into a whole another place where I'm not like in opposition like a lot of these a lot of these guys are like in opposition like you know them like they're not telling us the truth. I'm actually working with them and it's like I'm under the understand it's like okay it's okay that they have a narrative that they want to stick to but if you come at it with like a really friendly cooperative approach you can just end up working together. So, so, so you are like bridging the gap between the conventional mainstream archaeologists, geologists, climatologists, all this stuff and like the the alternative stuff. >> That's exactly what my goal is. Right. So, Danny, my I guess you say my purpose in all of this that I am very deeply driven is to bridge like you said that gap between the academic world and the alternative history world as it's called, which is a very sad term that they're using because it's not really alternative history. It's exploring history through truth, through objective analysis and understanding. And so, one of the things that's the most sad to me as being someone who's a wellstudied academic in that area is that the entire basis of science has actually quite broken down into a place that is very unfortunate because science is about the objective search for truth no matter what. Like you just go where the evidence is. You don't have a predetermined expectation of what it's going to be. So if you have evidence that come comes up that challenges that traditional narrative, it's in your duty to explore it, not to decide to ignore it purely based on all the shoulders of other men and women that have come before you that have laid down some kind of a a timeline narrative. That's why science is broken right now because science is no longer explores things just based on the evidence and on what the truth is. It's actually just based on agendas and based on predetermined expectations for things. And so that's where I come into this with a place of being wellstudied where I know that I know what they're looking for for evidence and I'm not silly like I'm coming at this just throwing out information and random things where they're like, "Oh, well, he's got nothing to base it on." Like that. No. If anything, we're uncovering pieces of evidence and dating mechanisms that have potentially never been available before. >> Mhm. So, I'm really excited for this podcast because I know there's a lot of different directions we're going to end up going. Uh I I watched a couple of your episodes with Julian Doy, which were fantastic. And uh look, you're here to be my tour guide today. So, uh I'm going to hold your hand and you're going to take me on a magic carpet ride through the history of Mesopotamia, uh Egypt, all this stuff. So, um first of all, where have you been recently? like what kind of explain like the travels that you've been doing this past year with your documentary and what you were looking at in Turkey and all that. >> Sure. we've been I have spearheaded I started this god it was over a year and a half ago >> um to develop a documentary >> and the reason for that was that I felt as though the things that I was connecting with and finding and studying were so important and so significant that they needed a certain kind of medium a certain way that the world could see them right it's not if you and I just talking on a podcast is Right. It's one thing, but providing people with a journey where they get to actually go and almost be there and see these things being found and in the field and analysis done on them and studied. I want people to go on. The whole purpose is of this documentary is I want people to go on that adventure. This isn't a talking heads documentary. This is an adventure around the world. We successfully filmed in six countries. That is not something that that often typically happens. you're let alone if you even get a couple countries. Um, which was not easy to do. Permits and getting relationships forged with different people in some places of the world like parts of Eastern Europe. >> You did it the hard way. You asked for permission. >> Well, >> wow. >> Yeah. We want to do everything legitimately because we're working with a lot of those those archaeologists. So instead of having something that's separate where it's like, "Hey guys, can you let us go do our thing here, but we don't really care what you're doing type of thing," we actually had the complete opposite approach where we said, "Look, I I really respect your opinion and your your body of work and your research, and I would love to have you come into this and share your perspectives, but we're also going to be exploring other possible perspectives." And they even though they dis respectfully disagreed with some of those perspectives because you you come at it with a friendly collaborative type of approach they often can see the benefits in wanting to work with people like that. For instance, a lot of these places in Eastern Turkey are very unknown by the world. Funding is is is a lack of funding interest. And so I am bringing a lot of interest to these sites. And so even if they don't necessarily all agree with the direction I'm exploring, which we'll talk about what that is, that I think that they appreciate a collaborative viewpoint approach that still respects the work they're doing. >> Interesting. So what specific sites in Turkey were you looking at? >> This all started for me when I was exploring ancient connections to Mesopotamia. The ancient story of Zasudra back to that story became a the Christian story of Noah. Okay. But that's the original story that's very different than it eventually ended up being has origins that are thousands of years older. It goes all the way back to ancient Mesopotamia. In fact, if you were to look at something like all the Kaoifor tablets that and there there are thousands that have been found out of places like Nineveh and the ancient library of Ashon Bashropon Asheronopal library and then the Samrians, Acadians, Assyrians and Babylonians. They all wrote different versions of really important things that were going on in their world. Okay? like the most important things to them that mattered. One of them was their understanding of of our origins which is very interesting in itself. The second thing they wrote about >> understanding and that's and those are the earliest oldest writings on earth bar none. And we know that because paper only lasts 500 to a,000 years at the best. Okay. And then what do you have like cave paintings >> and these are all written and carved into stone. So what they did is they found this ingenious method to to pres preserve a message and we don't even do that really today in which they figured out if you do something on the outer part like if you paint or draw it'll just wipe away right same thing with paper all those things won't survive. So the only way to have a message survive is to indent it into clay or stone with writing that actually has they're like wedges. And why that's important is because they go into it rather than be on the outside. And so when you bake the clay after you then get tablets and they can survive for up to if not sometimes depending on the condition over 5,000 years. >> Wow. >> So we're talking about think about paper 500 to a,000 years. And now you have tablets that can be 5,000 years. So well over five times that that length. That's why I put so much weight on studying Q&A form tablets because they're the origins and older stories of of of mankind bar none. And a lot of the things that come later are based on those. That's what's so impressive is it's not like a disconnection later. It's actually a direct seamless connection of older traditions and older things that go far back be before that. And that's what initially lent me led me. >> Can you carbon date clay? >> Depending on the condition. So carbon dating is often based on the preservation of that material. So stone, right? So goep was dated because the site was buried and they found organic matter they believe was un unffected by the environment. >> But you can't date the stone, but you can look at the organic matter and say it was minimum this age. >> Yeah. You can tell when that first grew on it, right? doesn't even mean that structure was built then. It just means whatever that organic matter was that that's when it first there's other dating that's starting to come up like luminescence dating and types of dating with um sediment cores that we're investigating and there's a whole another host of things that we're looking into for the dating the dating mechanisms behind that. Do you know how this whole thing got started? The whole story and how and how researchers like me even began in this >> thing. >> Well, let me I think it'd be important that people we get everybody on the same page. Okay. Okay. So, >> history has been largely unchanged in terms of our understanding of ancient history since about the Romans about 2,000 years. A lot of people don't know that is that Herodotus played a very big role with constant constantine in forming what we think of as history. Right? couple people like, "Yeah, let's put this here, put this here, put this here." >> Well, what most people don't know is that has remained unchanged for well over a thousand years. I don't mean unchanged like nothing has been added, but the the old ancient story of when the Egyptians are here, when the Sumerians were here, when uh the Peruvian, like all that, that story has been around for well over a thousand years and it hasn't changed. >> What story specifically though? >> The story of of us. We're going to call it the story of us, Danny. So like Heroditus wrote first wrote about this. >> So like when did civilization emerge? When did we stop when did we go from being hunter gatherers and nomadic to the emergence of something that that defined us as a civilization. Now that narrative has not changed. That narrative has been firmly established for a very long time. Now there are people like me who came into this field that saw huge holes in it. Now the first pioneer you could call him and he's a hero in this field is this man named John Anthony West. Have you heard of him? >> Of course. Yeah. >> He wrote a book called Serpent in the Sky. >> He was you could really say the prominent founder father of all this. >> Okay. He was a well-versed, very wellstudied man. and he lived in Egypt and he had been pointed out by another geologist, a French geologist over um some anomalies that they saw at the Sphinx enclosure. Have you heard this story? >> Robert Shock. >> Yes. Yes. So um Jonathan West is friends with Dr. Robert Shock who was one of the most famous geologists in the world. He's a PhD geologist. That is a big deal because up until that point, no PhD or credited highlevel academic had ever challenged the narrative. It was like untouchable. Okay. >> Well, in the early 90s, Jonathan West brought Robert Shock over to the Sphinx enclosure to date and look at and say, "This does not look like wind erosion," which is what the traditional narrative was that why why does that matter so much? Well, during the Egyptian times, if it's wind erosion, it can be easily explained if that's the evidence for saying it was from everything was built in Egypt during the dynastic period. >> Exactly. Right. >> Problem was that >> between around 2 to 4,000 BC. Right. >> Yeah. Right in there. Yeah. And so the problem is though, Robert got off his plane, took a bus to to to Giza. He walks in the Sphinx enclosure and within five minutes he knew >> that it was it was water. took five minutes for an academic to disprove a a longstanding thing that had become a basis for an understanding of timelines of the Egyptians and when things were built. It was like all based on that. >> So did he when you say he disproved that? Has Egyptology by and large accepted that? >> No. >> So they they they Okay. >> Yeah. It's it's really unfortunate. So what happened is he goes he sees 100% it's water erosion. He's well studied in that area. A lot of other ac I won't say academics other we'll say studied researchers agree with him >> okay >> but the mainstream doesn't >> does not >> they they're like won't they won't budge on it okay so that's the first crack I believe that's the first crack anybody can correct me if I'm wrong but that was the first top level academic that came in that that started challenging the narrative saying look during the dynastic Egyptians it didn't rain at all so how can you have extensive water erosion on the sphinx enclosure if during that time period there was no rain. Sorry, like they're scratching their heads like they have no way to explain it except for if you go back >> farther >> far a lot further than that and like when did ancient Egypt get rain >> and that's where >> flush rainforest, right? >> Well, it doesn't have to be a rainforest, but it needs to be enough rain to be able to create erosion. >> That could just be seasonal thunderstorms. But the point is it opened up the first hole. And when I was getting into this when I was younger, I that was he was a Robert was like a hero of mine and still is. And I was studying and I was seeing like wow. So not only that, but a lot of other things are starting to come up that are significantly challenging this that entire narrative like the entire narrative of who we are, >> how far back we go, how we got started. >> Why does that matter so much? Because those civilizations that emerged around the time of the Egyptians and the the Acadians and Sumerians, they were all war empires. All of them. They were all fighting and they were all war empires. And then >> after that it was just empire after empire like the Ottoman Empire, the Roman Empire. Um and then on and on and on. The point is Danny that ended up defining our story. We you look back at history and and about even understanding mankind and and who we are and like what consciousness is and what we once were. They look back and say, "No, look, we were hunter and gatherers that were just hunting animals and kind of fighting each other and then we emerged as civilizations fighting each other." You see, the problem here is that this entire chapter that I'm exploring that we're about to go into, they show no signs of war at all. Did you know one out of eight Americans is currently prescribed anti-anxiety meds? This is why the ammonita mascaria mushroom has been growing in popularity mainly because of its ability to ease anxiety. Even better, it's non-addictive and it activates the same GABA receptors as bzzoazipines and alcohol making ammonita miscaria a great natural way to help taper dependency. Stress and anxiety make it easy to slip back into addiction and that's why thousands are turning to amiscaria from Minnesota nice. It's not a magic bullet. Full Recovery still needs community and support. Its founder, Christian Rasmmanson, used Amanita to overcome his own withdrawal and built Minnesota nice to make natural healing accessible and affordable. Their capsules kick in within an hour and last 6 to 8 hours and cost a fraction of pharmaceuticals. They sent me a ton of ammonita and blue lotus gummies, and I'm already all out of the ammonita because of the amazing relaxing state it puts me in. It really helps calm anxiety and put me in a better mood. Imagine sitting in a room with a bunch of screaming children and a giant mess and not getting triggered. It makes dealing with terrible 2-year-olds far more tolerable. It's amazing. Plus, they give back, like donating $12,000 to the Fungi Foundation and leading new research with brain mechanics. Minnesota Nice wants to help you find harmony. Head on over to mniceethno.com/dj and use the code dj22 for 22% off your first order. That's mnicethno.comdj and use the code dj22. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. Well, isn't there also something weird in the DNA of human beings compared to the DNA of apes and chimpanzees where there's like a there's a specific um part of it missing >> has to do with the chromosomes. So, all primates on Earth have 48 chromosomes. Okay? all primates, all apes, except humans have 46. >> We're the only mammal that's in that category, if you want to call it, that has it's missing two chromosomes >> or one that's combined with two, but we're missing like this chunk of our DNA. And nobody knows how to explain it, which is why we seem so vastly different than the ape world because we are. We are actually a lot more a lot more different than we are than we have similarities in common. >> Yeah. It seems like the leap between apes and humans is insane. >> It's huge. And they're going to say, "Well, no, look, we share this percentage of DNA with a cow, but that percentage, even though it's small, contains like everything." >> Yeah. And like I I've never heard any conventional explanation for this that makes sense to me. You know, it just seems like it seems to me like the most I wouldn't say plausible, but it's it seems like there's been some tinkering. You know what I mean? Like somebody came down and said, you know, we're going to manipulate these [ __ ] monkeys a little bit, make their brains way bigger and and make them way smarter, which and then, you know, like how else do you explain the massive gap between like the brain size with us and the apes? But that's exactly what the talents talk about is they talk about that entire creation of us and our and how we were part of something that was like a plan. And that's where again you want to know that the answers to all these things. Yes, you can study more modern esoteric text and I love like look you know studying hermeticism and others but if you want to get to the heart of the details of our story and where we came from you got to read the tablets right like you >> can you read this? I I know the best translators that have done it. I am not I am not a seriologist. I want to be very clear. However, what I have done is a lot of homework to make sure that I know who the best translators in history were and what the and I've cross referenced every version of those tablets to find the ones that are basically more genuine. And I I say that because if someone was to just want to go look up an ancient tablet like say let's say the enumish. >> Sure. >> Okay. They may pull up a a Babylonian version and not even know it and then be reading about how mankind is created by like >> Babylonian version. >> Yeah. So what we what we look at if we were to like look at a timeline. Okay. Let's say this is a timeline. This is really really ancient. This is more recent. You have the whole Sumerian epic which is what we can get into and talk about that I think was completely separate from the the Acadian Assyrians and Babylonians. They're like separate time periods. Okay. And the Babylonians also recorded and re-recorded the stories that were older than them, but they altered them a little bit based on their patron god. Yes. >> And so what I mean is when you cross reference all of them, and this is what I've done is you go back and you could find the origins of when something was like its most pure form, >> right? It's like that like the telephone game where by the time you get to the end of the circle, it's something really goofy. And even today, you have people that translate multiple texts in multiple languages that come up with uh different translations and meanings for things. And you even have dictionaries online that are completely divorced from each other depending on somebody's belief system. Yeah. >> Like there's literally there's a there's a a a Mormon dictionary, there's like a Greek dictionary, there's like a Christian dictionary. Like depending on what sort of religion or what your bent is, you can find different meanings for different words. And that's why people all over the spectrum have different theories of what was going on back then. >> That's why this area is so finite and important because if you don't know who those translators are, you don't know the versions you're looking at, you're not really going to necessarily be seeing what you're you're supposed to be seeing. And so that's what I spent decades of my life doing was really focusing on studying every single tablet, cross referencing every city mentioned, every association that's important as part of understanding the stories because there is a lot of allegorical things in it. It's not all it's not all like literal, right? >> So separating what is literal from symbolic and allegorical is not easy. >> But that's where I started getting really curious because >> here we have these stories that are supposed to just be myths and allegorories. They're not real. And yet real cities are mentioned, real rulers are mentioned, real events are mentioned. And so when I was cross-referencing all of them, I started to put them all together and and recreate the timeline of this ancient world and what the what happened to them, what they experienced, what they said about where we came from, like who we are. And as that unfolded, it led me to like Vaughn and then opened up this entire rabbit hole because I had already been studying megaliths and this type of work around the world. Not monoliths like Stonehedge, highly precise megaliths like for instance the Valley Temple in Egypt or um or Oante Tombbo or Saskuke Woman in Peru or Puma Pumu in Bolivia or where you have very large or often very well- cut stones very very beautifully done usually a very hard type of stone not something soft and it often has a type of architecture >> that either only follows two forms and there's only too. There's either the very very 90° angle kind of sharp look and then there's the really polygonal natural look like we see in for instance Saskuke Woman where it's like big pillow. You've sure you've seen that. Oh my god, it's crazy. The huge pillow stones >> and how they all magically fit together, mold together. It's like you took hot rocks and just squished them together. >> Exactly. And that's what we're investigating is also how how those those things could have even been done. But the point is that when I was studying all of those around the world and looking at the symbols, they sometimes had symbols and other times it was just a signature of stonework. I found what I believed was the most important key of all. Which is why I'm calling the documentary the missing key and the my book the missing key is that I believe that Lake Vaughn is the origin of all of it. >> What's Lake Vaughn? >> Lake Vaughn is a region is a lake in eastern Turkey. And again, this is the new kid in the block when it comes to ancient history and archaeology, right? Everyone, you mentioned Turkey and everyone's like, "Oh, Quebec, Lee, and Carahan over and over and over again." But these areas are to me far more sophisticated, far more advanced, and just unknown, which is very strange. And they're a lot newer. I think part of the problem with these sites compared to Quebec, Quebec was found, you know, before the like around 19 1940s. It's been around a long time. Whereas, for instance, those underwater ruins that we're about to talk about under Lake Vaughn, they weren't found until 2017. >> Wow. >> So, that's a big reason why a lot of these things are not known is because we're breaking new ground. >> So, this un this lake vaugh is in Turkey and >> it's in far eastern Turkey. Yeah. >> And there was ruin underwater ruins found in 27 eight years ago. >> That's it. And so that person in the background, his name is Tossen Jalen. He's a famous diver and videographer. He goes all over the world. He's in like 200 documentaries. He's pretty well known. He was diving in Lake Vaughn off of a town called the Gigz and the northern part of Lake Vaughn. He wasn't he had not wasn't looking for ruins. He was he was filming underwater um these microbiolytes they're called. They're like a type of carbon formation that forms in the lake. Okay. It's Lake Van's a very special lake. >> It's what's called the it's the largest soda lake in the world. Soda >> meaning that it's a very alkaline salty lake and it has no outlet. So soda has to do with a lake that has no river or water exiting. So it all gets gets trapped in the lake. Interesting. >> Which formed these really large what they're called microbiolyte formations. And so he was down there filming them cuz he's like a nature photographer videographer. And he accidentally stumbled upon what became now considered the deepest confirmed underwater ruins in the world. Again, you had to throw out on Yanuguni or something. That's not confirmed. In fact, >> what's that? >> Well, Robert Robert Shock way back when Graham was doing his documentary brought him out to Japan to do the diving off of Japan to look at what he thought was underwater ruins. And >> is this Oh, is this the what they were showing with the Flint Devil debate where he was showing >> Yeah, maybe. And then and then uh Robert Shock determined it was a natural formation and it created a bunch of chaos. But um the point is that >> it was hard to just figure out. I mean, it was like a coin flip whether it was natural or whether it was man-made. >> But the point is that there are people that say there's certain ruins here or whatever, but these are the the deepest underwater confirmed >> that's clearly bricks. >> These are stones that are I likely and aesight. It's a very hard type of stone. Now, that that ruin you're seeing right there, they're actually scattered over quite a large area. They're as shallow as 30 feet and they're as deep as 75 ft. 75 ft underwater. like it's an enormous amount of water. That was one of the big things that led me to this region was exploring those ruins. And we uh we for the documentary, we actually dove down. I drove down and and and got a chance to see them and and swim down and see them for myself. >> Wow. >> Because they have >> terrible visibility down there, huh? >> Yeah. Thank you for because it's so salty, right? >> Um yeah, that's that's an Armenian one, though. If you if you go back, careful. There's Armenian and non- Armenian. Yeah. Go to that left image on right in the middle left. That one. Click that for me. Okay. Actually, not that one. I'm sorry. Scroll down a little bit. I should have sent that one. Uh, what I want to show you is the front capstone of this has symbols on it. They were really mysterious that match like ancient Egypt. And so, that was what's so exciting about it. Let's see if he if he if he has it. I did. I should have sent that one to him, but Oh, go can you go to the photos I sent you? The picture of me diving has it. So, it's if you go up um >> is it this one? >> Yeah, that one. Okay, we're we got it. Okay, there you go. >> Okay, >> so on what you see in front of you are two symbols. The third one was is worn off, unfortunately. Now, the middle symbol is a six pedal flower of lifelike symbol. >> And the one on the on the next to it is a counterclockwise spiral. Okay. M now number one this is deep underwater and then it brings up all the the questions of when was it built what kind of event could have caused it to flood and be underwater right which is what a lot of the dating that we're going to talk about comes from that I came up with and then the bigger questions are why is that symbol also at Ionis which we'll we'll talk about at Kev Klesi and then across the world in Egypt at the Osirion and then other places as well is like there's a giant puzzle here that we're putting together. A global lost civilization that seemed to be sharing knowledge all around the world. All had connections to it and they were systematically destroyed and wiped out. And we have ample evidence showing that that of that occurred during what was called the older and younger dus which was during the end of the pleaene the being of the holysine when the last ice age ended. And what we're being falsely told by by scientists is that number one, and these are unfortunate, but science has some real things that needs to get passed. The first thing is not everything is is is linear. It's not. Not everything is a slow linear progression. Not everything is gradual. Not everything happens slowly. It just doesn't. We look at icecore samples from Antarctica and Greenland. It's right there. And that's why when people are talking about how warm it is right now and all these things, I'm like, what are you guys talking about? Go look at a Greenland ice core and see how much warmer it was when it spiked during the the younger older dest. >> Wasn't it much warmer than it is now during like the Renaissance period? >> Yeah. Is that that too? And so what the point is that when I go back and looked and started studying climatology and ice cores and others, you see that the climate is the earth has gone through very violent and very apocalyptic almost um cyclical events >> where it's on like a repetition and that's why the earth goes into ice ages and then retreats and then it happens over and over again because there's a cyclical nature to the earth going through those. The problem is that when it goes from an ice age to a non-glaciated period, usually it comes with crazy disasters. And we've never experienced anything like that in the last 11,500 years. It's the holiday season, which means it's time to find new creative ways to hide your thinning hairline from your extended family. We know red light therapy heals and the technology exists. So, I Restore said, "Let's fix that." The Eye Restore Elite is clinically proven to help regrow hair using 300 lasers and 200 LEDs that send light therapy directly to your scalp. In a double blind clinical study, nearly every participant saw an increase in hair growth with this technology. The I Restore Elite uses Vixo lasers that feature wider beams of red light wavelengths that reactivates dormant follicles to restore your natural hair. And the LEDs provide broader uniform coverage to fill in the gaps. And it all comes with a money back guarantee. It's comfortable. It's lightweight. I feel badass when I'm wearing it. Everybody wants to know all about how it works and they want to borrow it from me all the time. And I've talked about red light therapy at Nauseium on this podcast before, so I'm confident that this stuff works. For maximum effect, bundle with the Revive Plus Max Growth kit and Biotin gummies, which works with the red light wavelengths. Holidays mean gettogethers, photos, and wanting to look and feel your best. And I Restore is here to help with huge Black Friday savings happening all month long. And with the code Danny Jones at irrestore.com, you can unlock exclusive discounts on the I restore Elite. That's code D-ns at irrestore.com. Please support the show and tell them we sent you. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. Yeah, there was a big news publication who posted something about this about um the history of like the warming and the cooling of the earth. I want to say it was maybe Wall Street Journal or maybe the New York Post or something like that, Steve. I don't know if you can find it, but there was uh and this was like probably in the last two to three years. >> I think I saw that. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. It was wild. They were showing like the spikes and the drops where it was going down like throughout, you know. >> That's not good for the agenda, though, you know. >> Exactly. That that was the point of it, which was crazy that a mainstream publication published something like that, you know. Well, that's what we're seeing is that the earth has been a lot more violent than we've often been told. And that, give you another example, >> the last ice age when it ended, we're taught today that the explanation for so many megapana dying, you know, like large animals like woolly mammoth and such, >> the explanation we're given for why they died, >> and by the way, >> like my good friend Randle Carlson, we have good conversations around this. 44 million megapona died during that event. 44 million in the northern hemisphere in North America, right? >> Northern hemisphere because that's where it was the hardest hit. Now, we're told that indigenous groups over hunted >> these megapana and that's what led to their extinction. Completely backwards, completely wrong. In fact, the opposite is true. Indigenous people were very respectful of populations. They would never over hunt. But the more important part to take away is >> we found Steve this was a a recent article published in a when one of the websites uh like it was either New York Post or uh Wall Street Journal something like that. >> What we found though across the northern hemisphere, northern Alaska, northern Canada and other places like especially Siberia are massive boneyards, massive events where they all these mammoths all instantly died. And so what we're finding, especially in areas called the New Siberian Islands in the early 1900s, they went up and explored and were mapping them out. And they found entire mammoths that had been flash frozen with not only undigested food in their stomachs, but actually in their throats. >> Yeah. Wasn't that how they came up with the term younger driest because it had the driest flour? >> The flower from that time period. What gets wild though is that so um the the frozen company um uh Bird's Eye really funny like right of all things how random is that? Bird's Eye way back in the day was doing some studies because they freeze things and so they were doing a study on how cold it would have had to have been to freeze a mammoth, right? It was so funny like a frozen food company. They determined it had to have been at least negative 150 degrees. >> Whoa. >> Instantly. Instantly to freeze a mammoth like that. I mean, they're the hardest animal on on the earth. Now, here's where it gets really wild. >> The flash freeze >> flash freeze a mammoth. Here's where it gets really wild is that during the older dry on in in ice cores from Greenland, you can see this huge spike at 14 and a half thousand 14,500 years ago. Like warmer than now. Okay. crazy huge spike before all this chaos happened right after a spike in temperatures that's like abnormal and it only lasted for maybe a year or two or like even that. So when Edward Tol the explorer went up to New Siberians and found the frozen mammoths wasn't the only thing he found. He found a 30 foot tall alder tree that was hundreds of miles north of where any trees can grow. Okay. Like out of place. Not only that, it was flash frozen like the mammoth with green leaves. Green leaves. It wasn't like a seasonal climate. Like seasons came in and shifted. It was in the middle of summer. >> So, how >> and the tree froze with green leaves and the mammoths froze. In the middle of summer, it means that this event >> caused the temperatures up in the north to drop as low as negative 150 degrees like instantly. How does that I mean like I understand if comets hit it's going to black out the sun and the atmosphere and it's going to cause it to get very cold quickly but how do you explain like instantaneously going to negative degrees? Have you ever seen let's see I won't I was going to bring up a movie here but um okay if you get severe interactions from the sun and I so there's a lot of people in my my field that are that are cosmic impact theorists. >> I'm not one of them. I'm in the camp of Dr. rubber shock that instead of an impact, it's more of like a giant CME event, >> solar mass ejection, >> massive charged particle event that bombards the earth and causes the magneettosphere of the whole planet to become weak, weakened, and then the poles all shift. Okay? When the poles all shift, you get a weakening of that electromagnetic grid that protects the earth and holes open up. Now, those holes can have a couple interesting effects. One of them is that if those charged particles get through one of those holes, they can like fry the earth. And so when we were at CFSI in the Vaughn region, that was actually probably the primary reason Robert decided to join my the the exploration investigation of the what we were doing is that I was like, Robert, I'm pretty sure from my understanding of geology that these blocks, beautiful basalt cut blocks have vitrification on them. And I showed him pictures of meaning melted melted stone. And so I showed him pictures. He came out and we we hiked up to this mountain temple. It's so beautiful called Kev Klesi. And there's a massive megalith. It's >> it's about 50 tons. It's huge. It's like 4t x 4t. It's it's enormous. And the sides have all broken off. And the top still has a beautiful smooth u area where they cut it where they where they whatever however they did that on the top of this block. The whole front of it and these bubbles is you can see where the basalt which is one of the hardest stones on earth. It's a volcanic stone is melted turned into glass. So it has glass on the top of it and he came and identified it as is it is 100% vitrification. Now, in order to get basalt to melt, you'd have to have temperatures to what do you think? >> To get basalt to melt, >> to get stone to melt, like quartz or basalt or anything that's got a high >> thousand degrees. >> Two nearly 2,000 degrees. >> Wow. >> So, on the surface, so like we're complaining about, you know, Death Valley getting like 140. >> How about 2,000? So, you would essentially you would vaporize. So if if if if Danny Jones was hanging out at one of those sites, >> well, it' be like a lightning strike, right? >> It would you would just poof. You just kind of disappear. Um and that's what's so fascinating is then, okay, so it's vification. It's on a stone that's already been cut. So we know the st the stone predated that event because it's has cuts on it and it's beautiful. >> But it means that whenever that had vrification, >> it had to have been an extreme event. So that's the point is you don't just get vitrification from like everyday thunderstorms or regular events, >> right? >> Vitrification has to come from an extreme event like something that >> is affecting like the whole poles of the earth and opening up holes. And the reason why these ancient sites are so targeted cuz you don't just see vitrification like all over the place is because they were only using stones that were highly magnetic in most cases. >> Like they were like lightning rods. So when you have these events come through, they end up focusing on these places because they're highly magnetic and so they basically attract electromagnetism and all these things and they and that's what's really fascinating, Danny, is that we saw >> at nearby sites, not just Kev Klesie, but Shàue next to it, that the actual original stone formations that the temples that were there literally exploded like exploded. We found fragments that were scattered over >> boxes exploded too. Some of the sarapium boxes in Egypt. >> Yes, that's a great example in in the Sarapium in Egypt. There's these giant granite boxes and the same thing happened there. like it was an overwhelm like an overload of energy >> and that these areas were like specifically ended up getting that overload because the upper Susi temple at Shàuiste there's nothing left of it and but what you find are an arc in a very specific you can like measure it even like an arc of an arc where everything blew and flew towards and there there are all these blocks and there all the beautiful cuts that were once in the the temple but they're all broken All of them like fra all broken into pieces like hundreds of them >> like they exploded like the whole thing exploded. >> Right. >> Yeah. What What is your take on those Sarapian boxes? What do you think they were used for? >> I I mean maybe some kind of like maybe it's some kind of rejuvenation chamber or something. Honestly, they certainly weren't tombs. No, >> to tell you that. They're this this civilization >> that built all of those is first of all that's not the dynastic Egyptians at all. The dynastic Egyptians were graffiti artists that came later and found a bunch of things and were really disrespectful. The fact that they recarved the Sphinx to be a pharaoh's head is the most disres one of the most disrespectful things that any ancient culture has ever done. >> The one that blew my mind the most was when we had um we had Adam Young and the guy Carol on here the other day and they were showing me one that I had never seen before. uh one of those boxes that is like the most precise box in like even more precise than the ones in the Serapium. I forget what it was called, but um Steve, if you go to my Instagram page, it's like the top post where they show it because I want to make sure I get this right. Um but what Chris Dunn was saying was >> Yeah, I know Chris Dunn. He was saying that he thinks that those boxes were used to like grow some type of crystals or something. Interesting. He thinks they were some sort of like battery. >> I don't know. >> I think that's entirely possible. The battery thing might be might be legit. >> Click on it. Get audio. >> Holy [ __ ] >> This is a granite room. >> So, this room is doing just fine. Doesn't need any >> How have I never seen this before? >> Splinter speed reset. probably the most precise artifact ever came out of Egypt. >> It's a perfectly polished uh rectangular granite box with looks like it was cut with a laser, dude. >> And the bottom has an angle, a constant angle. >> If we back up, freeze it so we can see that. But >> the top Holy cow, >> the top surface was published. Petri measured and published it and he found it to be 4,000 of an inch deviation across about one and a quarter meters which is like which is I think 20 times flatter than a normal household countertop. >> And this entire room is also made >> 20 times flatter than a normal household granite countertop. >> We're talking about a civilization that had tools and abilities and understandings that we still struggle for with today. this civilization that built all of these things, the highly developed stuff, not the adobe mud brick, not the limestone. No, only and this is the thing that's interesting. So, if you were to look at stone on the mo hardness scale, right? Diamonds 10 hardest. >> Uh, you know, one would be like a I don't know like a calite or a micica, the stones they were really interested in were all extremely hard. >> But not only that, they're highly they're highly mineralized either with quartz >> Mhm. like with granites like we see in Egypt or in ignous terms like ignous stones basalt and anesite highly mineralized with a lot of magnetism and all quartz as well it was it was like they were they didn't care where they were they didn't it didn't matter if the stone was 500 miles away didn't matter if it was a thousand miles away this civilization didn't care about that they cared about specifically acquiring it for very specific reasons >> for its electromagnetic property it's um it's I don't know it's a it's energetic properties on different levels that we don't seem to really get fully today and they would go to whatever length it took to find it >> and it didn't really matter to them like for instance at Ionis there's a type of the floor is made out of this beautiful golden calisite alabaster it's gorgeous and in Egypt is the only slight comparison that has anything like it but this golden calisite alabaster when I was doing research on it and I was looking at anywhere in that region where it could be found. I determined that the nearest source was like over a thousand miles away. And so it's like mystifying to try to consider. We have no idea how they cut them, these stones. And we have no idea how they moved them. We're talking some of them >> copper tools and pounding stones, >> right? Some of them were in excess of a thousand tons. We have no idea how they seamlessly created beautiful symbols and never made a mistake. How they would cut between blocks. We have no idea how they were able to um drill perfect holes. It it's like you give an example like the Azwan quarry right in Azwan Egypt. You've seen where they have they're they're taking out host rock to build obelis and different things. Have you seen the scoop marks? >> Yeah, it's insane. >> What kind of technology could have scooped one of the hardest stones in the world out of the host rock? >> Right. That thousand ton obelisk that they haven't finished the unfinished one has all those scoop marks underneath it. How? How? How are you scooping? They would have had to they they were they absolutely were using some some sort of >> I think maybe chemical or something to soften it or doing something or heat >> which is what we're exploring actually is the idea that maybe plasma was involved >> which is really interesting. >> Plasma. >> Yes. And so let me add something to this I think people will find fascinating because you just brought up the unfinished obelisk in in Egypt. Okay. That was by far the largest obelisk that they had ever created. Okay? More than double the size of the biggest one, >> right? >> Near. Meanwhile, in Easter Island, the largest moi ever that was that was being created like two to three times bigger than any other moi that are there was being taken out of the host rock just like in Egypt. >> But that was volcanic rock. >> Well, they're both hard. But both of them were being taken out of the host rock and then it just everything stopped. Meanwhile, you go across the world to China. You go to a place called You go to a place called Yang Shan Quorey in China and they were in the middle of taking out the largest the largest blocks in the in human history. Some of them weighed over like well over a thousand tons. Meanwhile, you add one more Balbeck Lebanon. >> Oh yeah. >> And the quaries there, they were taking out the largest that they had ever done and they never made out of the quarry. What you have in common with all of these locations from everywhere around the world is that the civilization was in the midst of creating the largest that they had ever created of these structures, which means that they were at the height of their civilization because they were taking on the biggest projects they ever done globally. Everyone was. And then all of a sudden, the work stopped out of nowhere and they just vanished. That tells us a few things. It tells us one, they probably were caught off guard somewhat or they wouldn't be taking on massive projects right before they're about to be destroyed. And two, the scope in of these events must have been so severe that most of them must have perished and that whoever survived must have gone to places like these massive underground cities like Darren Kuyu and and Kaimaki. I'm not sure you're familiar with but >> um you're not in southern Turkey are the largest underground cities in the world. Some of them go down to Yeah. It has a sister city called >> Ka Machi. >> Okay. >> The wild thing is that they built these cities to be so survivable without ever having to go to the surface that >> Kyle is 5 and a half miles away from Darren Kuyu. Okay. Okay. >> Five and a half miles. That's a long way. And yet at the bottom of Darren Kuyu all the way down the lowermost level they found a a tunnel like a like a corridor that goes 5 and a half miles all the way to Kaimogi >> like the people there that were trying to survive couldn't go to the surface >> and they were like going to go visit their other another city with maybe relatives and so they would have to travel underground. I'm not sure a lot of people don't like know about that. And to this day, we have no idea who built those cities. There's things thrown around based on occupations of people at different times, but we still have no idea who built them. And the amount of levels of Darren Kuyu is astounding. The amount of rock they would have had to remove. We've never even found any of any of the stuff they removed. >> When did we discover Darren Kuyu? Do you remember? Darren Kuyu is is is in I think in the 1940s and it was actually totally accidental. It's a funny it's a funny story. There was a a man that had an his his house was like an old city and he was he had an apartment and like it was like a mud brick apartment whatever and he had chickens >> and he couldn't figure out why his chickens kept disappearing. Okay, it's funny. That's that's the story. And so he's like what is going on? Where are my chickens? And so one day he followed one of them and he saw it go through like a hole in the wall. And so he took down the hole and it opened up and it turned out it was an entrance to the largest underground city in the world. >> Jesus. Could you imagine? >> It was right in the the basement. >> You have an underground city connected to the bottom of your house. >> So I'll go to the top right one. Steve, the Facebook one. So is this like a diagram of how deep it is? It's like an ant city. It's like it's like underneath an ant pile what you would see. >> And that's just Darren Cuyu. That's Kai Mockley is just like that. >> And it can fit thousands of folks >> up to 20,000 per place. And it's not only just what it seems with just random shafts. It's actually an entire world. They had libraries. They had areas for animals. They had areas for sleeping. They had schools. They had air shafts to to bring down air. >> I was going to say like how the hell do they have oxygen down there? >> They had a type of air shaft that went on an angle. >> Wow. Is that really it? >> Yeah. >> Holy crap. It's all lit up and everything. >> Well, they put lights in. I mean, they weren't >> I know. Obviously, after they did that, but it's amazing that they actually went to this extent to like make it like inhabitable and like so you could show people. >> So, they carved these air shafts enormous distances to the top on an angle so that rainwater couldn't like flood them down there. And they would live they would live for enormous amounts of time. And my theory that I mean I many other also support is that these were created solely because of the cyclical nature of these events and how these civilizations remembered. Their ancestors had been wiped out and they built these entirely for their own survival. >> So how would this survive a flood though? >> How would it fl What do you mean? >> How would you survive a flood if it's underground? They they have these giant circular stones that they just roll and seal and seal them underground >> and it's watertight even if there's like a like massive catastrophic flooding. >> Yeah. Have you seen the big round stones? No. >> Oh, they're amazing. So if you if you look up Darren Cuyu in round door stones, >> but then you're also cutting off the oxygen. So >> no, they have air shafts. So they have >> snorkels. >> They have air shafts that are cut up into high points. >> Like high points that come out. There's There's your There you go. Right there. Um, >> holy. >> So, do the one that's Yeah, the one next to it. But that gives you an idea of they would roll those across and seal everybody in >> and that would be watertight. >> As watertight as they could. But here's the wild thing is Danny is that what if based on how long these events went on like the young the the older Dryus into the younger Dryus had series of events that occurred for over 1,500 years >> right >> the entire human story >> what is the older Dus >> the older Dus is the events that occurred right before the younger Dus and they're not younger yeah they're not often talked about but the younger Dus is more like 12,000 years ago. The older dus is like 14,500 years ago. Not that much further, but they have direct >> connections to each other. Like if you're going to understand the younger dus, you can't unless you understand the older dus. >> So my understanding is that the younger dus lasted for about a thousand years >> and then the older dus is another thousand. So if you combine the two, you get events, not all the time, but you get events usually always on the front and on and the front side and the back side and then usually something in the middle. And so imagine our earth going through catastro catastrophic periods where certain parts of the earth is like you can't even live there. Not everywhere our life would all die, but certain parts of the earth are just >> violent and and and difficult to even live in. Imagine them going down there. Imagine entire generations never seeing the sun, never even coming out. As far as we know, like the people that went down there and lived there, they may have never surfaced. >> They would evolve into gray aliens with big eyes. >> Something weird like like mole people, right? >> No, no muscles on like they can't see. They're blind. >> They develop telepathy, >> right? No, I know. So, but it's there you go. That's like some good um analysis. You can look at some of these events um to see that. That's not >> It's backwards. So, >> it's not my favorite graph, but um >> yeah, 10,000 >> different versions of it we can look at, but but yeah, so there we're talking about disasters that were enough to >> wipe out an entire global civilization. And then the survivors were the indigenous people, which is why they had no idea how to mimic and replicate what the ancestors did. Yeah, it's interesting the stories uh the Sumerian stories of like Inky. Yes. And the the connection to Prometheus and Quzto Kawad and how that story has just been copied for so long into different contexts into different cultures >> because it was real. >> You know, the story of the adversary. >> Yes. going against the gods and going against the the structure or the system and trying to break it apart and to give and trying to save humanity. Right. Yes. And it's funny that it's interesting that >> Prometheus is synonymous with the devil or with Satan, the adversary. Yet, he's the one who tried to save humanity from Zeus. >> It's the same as the Adam and Eve story with the snake. It's the exact same thing. The snake in Adam Eve is Anky. It's the same it's the same parallel to all those stories is the idea that >> yes >> you know that >> this figure of Enki who is you know if you want to go to Norse mythologies Loki in my equivalent who's a trickster he that's his whole nature he's a know he's a knowledge he's a knowledgebrer preserver and he is the preserver of of mankind and and our seed of life and so he has shown numerous times especially the most important one being the epic of Gilgamesh and Atrahasus where He is uh there's a pact. I don't know if you know this. So in the in the tablets, the great Anuna, they're the supposedly the gods who determine our fates and determine everything here. Okay, we could talk about who they are, but they create a pact where they're not supposed to nobody's supposed to warn mankind and they're going to create a calamity to destroy them and reset everything. That's this that story comes from the earliest version of that is the Adraasus and then the epic of Gilgamesh came later. But that's what that story is based on. And so they want to wipe out humanity. They say that we're being too loud. That's what ENL complains that we're too loud and that um we should be wiped out. I I don't know if that has to do with language or what it does, but Enki warns the Noah figure, his name was Zasudra, an ancient sage, priest, king of a disaster, a flood coming in the tablets. And he warns him through a reed bed. So he he doesn't break his pact. He's right. He's on oath where he can't tell, >> but he tricks he's he's like a trickster. He speaks through a reed bed as a way to get around actually like telling them. And then he warns him and then they have this pivotal story that then lands in up in the airat region which is where Vaughn is. And that's why that whole thing then continues because it's the it's the extension of that entire story, >> right? Well, but it predates anything associated with the Hebrew or Christian traditions. It's not even they actually turned that story into a bit of a silly story. Yeah. And it's unfortunate because it wasn't two of every kind of animal or anything. That's none of that. It says that at all, >> right? >> It talks about how he's worn because he has a very important bloodline seed of of humanity that his describes it as being like a connection back to the gods like almost like a demigod, >> right? and that he's warned because he needs his the seed of mankind preserved. And that's where that whole story comes from. And it has nothing to do again it it's in the ancient Mesopotamian version tells us very specific information about why he had to build like a cedar craft and then seal it because it was like the only way to survive essentially. That whole story is is firmly established in the most important Mesopotamian traditions of all. >> Wow. >> Yeah. And that's what I was tracing. That's why I ended up in the Vaughn region around Ararat is because I studying the tablets and seeing that many things were pointed toward towards that event actually really occurring and that we had ancient maps that showing that that's where it that had happened and it was a real event. That was why I was exploring Lake Vaughn. And then I stumbled across all of those sites that were being found and realized by studying them and finding a direct genealogy connection through ancient Armenian genealogy that the whole thing was real. It's just a lot older than we're told. At a certain age, many people start to feel like their bodies are falling apart. Aging is inevitable. But what if it wasn't? The great news about aging that we don't know is we actually have a lot more control over the aging process than we think. Folks like David Sinclair in his book lifespan talk about how you can slow down aging and even reverse it. As we age, we accumulate zombie cells or old damaged cells that linger beyond their useful life. These zombie cells infect other healthy cells, speeding up their aging process. Hair loss, wrinkles, arthritis, cancer, dementia, and so on. Scientists realize we can use the body's natural cleanup process to starve these zombie cells of energy and kill them. And that's another reason I turned to Clean Being by Versa. It has an incredible blend of ingredients that have shown to kill these zombie cells. After taking Clean Being for some time, I've noticed I have clearer skin, healthier hair, better nails. I actually can see better. It's improved my vision, believe it or not, and I don't get sick as often. Versa publishes third party testing from each batch produced to guarantee you're getting what you pay for. So, head on over to ver.so/danny and use the coupon code Danny at checkout to save 15% off your order. Again, that's ver.so/danny, coupon code Danny to save 15% on your entire order. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. Wow. So, these symbols that you found on that structure underneath the lake, so the it was 75 ft underwater. uh the ones with the symbols are 30, but there are other parts of that those temples and structures that are up to 75 ft deep. It's over like a big area. >> So, when do you think that those temples and those structures under that water were built? >> Well, that's the million-dollar question. And so, when I was investigating and we dove down and we were looking at them, I came across a really interesting anomaly that is a big part of the documentary in the book, I realized that in order to have a lake rise, it would be more like a 100 ft. Because if you're if you're a civilization, you're building on the edge, you're not going to build where the water's lapping up against it. You would never do that. You would have to have enough distance between you and the lake that you weren't worried about it flooding over or whatever. So, how far is that? Well, if the ruins are up to 75 ft deep, it would have had to have meant that the lake was at least 100 ft lower. 100 ft. That's an that's an huge variability of a water body, >> you know. So when I was digging into that, looking at things like seasonal rainfall patterns and things like that, nothing could explain it. >> How what what is the deepest part of that lake? >> That lake is mysterious. And so officially it's 1,500 ft deep, but fishermen fishermen that have depth soundings that go out there claim it's far deeper than that. They claim it's over 3,000 ft deep. >> Wow. >> It's actually one of the deepest lakes in the world. It's an ancient lake. >> The deepest part of the ocean is 5,000 ft. This is 3,000 ft. This they have instruments on their boats and I've confirmed this with like the um the national >> Ask a Ask a AI, Steve. >> No, they're going to say 1500. >> Let's see what the AI says. >> There's They're going to say 1500. Okay. >> But here's the thing, though. Underneath Lake Vaughn, there are active fault lines. It's a very unusual lake that has faults underneath it. It's a very volcanic, very falprone area. And the theory is that the area that is that depth is only a is a is like a smaller area and they've missed it, >> right? >> Because I've talked to numerous fishermen that go out with depth soundings that go a max of a thousand meters. >> They max out. They can't go any deeper. And they're claiming that they're maxing out um in that lake, making it one of the deepest lakes in the world. And it's it's also one of the oldest lakes in the world. And they >> thousand meters is how many feet? >> 3,000 ft. >> 3,000 ft >> roughly. >> So it's very mysterious. It's a very ancient, very old lake. And they um >> still 1,500 ft is deep for a lake. >> Oh, it's wicked. It's very deep. >> That's that's probably the deepest lake on Earth, right? >> No, Lake Bal is the deepest lake on Earth. >> Oh, how deep is that one? >> Um I got to pull up the stats on that. I think >> Where is it? >> In Russia. Southern Siberia. >> Oh, Siberia. Okay. Yeah, I've heard of that one. Yeah. Yeah. >> Um Yeah, that one's the deepest. Yeah. I'm not. Yeah. 5,000. There it is. So, Bal is the deepest in the world. Yeah. >> Google. What is the deepest What is the >> Mariana Trench? >> How deep is How deep is the Mariana's Trench? >> I think it's 20,000 ft deep or something. Look it up. >> Oh, that's right. I'm thinking of Okay. I'm thinking of I'm thinking in the wrong uh the long the wrong measurements. Yeah. Okay. >> Okay. So, there you go. You're deeper. So, that's why >> March is like seven miles. That's where they joke that they can put up Mount Everest in the Mariana Trench and you can like put it in there. >> That's crazy, bro. >> Mhm. >> I know. It's like another world down there. So, >> it really is. It's less explored than the moon or Mars. We We've explored more of the surface of Mars than our own oceans. >> Yeah. And our Earth is over 70% water. >> Yes. >> Like ocean, >> which is wild that most of the Earth is actually unexplored. Dude, I had this NASA physicist on here a couple day a couple weeks ago, a couple months ago, and uh he was explaining how the variation in atmospheres uh change across planets in our solar system. He was saying that the surface of Venus, he was like, "Atmospheres are so crazy and all over the place and impossible to manage." And she's like, he goes, "The average temperature on the surface of Venus is like, what was it? 800° between 800 and 1,000 degrees depending on the weather." And and and it changes every day, just like the weather here changes every day, right? Yeah. >> He's like, "Atmospheres are are like impossible to manage. if you're if you're um a civilization that's hopping from planet to planet and you have that ability. He's like it would be so difficult to go from an atmosphere like Earth or the atmosphere like Mars which is negative 100° to an atmosphere like Venus which is plus 800. You have a,000 degrees variation in the temperature. You have pressure. The pressure on the surface of Venus Yeah. >> is the same pressure as being >> at the bottom of Mariana's Trench with the atmosphere. It's like hell. And that he was actually saying the coldest there there was like a a cold day on Venus which was like >> maybe 600° >> and there was bismouth and magnesium snow on the tops of the mountains. >> So wild. >> And there was he was like that's what a cold day in hell looks like on the surface of Venus. So he's like if you're if you're a civilization that can travel from planet to planet he goes you can't deal with the variations with a thousand degree variation different a pressure of being seven miles under the like like the pressure is insane the temperature is insane you have comets you have volcanoes it's it's completely unmanageable but if you can find planets that have liquid water on them >> liquid water can only exist between 33 degrees and 212 degrees Fahrenheit And you can go down one atmosphere, 33 uh 33 ft, two atmospheres. You can go down to the depth that matches the pressure that you're used to. >> Yeah. >> And the temperature variation is only less than 200°. >> So, it's perfect if you can find liquid water. >> I think the takeaway there is that the Earth is a very special place. >> And there's a whole another discussion that gets along with how rare and variable our actual combination of Earth, Sun, and Moon is. So that's a whole another conversation. But um very weird. The moon is so strange. >> Perfect terraforming device. >> Yeah, the whole that whole thing is interesting. Actually, it's interesting that the tablets even like the numeish talk about like the formation of our solar system and things. So >> yeah, really really interesting how we could be talking about beings that were here during the formation of our solar system. >> That's pretty wild to even consider. >> Yeah. Yeah. There's a there's a there's a huge rabbit hole we could go down with this topic. Have you heard of uh have you heard of the um there was an element? I think it was an element. It was xenon xenon 222 or something like this that was found on earth where this element uh can only exist if you have like I don't know a 100 thermonuclear bombs exploding, right? It can uh find out what this one is. This is one that Georgiani told us. But there's a specific element that we found on Earth that was like um it came was because it was like in the middle of like an atomic bomb testing site or something like that. And um it's I guess it doesn't exist anywhere in the solar system and they found it on Mars. Well, that just shows you the kind of environment that was needed to create that and how what kind of disaster could have led to that creation based on what we see now on the planet. Well, we have the remote viewer uh those with remote viewers during the Cold War who were asked to remote view Mars and people who have talked about it like Joe McMonagle was one of the guys, one of the um Stargate people who was tasked to remote view Mars and he explained seeing a civilization there of like tall white Nordic beings who were trying to escape and they were explaining that the there was a catastrophe there looked like everything there was there was giant megalithic structures that didn't look like anything he'd ever seen other than megalithic structures on Earth. Um, xenon 129. >> Yeah, >> I know. I know about that. John Bramer. Um, yeah. He was talking about how it's like a signature of a >> of a nuclear reaction. >> Well, but not just a nuclear reaction. Corona mass ejections with charged particles that are really radioactive can also can if it's an intense enough event can give a similar give a similar type of reaction that nuclear weapon does. >> Yes. So Steve ask ask Chachi BT where have we found xenon 129. >> So um and Joe McMmon was saying so there was not only these like ancient megalithic looking structures there and again he's this is a recounts of remote viewing. So take it with what a grain of salt what it's worth. Um he said that they were trying to escape because there was some sort of and this was a million years ago. So he was asked to remote view Mars over a million years ago, right? So he's saying that these tall white Nordic looking structures or uh being human they would look like humans but they were just taller. They look like Olympic swimmers, right? And they were trying to escape the planet because it was there was a pending a catastrophe coming. They couldn't figure out how to get off the planet. They needed to. They had explorers that had gone out to try to find another place for them to live. Try to explore neighboring planets, but they said they found one, but it was it was too unstable. The atmosphere was too unstable. There was volcanoes, maybe dinosaurs, whatever it was. And uh they didn't have an answer yet to like if they could actually go there. And there's been theories that have been tested that maybe that was the reason for the moon. If we could have put a moon there to stabilize the temperature, the atmosphere, the tides, all that stuff on Earth, maybe they could have used that as a terraforming device to jump from Mars to Earth. >> I think that there certainly is, and I'm not someone who's going to jump on really talking a lot about necessarily like that the extraterrestrial influence type of concept, but I will tell you if there's anything that suggests outside intervention, it's the moon. It's the weirdest thing in the world. Like we have we have we know of no other satellite to a planet ratio like the moon. The the what its composition is, the way it the way that it it balances life here. And the size ratio for the Earth and the Sun, it's an impossibility. >> Yeah. It's 1/400th the size and it's 1/400th the distance. It's perfect to create an eclipse. >> And we're told that the moon is just an accreted object that randomly formed that perfect shape that happens to be 1400th, right? to be that perfect representation of the size to give create a >> it's impossible that that could be random. It's impossible. There's no way that that all those impossibilities could come together in one thing unless something wanted to create a perfect system here, right? >> That's what it seems like. Our solar system is some kind of a an experiment and creating a perfect system with ratios in to foster something here. And I think the more that I've studied, especially looking at tablets, is that that may have been all done for a lot of it at least may have been done for us >> because of how important our story is and how we actually have a far more profound connection to higher higher things than we know. >> There's there's a guy who I think his name was uh fact check me here, Steve. The guy named Carl Wolf who um found images of he was working He was working in the space program and uh he was developing photographs and he went into this um secure location where they were actually like developing photographs of the dark side of the moon or whatever and this guy saw it and he described vividly that there was megalithic structures that were on the dark side of the moon. >> Yeah, I've definitely heard that. And like I think I think he was killed. He he died mysteriously. Uh he claimed he saw Okay. NASA photos of alien structures, quote unquote alien structures. Um he died in a bike accident. So go down to the top uh paragraph to see exactly what it says. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Uh former US Air Force photo, he was a photo technician who claimed he saw the secret NASA photos of the structures on the on the surface of the moon. So, um I don't think he actually said whether he believed they were alien or not. What he said was they were megalithic looking structures on the dark side of the moon. >> Yeah. And so there's a couple really weird things and I guess Ran's really good in the moon stuff, but I'll mention a couple things. Um one, when they did studies of the there was a whole Russian team and I don't remember if it was the 70s or or ' 80s, but a Russian team did a study on craters on the moon. Have you heard this? >> Uh what how they're the all the same depth. >> Yeah. And then none of them, no matter how large the radius of the crater is, none of them exceed a certain depth, which is so weird because the depth should be directly determined based on the size of the impact, right? So something's larger that creates a larger impact, crater should go deeper into it. And yet none of them do. They never they never go past a certain depth anywhere on the planet. They never do. And the weirdest thing is when after the Apollo missions when they sent a a probe to crash into the moon, I'm sure you know about this. It rang like a bell for like for like Yeah. For hours. It just rang. Which show which tells us that it's >> Well, here's composed of metallics and is hollow. Like is that >> Steve? Ask Chacht what is the size of the moon compared to the Earth and then ask Chacht what is the mass of the moon compared to the Earth? And the variation is crazy. Oh, it's like it's like light. It's a It's really really light. >> Oh, it >> but it's also the strongest thing ever at the same time, >> right? >> So, it's really weird. >> Yeah. So, okay. Oh, we didn't ask for all this. Come on, chat. GBT. >> But basically, it doesn't have any of the density of Earth. That's the thing that's so weird about >> Okay, the moon is about a quarter the diameter of Earth. Uh, what is the mass? What is the what is the um mass compared to Earth? >> The mass difference of the Earth compared to the moon. Oh, wow. That was cool. >> The Earth is about 81 times the mass. So, the moon's mass is roughly 1.23% Earth. >> And yet, it's a quarter the size. >> A quarter the size. That means it's hollow. >> Yeah, it's likely hollow. And the the theories and I mean again if you're going to try to figure something out you got to go back to the old Sherlock Holmes thing right and it's important it still rings true to this day. If you're trying to figure something out you use that old method right whatever when you're trying to explore something you explore all possibilities and whatever remains no matter how improbable must be the truth. That holds true for anything. So we eliminate everything right? Let's eliminate all the things that aren't there >> has a certain depth. The craters can't go past a certain depth. It rings. It's lighter. So, what does that mean? What's all that's left? Well, it's not natural. It has some kind of a uh a shield, like some kind of a metallic or something underneath the the the the ground, something to prevent anything from going deeper. And if it's a metallic-like object, it somehow is hollow, too. >> Mhm. >> Like that's the only thing that makes sense if if we analyze and look at it. And the fact that life wouldn't be possible on Earth without it, >> right, >> is really interesting. like has to be that exact ratio. What was it um that if it was even 5% in a different location, like if it was 5% further away or 5% closer, like none of this would work. Well, the the um the distance between the Earth and the Moon is changing. So, I think what did Kevin Kuth explain to us? He I think he explained to us that the distance the the moon every year gets a couple feet farther away from the Earth. Is that right? And has it been constantly doing that or does it I think it m maybe it resets every couple thousand years or something like that? >> It's title locked so it's it's it's stuck to our obviously our our gravity so it can't go anywhere. >> Um but >> it is so weird. It's so interesting to to consider whether or not something was created a long time ago to let a certain kind of story unfold. >> I mean it's a miracle. The moon is a miracle. >> It's an impossibility, >> right? It's a I like the moon being the idea that the moon just randomly ended up being that distance from the from the earth to be that difference that distance to the sun and being able to perfectly stabilize and terraform this earth to make it liveable is as believable as as Jesus Christ. I mean, it's enough to make anyone become a Christian. If anything, I would I would challenge anyone who's smart and academic to try to go look at that evidence to try to disprove that, right? >> Like about what the moon is because it doesn't make sense. >> So, this says that the the moon moves away from the Earth at a rate of about 3.78 cm or 1.5 in per year. Um, zoom. Can you zoom out a little bit, Steve? So, so uh so it says the moon's gravity creates tidal bulges and the earth's oceans because the earth rotates faster than the moon's uh than the moon orbits. These bulges are pulled slightly ahead of the moon. The moon's gravity then pulls back on these bulges and in turn the bulges pull forward on the moon pushing it into a slightly wider orbit. Interesting. But does it say that? Um so it just so it goes back and forth. Is that what is that what it's saying? Yeah. It can't actually because it would just leave if that was the case. It would just >> It probably just wobbles wobbles back and forth basically. >> Right. Right. >> Yeah. But it's really interesting. I mean that's it's also crazy that it's [ __ ] So it's it's 234,000 miles away. >> Yeah. >> Like that's just absurd how far away it is. yet it doesn't seem that far away >> because it's and yet it still plays such an integral part in our in our planet with life, >> right? >> Yeah. It's just weird. I mean, someday hopefully we'll know more answers on that. For me, I like to typically think, look, >> there's a lot to figure out still in space. We have a lot to still figure out here, >> right? Especially with our story and who we are. So, a lot of people are racing to try to escape. I'm more like I think that what we need is that we most need to grow is here not out there. Like for instance, we are very primitive in our understanding of consciousness and higher levels of energy and spirituality in like a deep way like they were. We we were like children when it comes to that. I think that we shouldn't be blinded by the the fun technologies that are put in front of us and ignore what may be a more important area to understand and go into like rather than moving forward at the speed we are and thinking that there aren't consequences. I think we need to remember that we can learn a lot more about who we are and about where we should be going in the future in the past than necessarily in the future. >> Like they could teach us a lot more than we understand. A lot more. And I think that's actually the biggest piece here is that if we study this civilization, this global civilization that left all these clues for us, all this knowledge, I think it is the ultimate way we find what we've been looking for all along, not out there here. >> Yeah, I agree with you. I think um they were on a different trajectory than we are on now, obviously. >> Very different. >> You know, >> they were very earthbased technologies. So their technologies seem to be based more on manipulating elements, alchemy, understanding things like resonance fields and simatics and like things that we are just starting to we still think are kind of fantasy a little bit and we're looking at in a in a weird way. Like it's an example. I think it's funny where I see it I see it in memes a lot. I think it's hilarious where people say they're like, "Oh, like we know all about radio waves and microwaves and all that stuff." And yet consciousness is still like not a real concept for them, >> right? >> So, you can't measure something and it's non-localized. It's something that So, like you can't measure love either, right? >> I'm sure you've felt love in your life or whatever for family or animals or people. >> How do you measure love? >> How do you measure it's real? There's a lot of things that we can't measure, but they're still really important towards understanding things that we shouldn't I think almost like um disregard because they're not super tangible. Like for instance, if we look at ancient mysticism and esoteric traditions of going into deep meditative states and having out of body experiences and lighting up your chakras through your spinal cord like we see with the kaduca symbol like all this ancient like almost like magic that we seem to laugh at and nothing is real in in most cases and yet it may be the answers to all of like everything. >> Why do we laugh at it though? Like why has it become such a weird uh a weird stigmatized thing that society normmy society likes to paint as like kooky >> because we've been conditioned that way. So our entire life and our generations before us are based on civilization emerging of an industrial age. It's based on industrial machines and technologies that completely disconnect us from the earth. They don't bring us closer together to the the universe and the earth. they disconnect us. So our entire civilization is building itself on the principles of just acquire more, grow, accumulate all the resources you can and just be like um I don't know like a some kind of a conquering monster here rather than realizing that the depth of what we really are and what we can become, they seem to have mastered and they were able to do things that we have no idea about today. Maybe that's why they got wiped out. They were becoming too they were getting too close to the gods. They were becoming too much like the gods and >> I would I would say like what is a more tech what's a more advanced culture us or them? I don't know how I don't know if I could answer that because it depends on what you want to call advanced and depends on what you want to call like if you want to call something superior to something else. I would argue that a lot of the things that we have now are detrimental towards our understanding of something greater because we choose to hide from it. We choose to ignore it because I think that it's scary and it's something that is unknown to the world that they they don't even believe it's real. Like people don't believe that. Like if you were to say magic and talk about magic, people like, "Oh, you talking about like slight of hand magic with cards and stuff?" No. >> Like ancient esoteric mysticism magic, >> right? like but they're going to laugh at that. People will like smear and make faces and you're like so you start to look into what these >> magic was synonymous with religion in antiquity. >> They were >> Jesus was doing magic. Yeah. >> Music and drugs. They were magic. That's the whole point is that >> so theian mysteries was >> exactly. So the real question we need to ask is how much have we lost? How much have we forgotten who we really are and how much do the things we have actually disconnect us from what matters the most? And I mean I and I mean that like if you if you never ever go out into nature, you don't meditate, you don't ground yourself with any of it, you're always going to be disconnected. you'll never be connected to it because the core of it the first thing you must do it's in every ancient tradition throughout Vadic traditions and throughout um gnostic traditions is the importance of having an understanding of the all having an understanding of the universe earth like our roles within that what consciousness is what energy is energy can't be created or destroyed it only changes state so then why do we think we die >> do we really die >> or does our our spirit our consciousness live forever eternally. >> Every civilization from this time period was obsessed with the afterworld, the the afterlife and the underworld. They were obsessed with it. The Egyptians used to try to map out if if someone died, they would try to map out the their path of their souls and try to have them reincarnate again. >> Same thing in India. >> Ancient cultures were obsessed with the idea of dying and rising gods. And it's it's repeated throughout history going back thousands of years before Jesus Christ. And yet we're we're conditioned into that the brain creates consciousness and we die and we and then that's it. We just go in and like we never exist again. And so it creates this perpetual system of fear throughout everything and like traps people like it it entains them in this ideology that prevents them from seeing the higher truths of what they really are. And that's why I think the entire purpose why this entire chapter of human civilization this lost civilization why it's been so pushed pushed at or prevented from becoming known and suppressed in many cases. It's because if it became true like known about them we would fundamentally shift everything we think about who we are. Everything like this whole world of what we created would some somewhat crumble. I think do you think there's knowledge that is being hidden about these people that somebody somebody like a group of people have that is just they're they're keeping it from the world? >> What we see >> you think that's what Zahi Has is doing? >> No, it's not Zahi. He's he's just a gatekeeper for something higher. So >> he just seems like a a guy who'suting himself for money and and political power. What what we saw happen all the way back to ancient Babylon and then throughout the Roman time period was this idea of controlling thoughts, controlling people's thoughts and how they view things. And >> it was done so as a means of control even now. >> Yeah, it's still being done. But back then it was even being done on another level I think because the world we lived in like for you've seen the whole idea like the whole Roman games thing, right? Rome was in a state of collapse and people were super unhappy. So what they did is they created games to entertain them and distract them from the greater problems of the empire, you know, like much like we sometimes do today. And it causes people to not care about >> um about asking important questions because they're just being entertained. And then >> and then that entertainment usually comes along with like a conditioning of violence, >> right? >> So those things are are being used were used as a tool. And so what happened was >> secret societies used to be exist all throughout history and were very important. The role of secret societies was to bridge the gap of older traditions and knowledge and carry them forward because they realized that a lot of this knowledge was just not something that the average person they really would understand or get. And so it wasn't always about a necessarily like a hiding. It was originally more about what they call like the um like someone who's like an adept someone who is um already that kind of mindset. And so they bring them in and they would teach them and they would bring them in. They're called mystery schools. >> Okay, they go back all the way throughout history, these ancient mystery schools. And they were it was recognized very early on that the average peasant or person that lives and lives their life like they wouldn't understand. And it was they considered it something where it ended up having to be kept within certain fractals of society. And that was not done intentionally as a way to hide knowledge from everybody. But eventually it was. So eventually those secret societies that were maintaining protecting that knowledge, they ended up becoming really very corrupted over and they used that used that knowledge as a form of control as saying like we have we have a deep understanding of the psychology of humans and the nature of them and the nature of who we really are. And so that knowledge at first that was um being guarded within certain groups then became hidden. >> And then the average person like couldn't even get access to it at all. Even people that wanted to know it was only in these upper echelons. And so what happened is well too much power ended up in certain groups. And then the very secret societies that were supposed to be the ones protecting ancient knowledge and being those keepers of knowledge ended up being the gatekeepers of everything. >> They flipped it. >> They ended up becoming the ones that were controlling. And their viewpoints often, and they it's funny because you can get little glimpses of it during interviews and different things is they often say that humanity is are basically like sheep and they're not ready for understanding like the greater truths of everything. So they do it as a means of protecting them, >> which I think is [ __ ] I think the whole that whole idea of keeping us in conditioned lower form of consciousness simply because >> they're protecting us. What really is the truth is that it's a system of of of creating control and keeping people in like an industrial type of mentality for working and not asking questions. which is why the Rockerfeller education system in the United States that was developed by Rockefeller was developed during during World War II because it was developed as a curriculum that would create a worker just educated enough to do regular tasks but not educated enough to the to like a high level to ask questions and to go to go into a deeper place is very very cleverly designed the Rockefeller um education system so that people are literally creating it into a mindset that blocks all of these things that we're talking about out even the idea I'll give you an example just a simple one is the idea that if something is old it has to be primitive that is ingrained in people ingrained so the to the point where if I show someone Ionian I'm like look at this andite stonework it's spectacular they're like that looks like it was just built that's their mentality is that instead of thinking that anything old is primitive how about it's not linear at all is that most of the all the advanced stonework and the amazing stuff is actually the oldest and that the primitive looking adobe and stuff came from way later because we were reset. We lost everything. We forgot and we had to go back to >> starting fires and hunter gathering again. And then when we rose back up again, we had no idea had to do any of the things that they did. No idea. And so that's where the confusion came in over other cultures building on top of much older um structures and then getting getting credit for building them. >> I want to um I want to touch back on that Rockefeller point you made. Is that when the schools the modern day um school system was first developed? Uh >> it was the education system in the United States. So let me give you an example. If you if if if Danny Jones like you're like, "Okay, I want to be a teacher. The hell with this podcast thing. I'm done." Right? I I want to go teach uh I don't know, English, right? Actually, that's not a good example. Let's say you wanted to teach history. >> Okay, >> that's better. >> Perfect. >> So, you go in and you're like, "Boy, I am going to shake things up. You guys, you better look out, right? The hell with that whole Rockefeller in education system. I'm going to be talking about >> the Anunnaki. We're going to talk about Anunnaki. I'm going to talk about, you know, ancient lost civilizations and like what they were building and creating and blah blah blah. You will be out of a job within a week. Gone. You will be fired. Why? >> Because if a teacher is going to become a teacher, they have a very set education curriculum. You have to maintain. You have to. So if you you get like a big book and you're like, "Oh, memorize this whole thing and that's what you're going to teach." >> They can't teach about anything that's outside of the curriculum or they're literally in trouble. It's that's what we're talking about. >> What is the reason for that? >> To keep us in an indoctrinated mindset in which we perceive reality in a completely artificial way that is not at all what it really is. That's the whole idea behind like the Truman Show and the Matrix and all that stuff. That's what it comes down to is that it's a conditioned world in which we've been forced into a materialistic world that's disconnected us from all the things that really matter the most. H Steve, remember we pulled up a stat the other day about uh about school books and college books like the typical books that you get in school that you hand out to all the students. >> Yeah. >> That industry is like a multi- multibillion dollar industry >> because they own the whole thing. They can't nobody else can. >> All they all they have to do is just reprint the same books forever. And now now that uh schools are starting to transition to iPads and computers, they're actually the their revenue is starting to fall off now finally. >> But that's what we're talking about is a long time. And so every generation gets taught a version of reality. Everything who we are, what what consciousness is, what our history was, right? What who we who were we >> and then everything is then based on that level of conditioning. And then what happens? Well, they have kids. Then they teach their kids that. then their kids go to school. So, I remember when I got out of college and I went down the rabbit hole that I did, I was like I I couldn't believe it. I felt like I had never been taught anything. Like most of it was [ __ ] >> Mhm. >> At least a lot of it. A lot of it was was in a certain kind of um viewpoint that was really hiding everything that really mattered the most >> to me. >> Yeah. >> Learning really began for me like after college. Home school's starting to become more in vogue lately. >> Yes, it is. >> A lot a lot of people I know are going homechooling. >> They don't have to follow the curriculum necessarily. Homeschooling has the option where as long as you follow certain criteria of grading and meeting certain requirements, you can be a lot more flexible when it comes to that. >> Yes. Yeah. There there's certain guard rails they have to stay inside. It's like to to stay like accredited or whatever you want to call that. But like what does that even mean nowadays? like you don't you don't you don't need like when you go to hire most companies nowadays that are like hiring people to do highlevel jobs unless it's like a doctor or a lawyer. They don't really like I don't feel like education is that important anymore. >> In fact, I would say it can often be the opposite. Let me let me tell you what I mean by that. I'm working with a lot of archaeologists around the world >> and I will show things to them they've never seen before. They've never even like I've never even seen that before or even considered that. And when I talk to them about the theories and the evidence and what we're looking at, a lot of them, it's like it's like a deer in the headlights >> because when you go through a an education system to get a degree, you're just regurgitating a very specific core pieces of information that you're being given. So, if you want to have an archaeology degree, you're just getting good grades and you're testing and you're and you're writing about what's already been established. And you can't you can't challenge that narrative. You will be laughed out. If someone has an archaeological degree, they can often be have more of a conditioned controlled mindset than someone like me who doesn't, >> right? >> Because I'm not bound by anything, >> right? I'm bound by the by the objective study and search for truth and like going going off of science, but I don't have this predetermined thing that's telling me that has to fit into something, >> right? You don't about tenure or all these kinds of things. >> Yeah. I'm just like, okay, what is the evidence? Well, it's pointing towards this. I'm going to follow it. >> Mhm. Right. >> And that's dangerous. I'm I'm very dangerous because I bring in to merge that academic world with the alternative world and I bring the receipts and I bring the evidence and saying look >> we have huge holes that do not make any sense on a wide variety of areas all around this in the world and I like what Graham Hanok says about it being a foundation of sand. The the our history is a is been built on a foundation of sand. It will just wash away because it has no structure. It has no foundation. M >> once that once this all opens up and we'll understand this lost chapter, it will open up every door that we've ever we've ever wanted because they seem to have mastered all the things that matter most like >> like understanding the nature of source and creation, understanding the blueprint of everything in the universe, understanding those celestial forces that maintain that, understanding our role and who we are in that >> understanding how we were created and what the gifts that we have that are like them and how we've largely been kept in a place of controlling our consciousness and controlling that inevitable truth of understanding because the nature of reality is two things. One, it's cyclical meaning it it's never permanent. It's always changing. And two, and always returning where it's cyclical, like starting somewhere and then ending up where it began. And then two, duality and polarity are fundamental constants in the universe. Meaning that if there is light, there is dark. If there is good, there is evil. And those roles are being fundamentally played. Very much so. To the point where when we try to understand how our world became so dark and so war driven and so controlled, we simply need to understand that it was an inevitable plan. I believe as part of an understanding of if you you ever heard of that that term with great with great power comes great responsibility, right? You see it in all the Marvel movies. >> Do you really think that Danny Jones should have >> great powers and be able to do great things if he doesn't know how to doesn't know how to appreciate it and uses it poorly or doesn't have like a deep understanding of it? Do you deserve to have those things? >> I don't know. >> No, you don't. because you're not going to use them in the right way. M >> it looks the entire when you read all the tablets and you start getting into understanding who the Anuna are and how they talk about them being the ordainers of destinies and how they're like chained to our reality and in ancient Gnosticism through the Nakamati they're called archons like the controllers of our reality and how they're described as ordaining the entire destiny of us and every event and everything that happens is actually part of like a great story and that the whole purpose is to >> allow us to be tested. to see what path we ultimately take, >> whether or not we're tempted with great technology and great power, whether or not we actually follow and take the right steps necessary to be able to understand something greater and deeper. I'm not interested in a bunch of fun little tech. I'm interested in understanding how an ancient civilization could have used their voice to move stones. >> That's what I'm interested in. How do they move a thousand ton megalith, >> right? we're not asking the right questions. We need to start understanding that this entire civilization that we're exploring that left all of this knowledge there for us, >> we're just ignoring and we're not paying attention to it. Whereas it may have the answers to everything that we're really asking like the most important questions of all. Who are we? What is our role here? What are we supposed to be doing? >> Um other questions like what powers do we have? What have we forgotten? >> Who are we who are we supposed to be? >> Yeah. like the most important questions of all they seem to have mastered all of them >> and that all esoteric traditions all teachings whether it's Vadic teachings or teachings from Gnosticism or or hermetic teachings or the popo vu and ancient Mayan teachings or Egyptian teachings or Mesopotamian teachings or Tibetan teachings >> Chinese teachings laoo they're all the same thing they're all a giant collection of understandings of how we as powerful beings can follow a certain archetype and unlock a doorway, >> right? >> Unlock a doorway that takes us somewhere that technology does not take us. >> Well, human beings certainly have abilities um we do for sure >> that most people aren't aware of. Agree. >> Right. I think um one of the best evidences for that is like things like the Stargate program that the military was spending lots of money on to get people to do things like remote view, astral projection. Um there's this guy uh what's his name? The Jewish physicist who wrote about the um what are those papers called? the the classified CIA papers where they talk about consciousness and astral projection. >> Um >> um >> that's not the not the Adam story, is that? You're talking about a different one. >> Yeah. Yeah. Not the Adam and Eve story. Yeah, it's a different one. Um God damn it. Why am I blanking on this? >> Are you talking about gateway experience? >> The gateway the gate the gateway experience. Yes. Thank you, Steve. Um there's clearly been an a correlation with the rise in technology and the atrophy of the psy psychic mind and this the atrophy of psychic abilities. Right. So so it seems like the rise in the the technical analytical mind has >> correlated with the atrophy of the psychic mind. And I think that even like if you want to use the most extreme example of human beings before we had the written word or before we had the technology to offload our memories onto other devices. Now we have phones but back then we had >> tablets things like this like >> we probably had some extraordinary abilities that are inherent in us that are ancient. >> Mhm. that have just been non-existent since we've been in this industrial technological world. >> Longer than that, too. Yeah. Even longer than that. >> Mhm. >> No, I 100% agree. That's the new That's the new future. And that's why people like like have you ever gone into like the Amazon rainforest or a place that's completely uninhabited way far away from civilization >> and like had that experience of like deep senses sort of like waking up in you and like hearing the birds, the insects. >> That's what I was trying to explain when I was talking about how we've been we've been disconnected from what matters the most. M >> the earth and grounding is one of the essential components that every mysticism teaching encapsulates and says basically there are these tenants that we must follow if we want to reach those higher levels and if we don't if we try to skip them we won't we'll be shut down and prevented and again that whole conversation of who's preventing us is another whole thing we can talk about but the point is that if you decide to see through the illusion >> you can end up becoming something far greater >> and that is >> as when I was studying that civilization all you know as many esoteric teachings and mysticism as I could I didn't just study them right there's a there's a you know the difference between having knowledge and wisdom right you know the difference between the two >> what is it >> knowledge means you're aware of something oh great w I know all about chakras and stuff right and meditating and you ask me have you ever meditated I'm like no no no that's the difference between wisdom wisdom is applied knowledge into your life experience. >> Yeah. And so I went down that journey and had profound like I can't even explain them. Like they were experiences so profound and incredible that they >> you can't put them into words. >> No, they were they were like something that like people wouldn't even believe you. >> And I so I experienced those things firsthand. And so I know what they're trying to >> help us with. What they're trying to help us understand is that like you said the things that matter the most we have forgotten and we are not really practicing or understanding like if you're just if you're being bombarded by all kinds of sensors and wireless signals and noise and all these things it's actually really affecting you. >> Yeah. >> That's why when you go into nature you go nature and you're among that and you can meditate and connect you unlock something because what you do is you ground. So the first thing is you ground to the earth and that's important. The earth is a giant crystal. Okay, the earth is mostly silica based. So it's a giant crystal that is very powerful and we one of the essential components for anyone that's listening to this like the first thing you want to do if you want to go down that road, you need to spend time in nature. That's the first thing. And then understand how to quiet your mind. Understand how to be you have to be healthy. There's there's a whole list of things here, right? You have to you have to drink only spring water. No more tap water. only distilled in spring water. That's it. You can't drink anything that's got chlor fluoride in it or anything. >> Um, you have to eat healthy, as healthy as possible, as organic and as natural as you possibly can. You've got to exercise. You've got to exercise your mind, too. >> All those components. And then you go into nature, start studying esoteric, mysticism, traditions, and what they were all trying to teach. Start to incorporate that into your archetype of who you are. And watch what happens. >> Watch what happens. Yeah, >> it unlocks you. >> Being inside these LED light bulbs all day, too, is like one of the most unnatural, unhealthy things for the human mitochondria. >> It affects our circadian rhythm. So, it's really bad. So, I would propose if you're going to be in lights, all nonLEDD, salt lamps. If you can, even try to go traditional and rise and fall with the sun. >> Like, if it's really dark, >> maybe it's time for bed. >> No screens, >> right? Exactly. No, I mean, seriously, >> for sure. That's one of the best things you can do for your health. >> It's so interesting. Even components like getting a lot of sleep >> without things that are distracting and getting a good night's sleep. And when you incorporate all those things, something unlocks. >> I mean, you've seen you you see what happens to orcas when they're in tanks at SeaWorld for their whole lives, right? Their fins start to flop over. They become mentally unstable. They attack humans. They look terrible. I mean, that's what is happening to human beings that sit inside an office in a cubicle all day. >> Exactly. >> Underneath LED lights. >> We are in an artificial system in a place that we don't belong. which is why all of this has gone the way it has. Which is why that civilization that we're exploring, the lost civilization is so dangerous because they mastered the human experience and the god code. They mastered it all. They were they were literally I don't know having astral projection journeys and I think they were able to take their consciousness and go anywhere they wanted. They were able they were doing things in these temples and things in these pyramids that we don't understand. And we look at them and we are like, "Wow, that was cool that they made those. That looks really hard." And yet we can't build them today. When When have we built the Great Pyramid of Giza? >> Right. >> 2 and a half million stone blocks, an average of 3 to seven tons. When's the last time we did that, Danny? >> Never. >> Oh, we can do it, though. Okay. Is it going to be a perfect mathematical half ratio of the earth, sun and the moon that that aligns during the procession to Sirius and Kynes major and has a a a guardian lion that faces Leo with an entire subterranean world that we have boarded up and refused to go explore? >> Like you know the whole Sphinx paw thing, right? The right the right paw. >> Mhm. They have done LAR and ground penetrating radar around the Sphinx and they've identified four entryways in into the Sphinx. And some of them are super obvious. Like it's not this isn't a conspiracy. Oh yeah, I've seen there's one on the head. You've seen it, right? So there's an entrance on the head, there's one on the rump on the back, and there's one on the right paw. Okay. When those were brought up to Zahi Hawas in the group, they had a lot of public attention to to investigate. And so like I've I've heard I've gotten this whole story from the inside. So I know there was a whole team that was involved in doing analysis that they found chambers. They found openings under under this the Sphinx and they saw uh rooms and they also saw something down there that looked like a structure like um >> like they don't know what it is. Okay. And so what happened is they brought the scans. This is like in the I think it was the early 2000s or late 90s. Double check what that when that was. They brought it, the public got all excited briefly, right? It was in the it was in the news a little bit. And so the teams Aiwas and the group, what they did was really clever. So let's put this on record in case it's not on record. They decided to drill to quiet everybody and go investigate, but they drilled in the wrong spot deliberately. So they went several feet in the wrong area, came down and didn't find anything and say, "Look, see there's nothing here." >> They never even drilled in the place they were supposed to. They never even went into the area that the voids had been found on on scans. And so they tricked everybody and they then that's how they they're they hiding and pretending all these things aren't really there. >> I mean, you've seen the news out of Cusco in Peru, right? How they've found the entire subterranean connection from Cusco all the way to Saskan underground. >> This is recent. >> Yeah, this was just like this a couple months ago. >> Really? I know. I did not see this. The ancients seem to be really interested in the subterranean world. Very interesting interested in and the means that has that has a a connection to what's above. So what we see above in Egypt is just the surface that it actually has a whole system of things underground that that deal with not the necessarily the new thing that >> the SAR scans. >> Yeah, I don't buy that really. But we know that there are huge aquifer systems and subterranean areas, >> dude. The [ __ ] labyrinth in in Egypt. >> There's a lot of stuff like that. >> That's like I just watched Ben Vancwick's whole video on that. It's completely insane. I mean there's all kinds of writings from antiquity from Herododus from uh like uh Ply the Elder um >> Ply the Elder >> um um Strabo who write about this write about this labyrinth and they say that it's like 100 times the size of the labyrinth in Cree that it's like an impossible feat of engineering even more impossible than the Great Pyramid of Giza. They all say that. They all say it's like a way more astonishing feat than the [ __ ] great pyramid, which is insane. >> When when those things actually come to light and people start understanding the engineering that went into them, we'll understand that they had capabilities that we don't understand today. >> Yeah. And that's the thing is that we often will view them as being primitive. I don't think they were at all. Like I think that they had forms of technology and and human abilities that we don't remember anymore at all. Yeah. >> I'll give you an example. This one is probably the easiest example that everybody knows. You I imagine you've had this experience in your life at least a few times. Someone you know well, not like someone you don't know. Someone you know well, maybe a family member or best friend. They're going to call you and it's an intentional thought like I'm going to call Danny. I haven't talked to that guy in like a month. And right before they call you, they think that >> right? >> Have you ever had that pop in your head where your friend and then they call you? >> That's it. I've had it happen with people that are not even that I'm not even close to. I've had like I've talked about on the podcast before like I've had it happen where like I I was thinking randomly in the future about an interaction I was going to have with a guy that I see maybe twice a year and then two seconds later he calls me. >> But that's the thing is it wasn't random. So the idea is more of that thought you picked it up like an antenna. Okay. So try to think of consciousness as more like an antenna of a radio station. Yeah. Okay. And so you picked up on that conscious thought because it was intended for you. Right. So it has to be an intentional thought. And that's important here to understand. When we have intention behind our thoughts, we can activate something. >> We can activate something that goes into ancient telekinesis abilities that we don't really remember anymore, but there's almost like a little bit of a the leftover memory and the leftover like parts of that are still there. They're dormant. They're think of it this way. >> All of these gifts are not gone. All of them. It doesn't matter what they are. They're not all they're not gone. They're dormant. >> They're all dormant inside us. We will activate them again. It's just a reactivation based on activating our DNA with a certain kind of frequency. Right. >> And it I mean it is it is proven beyond a shadow of a doubt that there's these kids that can read minds now. These non-verbal autistic kids with the telepathy. I had a woman in here the other day who's a mom of a non-verbal autistic kid and taught the mom how to see without her eyes. She was sitting here. We literally wrapped her head in like 30 blindfolds and he was holding up cards behind her head while she was wearing blindfolds facing the other way and telling him exactly what he was holding. >> Wow. >> I've never seen anything like it. >> That's the abilities that I'm talking about. Now imagine that on like a hundred times more stronger. >> Imagine if we were literally like magicians almost. >> We could create. We could move things with our voice and our sound. To this day, we know we know that there are still Tibetan monks that have been have been documented as as moving an object >> with their voice, >> right? >> We we know that levitation and acoustics are are fundamental understanding that this this culture had. And it gets even deeper is like, well, how do they know about like the ratios of the earth, sun, and the moon? How did they know about um about geodessie locations on the earth dealing with like 30th and 40th parallels building very specifically these certain lines across the earth. It's like mindblowing when you start getting into what they knew. They knew they knew like everything. It seemed as though they had mastered a lot of things of reality and a lot of concepts. And I think that's why they were able to build what they built >> because they were masters in what they did. And I don't think it any of it was built by hand at all. >> Really? >> No. I like think about it. Like a lot of people will jump to the idea, well maybe giants move them. No. I think that when we look at how it's described, right? That's how we know. Let's think about the descriptions. >> Is there any texts? >> Oh, well, we have to go back to in indigenous traditions. No, the texts don't really talk about that. the text wouldn't know because right because if the if the great pyramid and these these like the labyrinth and stuff were were built they would have been way before they they would have been built way before you know antiquity as we call antiquity right it would have been if it was before the younger dus yeah the lost >> there's no way we would have texts from there from that time >> some of the cuneaoiform tablets could have been from that time or at least rewritten from that time >> which is why they're so important and interesting but um A lot of like Vadic and Hindu traditions talk about technologies. They show them, they talk about them. And it's not only that area, but a lot of others. Let me give you an example. Um the story of Vera Kosha out of South America. >> He is told to have arrived in the shores with a group and they initially were not receptive to him. And so it's described very well that he simply uh did a magic trick for them like actually moved something or or created something out of thin air. That's how it's described. And so when they saw that they bowed down and said like I'll follow we'll follow you. And that same story is echoed in other places too. I'm sure you know in the Aztec realm it was Ketaquad was their their their dragon. >> This is Prometheus. This is Anki. Yeah. >> Yeah. Same thing. And then in the Maya it's Kukakon. And then we see that same equivalent in other parts of the world like th in Egypt and Hermes in Greece. And what it all comes back to is they all are described as being magic. All of them. Every single one of them is described as being magic and being able to create and demonstrate things in front and then then the people followed and they taught them. >> They taught them everything >> and then they left. This is the interesting thing. It's described as them creating places and then leaving and then leaving the the people that are there to be the caretakers of them. But the people that were caretakers often they succumb to violence and um ways that it wasn't never meant to be. That's why the Maya and the Aztec were so violent >> because they was never it was never intended like that and originally they went through periods of climate disruptions with crops and things and they became they did blood sacrifice and things like that. But the point I'm trying to make is that a lot of those ancient cultures never started that way. A lot of other cultures came later that were just shadows of their former self, >> you know, and it's sad that they're the ones that are being given credit for such such amazing things and they're not the ones who, you know, really built any of them, >> right? But that's where we are now is separating what is just more primitive later cultures that get all this credit and then showing where it should appropriately be which is basically like a lost chapter >> that they no one was really able to do what they did after ever. What what what do you think? Do you do you think um the archetype of Quzo Kawal and Prometheus and Enki are something real like something physical? >> So that and if so that opens up like a huge thing. >> What what do you think they were? >> Okay. So that that is a really really important and really difficult question to answer especially for people that haven't studied it and actually read tablets themselves because it sounds you like too fantastic when you describe it. Now, most people in my fields will credit everything with these lost civilizations to aliens. Most of them do. I do not. >> I don't think what we're talking we're thinking about is an alien in the conventional sense. >> Right. I agree with you. So if you take all of the traditions, if you take all of the ancient teachings, if you take hermeticism, the Vadic cultures, you take u the Mayan stuff, the Egyptian stuff, the Mesopotamian stuff, especially in the Mesopotamian stuff, take all of them. Take every reference to these gods, these Anuna, every single one around the world, they all like say the same thing. All of them do. Especially the tablets. I counted one time how many times the Anuna are mentioned in different tablets. I have I have 12 different tablets that they're talked about. So their original name is not the Anunnaki. Their original name is the Anuna. That's the Sumerian term that was that was the pantheon of gods that were associated with the Sumerian civilization. They describe them as being the origins of everything. That they're that humanity about the first cities about civilization itself. They they say in the tablets that it came from them that it was all lowered to them and in very specific places that it was created and how they are we are very much more like them than the other way around that it was described in the tablets that they created us in the image of them and that we are nothing like anything here at all. And that's why it's so confusing and we're um so mis misguided is that they are just they just described now try to wrap your heads around this your head around this. They're described as being something far more than like a group coming in a ship or something. They're not talked about that at all. They're talked about as being like omnipotent. They're talked about as being eternal and that they are fractals of source. Okay, there in hermeticism is my favorite one. The conversation with the poander and Hermes is my favorite conversation regarding that because he asks about the nature of everything and like he's talking to source and source is coming through as a dragon which is really interesting because Kataquaddon are both dragons, >> right? >> So is our traditions in ancient China there are feathered serpents which is like a dragon. And so over and over again we see that archetype being shown >> back. Now, why a dragon? Well, a dragon's just a metamorphosized serpent to its highest form. Simple as that. So, this this the snake is really interesting. >> The snake is the same. The snake is described in at least one section as being a feathered serpent. >> Yeah. Because they're the same thing. >> That's why the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve are are tempted by a snake, >> right? >> It's just Anky. That's why Anky be he became demonized by later corrupted religions that then turned him into like a demon, >> right? That's where that whole thing came from. They inverted so many things. They inverted. >> They inverted all kinds of things throughout history to make it the opposite. I'll give you an example. We know >> that's why they they try to connect that's why they connect Prometheus with the devil. >> Okay. Yeah. Like let's pull this up really quick. Be super easy. Look up the um the caducious or the rod of eskeipius the medical symbol, right? Yep. >> Do we know what that is? >> Yep. The snakes wrapping around each If a snake is evil, why is on a most prominent area of that has to do with health is Yeah. Go to an image really quick >> is the rod of Eskeipius. >> Okay. So there's two different symbols so people don't get confused. The caducious is the one with the wings that is related back to Hermes. Okay. Now that is two serpents intertwined around a spinal cord, our spinal cord. And the reason they show the wings is that they're showing that if we unlock our chakras of higher consciousness and energy, we basically unlock something. >> That's what they were leaving behind is all the knowledge. And the other version of this is called the rod of eskeipius. That's the one that became the medical >> the medical symbol in the United States. It's a slightly different version. >> Two snakes having sex. >> Well, they're intertwined around each other. >> That's what snakes do when have you seen a video of snakes fornicating? It's insane. Carl Ruck did a talk was talking about this on one of his videos. He's a he's a classical scholar also studies ancient Greek. >> Two snakes would probably represent the divine masculine and feminine that exists in all of us. Okay? And those two snakes when they dance and merge their energies in balance, they unlock the highest state we can. That's why every tradition and everything has been trying to tell us this and we're not paying attention. And that's why those symbols, why would the snake be so evil and demonized if it's on two of our most prominent symbols that go all the way back? >> Because it was inverted. >> It was inverted from its opposite meaning. And it goes all the way back to the very beginning, >> the very beginning of a a battle over controlling our mind, controlling our thoughts. And it goes all the way back to the very beginning of that. Again, we just talked about the story of Adam and Eve, right? in the garden where the where Anky the snake tempts Adam with a knowledge of good and evil and then they get kicked out and they learn awareness and all this stuff. Right. >> Right. >> Why would that be an bad thing, >> right? >> Well, it's considered a bad thing because monotheistic religions ended up becoming very controlled that it all started with the council of Nika. Y >> you know about that. And so it's it was like a put together book with some stories that were older that were rewritten and then other things that were used as a form of manipulation. Right? We know that Jesus said that the path of reaching him, the state that he's in is just the kingdom of heaven is found within. He didn't tell you to follow a church or anything. And yet to this day, churches reorganized that message into him being a savior that we have to follow and that but we don't become that like we can't be our own savior. They they flipped it. They switched it around to what it was never supposed to be all along. It would end up being a form of control. >> Yes. But in the the original form, these all these esoteric teachings and mysticism, their whole goal was to take the ancient knowledge of what once was and then incorporated into us and then unlock basically like our god side. >> Like we become something far greater. And that's what every ascended master throughout history, whether or not it's Krishna, Jesus, or um Buddha or any of them have all been saying the exact same thing, >> right? >> Every time. And yet we choose to not connect them and listen. >> And it's profound because we could be something far greater than we are. >> And we're just being held back by things that are quite frankly just like illusions. >> Yeah. The Yeah. The crazy game of telephone that has happened with the Bible is is pretty astonishing when you actually really look into it. >> Yes. that these stories have being been written and rewritten and rewritten and rewritten over time >> with an agenda. >> That's another thing. These people, not only do these church fathers have an agenda and the people that are writing it have an agenda, but they're also making money by preaching this stuff, >> right? So, so we virtually have zero idea like if there is I mean I'm a lot of these stuff these things are fairy tales but like I'm sure there are some elements to truth in a lot of it that has been twisted over time but there's no way you're going to look through just the canon and figure out what was going on 2,000 years ago. >> You just have to go back before all that stuff. On top of that, it's interesting that out of all the biblical literature, 100% of it is Hebrew. Well, and that's the thing that it's unfortunately it's an agenda by by those who are really staunch supporters of the of the Christian and Hebrew traditions, which I mean I of course you have to dabble and look at all of things, but if you're trying to pre pretend that that's the beginning of everything and that those predate things that are earlier, that's where I get into issues being like, why are you trying to pretend that Christian and Hebrew teachings are far older than like these Mesopotamian ones or other ones, right? Ordmetic. >> No, you can't do that. There is an order of when things came. Mhm. >> And then you were you were just asking a little while ago about how to find out the real story then. Well, >> there didn't seem like there was always agendas like later. >> It seemed as though if you go far enough back, a lot of these ancient traditions and cultures were trying to preserve things in the best way possible, not becoming like a council of Nika, changing it around to an agenda. that whole like mind control thing that seemed to have come out of God, at least the Romans, maybe even the Babylonians, but that was not necessarily something that I think has always existed. I think that civilization we're exploring, >> they seem to have a a lot of emphasis and importance in being having integrity and honor and being um someone really genuine and really highly conscious. To me, the crazy the craziest thing about these ancient texts is that like the biblical cannon all comes out of these specific Hebrew texts, right, in the Dead Sea Scrolls. But like classical scholars, what they look at is all the text that was going on, all the literature from that time 20 from from 500 BC or 500 AD back to, you know, the time of Homer, right? 800 BC. They're not looking at just the religious text. They're looking at the philosophical stuff, the medical stuff, everything. Historical stuff, geological stuff. >> And all of it was Greek. It was all Greek. >> Yeah. >> Right. All the religious stuff is only in Hebrew, which is a 7,000word language. 7,000 unique words in Hebrew. Greek has over 1.2 million. The Library of Alexandria, all Greek. >> Yeah. >> Maybe like 1% Hebrew, >> which is insane to me. How come there's like when you when you try to go back if you take take your time machine back to when Jesus was walking around? Yeah. The best way to figure out the context to the language or the what was happening is you take what the historians back then were writing, what the comedians were writing, what the philosophers were writing, and you try to combine it all. Take the words and figure out the best contextual framework for that word. >> And that's how you come up with a consensus to what that word meant because there's semantic drift. words change the meaning of words change over time throughout centuries >> for sure. So, and 90% of the lang 90% of the language that was being used and was written all the all the writers, all the literature was in [ __ ] Greek, dude. It wasn't Hebrew. Just because the Dead Sea Scrolls have all this religious stuff, there's nothing that corroborates it in Greek. >> Yeah. No, I think that we need to open up the our lens of understanding that a lot of these Greek and other other texts like this go back far older than Hebrew. By the way, and by the way, the Wes Huff uh Billy Carson debate thing, >> like everyone says that Wes mopped the floor of Billy, but Billy got a lot of [ __ ] right. He doesn't like wasn't confident in the way like, you know, Wes kind of like was trying to structure that argument in a way where he was like showing books and asking him questions about books that he didn't really know the answer to right then and there, whatever. But like Billy was actually right about a lot of things. There's a lot of like ancient historians I've talked to that said, you know, Billy actually had a point there. He just didn't like finish making his point or didn't actually know the context behind it or whatever. So, >> yeah. And and and Wes Wes made some statements on Rogan that I didn't agree with either, but we can we can have debates and conversations. >> Yeah, he made a lot of mistakes on there, but like to like again to Wes's credit, he did make a response to that like saying like, "Look, I [ __ ] up a lot of [ __ ] on the podcast." He he made a video about it like basically trying to like like for example the Ezekiel thing. He's like, "It's not word for word. I messed up." >> Yeah. We say things in in context, but >> Yeah. When you're doing a three-hour podcast, you're going to get [ __ ] wrong. >> Yeah. So, so we're we're exploring some pretty incredible things. I wanted to bring up Ionis and talk to you about that because I think it goes down a rabbit hole that is connecting to a lot of things we just talked about that, right? So, I'm sure you haven't heard of Ionis yet, right? So Ionis is was not found until almost 2000 and it was it was deliberately buried on top of a mountain and it's an incredible ancient temple. It's built all with andesite and basaltt and golden calisite alabaster. But I want you to click that picture. Yeah. Right in the um right on the left there in the middle. That one right right there. So, I want to show you this and talk about it a little bit because I think it's fascinating is that this is these these sites around Lake Vaughn are I feel like will be game changers in the future. Big game changers. Number one, if you look at this a lot of the symbols they have around it, um you've matched them around the world and to other important symbols. But most importantly, I want to focus behind the altar on the sun cross. Do you see that? >> Mhm. So that sun cross is a very specific type of cross. It forms a circle. That's why it's a sun cross and it has you know equal equal arms that that come out. Now when I was looking into the age of this civilization and the evidence we're finding for how much older it was than the Urartians. So traditional archaeologist tells us that this was built by the Urartian culture 2,800 years ago. But they're the ones who built all the mud brick on top and all the castles. And that's what that dirt that's right above that is. It's actually eroded mud brick. Now >> that's one of the reasons why a lot of this has been ignored. But Ionis that cross if you look at that and you follow it, it brings up some really profound questions. The first one is number one, how did they create and carve any of those things? Those stones are what's called andesite. >> Those are a seven to a seven and a half on the Moe's hardness scale at a 10. And for not only that, but if you look, they cut symbols through more than one block, which I don't even know how you would even do that. If you would have two blocks fitted together, >> like they did it after the blocks were already put put up there. >> How would you fit them perfectly together like that? >> Mhm. Yeah. They had to have done it after the blocks were put in place, right? >> There's no mistakes. They're all laser cut. Okay. And it's one of the hardest stones in the world. But what gets even more wild is that that symbol we then find in the highest levels of secret societies and echelons of religion later on. And so if you want to pull up really quick, can you pull up start with that Knights Templar cross? I want to show that really quick. Right there. Yeah. >> So the Knights Templar became one of the most famous groups in history, right? They were protecting and preserving this this this cross >> and they ended up being hunted down and eradicated by the church, right? It's a famous story. They were part of an old secret society that was protecting something. >> Yeah. They controlled all the money and all that. >> That cross is called either the Red Cross or the Knights Templar cross today, but it's based on a solar cross. Now if that cross predates them by a great amount of time and and I it's a from my honest that's the origins of that entire cross the mystery just gets deeper and deeper because we could be looking at ancient traditions and knowledge and knowing that were literally lost and and still remained in certain secret societies through oral traditions and others but the actual origin point of where it came from might have been lost like they didn't they had no idea that it That was from Ionis because Ionis had been buried for almost 3,000 years. >> Buried never. It was not found until somewhat recently. And so >> Alexander the Great visited the Vaughn region. Xerxes visited the Vaughn region. If you go to Vaughn Castle, I was just there for a tour. You can see the Xerxes inscription up there. They all visited like they knew that it was a very special place, right? Some of the highest high-profile explorers and people like that in history and conquerors. and they went there, but Ionis was buried and never found until recently. And so you start seeing it this usage of this type of cross in the highest echelons. And it really brings up very profound questions about whether or not it was some kind of an ancient knowing and tradition that went all the way back but was then lost and still remains. So can you go to the next picture of the pope really quick in the Vatican? I want to show. Yeah. So take a look at this. uh instead of having the Christian cross, the pope is wearing that same cross from the Knights Templar >> all the way back to I believe is this first one that came from Ionis. And so it gets into some really profound areas of exploring whether or not we could be looking at an entire area of lost history that could redefine religion, could redefine like psych, you know, philosophy back to what it used to be. ancient teachings, um, understandings of sacred geometry, all kinds of things that come back in opening the doors of what the civilization may have, um, like left behind for us to find our way back. Let me give you another example. Can you go to that image that's on the left there? Right on the left, that T-pillar right there. No, no, up on the left there. All the way left. >> Yep. That's from Shàue. That's ex That's right next to Ionis. Now, when we were there doing um doing an analysis and investigation, do you see that? That's the center cut in the middle there. The the that we found that that was exactly 12 in exactly a foot. And when we measured other ratios ratios with it, we found that it may be part of the building blocks of potentially even mathematics. So I found also areas that looked like a compass was used to design some of the symbols and they have this symbol. Now if you look at that that what that symbol looks like if you go to ancient Greece the capital letter for for fi >> for pi >> Mhm. >> is that design and so is are we looking at the origins of the basis of geometry and mathematics encoded into these structures and areas around Lake Vaughn. I'm telling you, it just keeps going deeper and deeper because every time we look into these things they built and left behind, it's like it seems like it's the beginnings of everything that became the most important parts of um of civilization like like we said like astronomy, mathematics, um even agriculture and other things may have emerged from these places and may have led to everything else like that we understand today. >> Wow, that's pretty [ __ ] crazy. So that that piece right there. Um just so you can get an idea how big it is. Can you zoom out to the other one really quick of the other images? Um and then go up. Yeah. Go up to the top second one. That's how big they are. That's around seven tons. >> Wow. >> And now notice it's sitting in situ still barely sticking out of the ground. Right. >> These sites are the only places in the world where you can find things like this that are not in museums and are still sitting there. You can't find that anywhere in the world, right? They're just sitting there overgrown. And we're like, we went there and we're we just went there with a tour and people actually found an artifact. Um, do you have a picture of that? I think I showed you that. Yeah. Can you go to that artifact really quick? I want to show in the middle, right in the center, dead center. Click this. That guy right there, his name is Xavier. He came on my tour. It was our first tour we've ever done in the Vond region. And I brought him to a place called Kev Klesi. And I showed him the type of everybody like a whole group. We had 30 people and I showed everybody the type of stone we were looking for. I said, "Look, they carved out of out of fine grain basult only." >> I said, "If anybody sees one, there's still a lot that hasn't been found here." And they were doing a act active excavations at the top of the hill. >> Like I'm I know the archaeologist and I work with them. And so we're walking on the slopes. He turns over a stone. He turns over a piece and there's a full from a basalt um relief. That's the bottom of a lion. Okay. Now, I'm going to show you where it's from. >> Oh, wow. >> Remember the legs there? Y. >> Now, can you go to that first image on the top left for me? >> This came from the same site. Now, zoom in the bottom with the lion. It's the bottom of the lion. >> Wow. >> So, he found one of the pieces of one of these. >> Where is this phone from? >> This is from Kev Klesi, which is right next to Ionis around Lake Vaughn. We found a piece of one of these and it went into a museum. We handed it back to them and they they literally are putting in the museum. But that's what I'm trying to the point I'm trying to make is that this is like the wild west of archaeology. >> You can really find things. See, >> that's crazy. >> So, it's actually it's actually the left line, not the right. Yeah. So, if you if you zoom in and look, it's the bottom of of the lion. >> And so, there are the reason for that is that those bobber leaves, those huge ones, there's at least 10 of them. And a lot of them broke off and fractured some of the sides where the symbols were and they're still there and you can find them. >> It's crazy the negative relief like how they were able to do that kind of a detail. >> Well, okay. And based on that, now go scroll up for him when he's based on the the relief. Yeah. On the left. I want him to see this. Go all the way up. Now go to the top. Look at those levels. >> Okay. So, you're talking about a solid piece of assault that's around 50 tons. Okay. Now, they didn't make a single mistake. They somehow carved that is three different interval levels. Three. They they carved three interval levels into that somehow. >> Without making a mistake in one of the hardest stones on earth. >> That's insane. >> We have no understanding for how they did these things, >> right? >> No understanding. In fact, today masons have looked at stuff like this in hard stone. We're not talking about soft stone. We're talking about granit, basults, and andesites. They are saying unless they had like a lasers and and machines, they wouldn't be able to do this. >> Right. Same thing with these vases, man. >> Like I know. So, we have no idea how they did these things. No idea. >> Right. Yeah. And the crazy thing even about the vases is like some of those vases are so thin. They're almost paper thin. Like you shine you can shine a flat. We had Matt Bell in here who I was just on with him a few dozen of those things and he shines the light in there and you can like see all the light coming out through the granite. Like how the hell were you able to carve something that's perfectly symmetrical within 1,000 of a deviation and it's like that thin and that one of the hardest stones on Earth? >> So, can you go can you go take me on an image here? Can you get out of this for a second and go to that Paleo Lake Vaughn map in the middle right in the center? There we go. Yeah. Okay. Now, the area in blue, dark blue and light blue is the original size of Lake Vaughn. It was less than half of what it is now. Okay. And I want to I want to add this because we didn't we kind of jumped over it and missed it. The underwater ruins are right in the area that's called carbonet mounds in the in the northern part. In fact, those carbonate mountains were why Tossen went to dive in the first place and then he found those ruins initially when he told the government and others they didn't believe him. By the way, >> now what I found and discovered is do you see those dotted lines on a little stream on the very left side that kind of extends out? That's was called the Miat River that used to be the only river outflow to the lake or out that that exited the lake. Okay, the only one. Now, what did I what I stumbled upon that's very significant that may be part of the evidence of dating like not only the vitrification but others. This is a big one though. Again, how could the ruins be 75 odd feet underwater and have lake levels that would have been 100 ft different? Right? Well, when I found this map, it was based on a whole analysis in the 2000s of a group that was doing soil analysis of the lake because it's an ancient lake and they wanted to get snapshots for like the Earth's climate. So, they came up with this lake model. And what is so important about it is it shows that where all those little dotted lines are that are in orange and and uh red, it shows that the lake never used to be there. And why that's important is that it shows that the area where the carbon mounds are was where the underwater ruins were when they were above water. Okay? So that gives you a basis. It verifies what this where Lake Van's Lake was >> during this the time period that I'm targeting which is before the plyene ended. Right. Right before >> the younger Dus is where it's going to you're going to know where I'm going here. There is a huge volcano on the south part of that lake called Mount Neat. Not the Mount Neret with the statues on it. There's two Mount Nerotts. That volcano is called Mount Neat. It's one of the largest volcanic caluras in the world. It's sitting right on the southwest part of the lake now. Scientists have studied Mount Neut for a long time. It's one of the most studied volcanoes in the world. They did core analysis. They figured out when the major eruptions were. They like mapped it out. What they found was that the last major eruption that blew the whole top was right at the end of the pleaene right during the older and younger dus. You ready for this? Giving us dating from when that eruption occurred. When that eruption did occur, it threw so much debris. It was massive. I just got back from visiting it. That caldera is 40 km in circumference. 40 km. That's how huge it is. When that debris flew up in the air and blew its top, it blocked off the only river outlet in the lake, the Miat River, sealing it, becoming the largest soda lake in the world. If you had a bathtub and you had a drain and you plug the drain, what would happen? >> Water wouldn't go anywhere. >> It would fill up. Right. >> Right. >> Well, then what happened? Lake Vaughn more than doubled in size. More than doubled. That's what that entire area in red and orange is. It's the current lake today that encompasses how big it is. So if you if trying to explain how underwater ruins could have been flooded by that much water, you'd have to you'd have to have some kind of a major geological event. Does that sound like the kind of geological event you would be looking for? >> Mhm. >> And so think think about it this way. If the ruin, if that's the event that flooded the lake and caused it to be underwater, then all you'd have to do is because you have the dating of the eruption, it would mean that the ruins are older than the eruption. Right. >> Right. >> And so therefore, you can you can get potential for dating that may helped shift this entire paradigm. >> Wow. >> Which means that it's it's old. They're older than Geck. And I do believe that. I believe that those ruin what I'm showing you around Lake Vaughn may be some of the oldest ruins in the world. Again, not primitive starting from something that's very advanced and then teaching all around the world and then creating things like that >> and then they all were like wiped out. >> But it it gets really deep the implications of vaugh and I want to tell you why I'm saying that because I'm about to show you the same symbols all over the world. Okay? So that would mean that the underwater ruins we could potentially have dating. Now, can you get can you back out really quick? Go to the um Okay, let's start with go to the um the the top left image of that big relief that we showed way up. Go all the way up. Keep going. That Okay, click that for a minute. This was found at Kev Klesi, the same place that that artifact came. I showed you the lion. Now, zoom in to those step pyramid design for me at the top. >> Okay, pay attention to that really carefully. Take a snapshot in your mind of that. Ready? Three levels. Specifically three. Three. Three. Three. Three. Three. In fact, what's what's you know the Nicola Tesla quote where he says, "If you want to understand the secrets of the universe, it's through the numbers of 3, six, and 9." >> You ever heard that before? No. >> Well, everything is fractals of 3, six, and 9 here. But what I want you to see is that take that step pyramid design and then take the inverted one and then combine them. Can you look up for me the Chakana design really quick? C H A K A N A. >> It's it's the most important symbol in South America. >> Chana design. >> Chakana design. Okay. So, Chana um Yeah. Like go to the left one or whatever. Go to the left the very left one. That's fine. Or whatever. >> Yeah. So, if you take the middle piece, which is like the the dividing of realms, and you just take the step pyramids, you can see it's just the top step pyramid, the lower step pyramid. Right. >> Mhm. Well, that's the most important symbol in South America. Okay. Now, go back to what we just looked at. Okay. Now, go to the the image on the right there with the the the spring that's flowing over the the water three down on the right. This is in Peru at a place called Oanti Tombbo. Look, it's the three-level step pyramid. >> Wow. >> It's in Peru across the entire world with three levels with the water flowing over the very top of it. Same thing we see at a nearby site called Napa and Glacia as well. Okay. And it just it keeps going. I'm not done yet. Now go back out really quick for me and then scroll. Is that the bottom for me? Okay. Then Okay. Go down. Um you can do the one in the middle middle down there. Yeah. That's this is in Saudi Arabia. This is in called Main So in Saudi Arabia. Even though it may have more levels, it's still the same step pyramid concept. Whoa. >> Okay. Now, I'm going to add one more for you. >> What is this rock? >> It's a giant stone temple in the middle of the desert. There's more than one that they literally created entire mountains into temples. >> Okay. Now, >> so they carved this out of the mountain. >> Yes. Out of a single mountain. Okay. Now, go back. >> This is all that's all one piece. >> One one stone. Okay. Go back for me now to the images. Now, go up and right right in the center. This that one this I came across and couldn't believe it. That's Cambodia. Okay. Across the entire world the other direction and I identified these they're only very specific sites. They're not all of Angor Watt and Angor Tom. They're these very isolated temples within that that are completely different than the rest. And they're actually considered by a different to be built by a different culture that's not the Kare Empire. So when I started finding this, I started seeing it around the world like, "Oh my god, and that's not even done yet. There's more." It was like a blueprint of knowledge that then was all around the planet. Okay, now go back for me. I want to show you another example. It's wild. Okay, now go to that um that T-pillar on the left, one down from the top. That remember we were looking at that. Mhm. Take that concept and then take the inverted pyramid with the steps and then watch what happens. Now go back out for me. Now go um let's see. Is it down or up? Let me see. Okay. Um yeah, bottom left. This is from this is from Puma Punku in Bolivia. It's the same T except they took the inverted pyramid. They combined both symbols. So they took See the inverted one. They put the inverted pyramid into the top of the doorway and then they took the T and they merged them into one symbol. >> It's like it's really wild. They're all over the place. The the same symbols, >> right? >> And then if you and then go back out for me and then go see how there's three doors on the other one. Go now go down the bottom and the bottom right. Click that. That's the back of the sungate in in Tiwanaku. Three doors. Center door is the most important. >> Yeah. with the the the the same the same designs on each doorway. >> Wow. >> It's it's like it's it's had its origins in Vaughn and then and then passed all around the world. >> That's crazy. >> Like they're trying to tell us something. They're trying to teach us. And now if you want to know what they mean, let me explain it for a minute. The non-inverted pyramid means above or the heavens. The the the or I should say the inverted pyramid means means the heavens. The non-inverted pyramid means earth. It's our realm. So it's like they're talking about two realms of reality. So one would be like this realm of earth and the other one is above like the heavens. So it's really interesting that on those reliefs like especially the gate of the sun because it's an astronomical temple that's to the stars, it's only shown with the inverted pyramid only. And every single time they show it, it's the inverted and not the non-inverted. It's like they're they're trying to show us >> aspects of knowledge >> of of of how it all functions and how it all >> Do you think there was any utility to this to these structures? >> These may have been gateways that take you somewhere. >> That's what I'm saying. I'm like my mind auto goes stargates to somewhere else in the universe. Like we don't understand, but I'm telling you these fundamental esoteric principles that are like the most important thing to understand, they're they're all in these places. Like all esoteric mysticism traditions >> all came out of this knowledge. >> That's what I'm trying to say. >> Yeah. >> Like everything came from this. >> It looks like as they like they were lowering all knowledge. And I want to give one more example. Go back to the images. Go to the very top left again. All the way back up. Okay. Click that one again on the left because it's just there's so much there I have to always bring up. Okay. Look at what's going on here. There you have the god Haldi on the right, which is equivalent of Enki. He's got the pine cone. You see that in murals all around the world. I'm sure you've seen that. But instead of a handbag or a bucket, he has what may be the first cup or chalice in history >> ever. Now, the chalice or the cup, if you look it up what it means, it means specifically the passing of a spiritual or religious doctrine. So, we know what he's passing. We know that he's passing the knowledge of the most high divine knowledge. Why? Look at his his helmet, his his like almost like a magi type of hat. If you scroll up, notice what door it's facing into. >> The center door, >> right? >> Remember the gate of a sun? The center door is the largest. Have you seen the Last Supper? The famous Last Supper from Da Vinci. >> The three doors are there in the back. >> Can you pull out the Last Supper from Da Vinci? I'm telling you, it's like they knew. Even Da Vinci knew that there was like a deep understanding. Yeah. Just pull up any of those. And then um Yep. Look at the doors in the back. See how Jesus is in the center door? >> Yeah. >> None of it's by accident. >> It's been right in front of us the whole time. >> There's a deep understanding of the three doors represent the three aspects that of of like the universe. And the the concept of three is a fractal that goes all the way back to us too, Danny. Now go back to your religious understanding. What was the trinity? >> You remember >> the father, son, and the holy spirit >> or the mind, the body and the the spirit like soul. >> Okay. >> So three components make us make up us of what we are. Three fundamental components. We are the body, we are the mind, and we are the spirit. >> So, they're showing that if you balance all three of those things, you unlock something. You unlock a doorway. And that's not the only understanding. There's more to that. >> Where did Da Vinci get this from? >> Well, that's the ultimate question is that it's been it's been speculated or I've read that he was actually in a secret society. >> What? >> Yes. That's why his work is is codes. It's like codes embedded in it >> like including the Vuvian man and all of that, >> right? >> And so you get into this idea that goes all the way back to also the Vadic and Hindu traditions, what's called the trimeerty. Can you pull up the trimety for me? T R I Mur Ti. >> Find that. We're I got to take a leak real quick. We'll be right back. >> So what are we looking at here? So again, we're looking at these concepts and these teachings that seem to pass around the world. >> You just have to go to India and find a direct comparison to it. >> So when I showed you that last relief showing Haldi and then his counterpoint on the other side and then the tree of life here in India, you have what's called the trimety. Now what the trimety is is the ancient understanding in Vadic and Hindu cultures about the three fractal components that make up reality. So I mentioned that there was a fractal component that makes us us too. Remember everything seems to be fractals >> which is what's really fascinating meaning that we seem to be a fractal of the entire universe in some ways. Yeah, >> it's really weird when you look into actually the the comparisons of us in terms of how we or even like the we have the same the same um percentage of water as the earth like the same iron in our blood that runs it which seem to be a fractal of everything else. And so those concepts are within us but they're also on the on the greater scheme of things. So for instance in the trimety it's described that there's three guardians that basically manage and balance all of reality all that of everything that it's not random at all in fact that everything is being carefully managed in our in our universe and that they describe it as being um the center or we think of as Brahma their version of Brahma or we could consider it like almost like the tree of life on that previous relief they consider like God or source. And the reason they often show it in a in nature is that they the ancient cultures believed that source or God was simply in everything but especially in the the balances of how nature flourishes and grows. Like nature itself is God. That's what they described it as. However, >> they state that that growing and that and that um flourishing is not the difficult thing to happen that happens no matter what. It's the balancing of that that's hard. that they describe that the two on either side that's what their roles and responsibilities are in the known in the universe meaning that the individual on the right is known as Vishnu and he would be the equivalent of Haldi and his role is he is a preserver of knowledge he is a um fertility god god preserver of knowledge and balance balancer of cycles and on the left is what we think of as as Shiva the destroyer >> right >> now that equivalent in Urartian was showed is well the other mural is called Toshiba and it's like that everywhere in the world like if you look at even um even other traditions like we see with um Zeus and others this counterpoint is very important because they describe source being the center of everything and that there are beings that have to maintain both the preservation and creation and balance of life as well as the destruction of it. So this might help people understand a little bit more is that the figure on the left Shiva it's his job is literally to be a god of destruction and renewal. >> So destroying old things and and like a war god like all those things >> and whereas the opposite is Vishnu is trying to preserve that knowledge and balance it. Now why does that make sense? Well go back to ancient Mesopotamia. What is Enlil and Enki doing over and over and over again in every tablet? Do you know? >> Remind me. >> They're playing dual. They're playing duality gods of each other. Always, no matter what. Every single text, Enki is this god of knowledge and wisdom. And then Enl was always trying to destroy it. He was the one in the Garden of Eden that banished them, right? >> It was never really God. It was him. >> He was the one who banished them. He's the one that that creates cycles of destruction and war here and deception. >> That's his job, >> right? >> He's that's what his his role and responsibility here while at the same time Enki's job Yeah. Enki's job is to maintain balance and and basically pollinate the tree of life to continue it growing so it grows eternally. They are, if we want to try to understand what the way that they describe themselves in all hermetic texts, all ancient traditions, all Mesopotamian texts, >> they call them, they're like, they're basically cycle masters >> and time lords. >> If you wanted to try to wrap your head around that without losing everybody who's listening to this >> is they describe themselves as literally like time lords and cycle masters >> of everything. >> Interesting. >> Of the entire universe and that that's what their roles and responsibilities are. and that they were the ones who created our solar system so that this story could unfold and that they've been managing this all along and that we are were created in their image to eventually become like them and that all of this is actually just grooming us to become like we were meant to all along. All of it. And that's why all the esoteric traditions and why at Ionis it shows Haldi bending down on one knee and passing that solar cross and all of that because they lowered the greatest divine knowledge of all time and it led to what I believe was a golden age on earth and that's when they built all the things they did and left behind everything they left behind and then they were wiped out and destroyed >> and then we are putting the pieces back together and finding our way back to where we began. It's all about the wandering in the journey >> as a microcosm of humanity. Our journey of wandering is part of this. We're supposed to start from a place a spiritual place of deep connection to the to to the all, >> right? Right? >> And we come into a material body and we experience incarnation over and over and over again >> as many times as is necessary until we finally walk that path that we that I've been describing that they've been basically screaming at us about that we're not paying attention to which is that they're leaving behind the blueprints back to where we began back to source. And if we just follow them and listen to all the knowledge that they were try they were trying to leave behind for us, we can unlock those those doors just like they did. >> Now, wasn't the story the Anunnaki Anunnaki story that wasn't part of that story that they were trying to create a lower race of like slave species of humans to likeform the earth. >> Be super careful with anything. Zechariah Sitchin, I strongly want to point that put that down right now. Anything related to something like that is usually from Zechariah Sitchin. >> Okay? >> Not not actually from the tablets. And so I want to be really clear about this. Zechariah Sitchin was not an Assyriologist. He was not a translator. He didn't have he had no idea how to read it. A Sumerian Acadian Babylonian Syrian. No idea at all. You look at who the expert translators were. The first one who cracked the code was in the late 1800s, George Smith. The guy is a legend. >> George Smith. >> George Smith. And nobody has ever heard of him. He's the one who cracked an a language code from the Samrians that had been dead for thousands of years. Nobody knew how to read it. He cracked the code. That ep epic of Gilgamesh was actually the first one that he cracked. Anyway, after him. >> So, so the story of them trying to create the lower slave race of humans to terraform the earth was not necessarily accurate. Zechariah Sitchin. >> Zechariah Sitchin. What happened was he wrote a whole series of books and he tried to base them on being translations and direct understanding from the tablets. And he was the first one to do that and he created a mess. >> He created and I think it was very intentional >> and this is what he and he came up with the idea that there was this planet Nibiru that they came from. Okay. So what he did is he took pieces of truth from tablets and wo them into a very clever story. Very clever story. >> That seems like what a lot of people have been doing. >> Yeah. It's like like for instance when we talk about if we get to astron astronomical things like there is a planet out there but it doesn't come through our inner solar system. M >> so he took that and then turned it into something it's not and then he took other things like for instance areas in the tablets that it's just discussing roles and responsibilities of the Aiji and the Anuna and then why we were created and then turned it around to making it seem like we were created as a slave race to mine gold. >> Right? >> The whole thing is false. The tablets never talk about mining. They never talk about gold ever. Really? Ever. Not a single time. And the only mention of gold in any tablets is that it talks about in the Enkian world new world Enkian world order tablet. It talks about them bringing gold, lapis, lazuli, and silver as an offering to the temple. That's it. It never mentions it ever again. >> Wow. >> The whole thing is [ __ ] He made it up and it's confused everyone to the point where you have two camps of people. You either have academics who believe the Anunnaki and a lot of those stories are just myths and allegorories and none of it's real at all. Or you get a lot of people on the all the extreme other side where they believe everything Sitchin is saying is what the tablets say and they don't go read the tablets themselves. >> Right? >> So then you're stuck in this weird place where I am where I'm like guys that's not what the tablets say at all. And in fact they say the complete opposite >> and you're and you're not necessarily reading these yourselves. You're relying on some of the best translator translators in the world. like a combination of George Smith. Um, George Smith and Samuel Kramer, the greatest asserologist in history. >> George Smith's not alive though, right? >> He's he's passed. >> Um, and then I would a third person I would add would probably be Stephanie Deli on on top of that. >> Okay. >> So, the three of them have confirmed each other's work. >> So, that's more importantly to understand is George Smith comes out with all these translations. Then Samuel Kramer goes in with goes in with his understanding and then confirms most of it which he did because George Smith is a genius. And then Stephanie Deli came in and basically confirmed those the the other two people. And you take those versions only. You don't read any other versions from anybody else because you have to know that the source of what you're getting from is is accurate and truthful. M >> and it's so if you really want to know what the tablets actually say, you go into it, you learn that they talk about how the Anuna are somehow chained to our reality. That's what they use those phrases, >> chained to reality, >> like they're stuck to our reality. It's wild. And that they are basically fractals of source that is doing the the work of source here. They're not separate from source. They're not some renegade group doing their own thing. It's not like that. They're they're described as being fractals of source, omnipotent, and they're assuming roles in the universe based on what are called natural law. So laws laid down by source, one of them being duality, >> polarity, fundamental constants. Uh um feminine and masculine energy is another another constant, right? They like their constants in the universe. they seem to be the ones that are that are described as playing those roles for all of time. So like Enki is always the the knowledgebrer and the and the wisdom keeper and the the preserver of life and everything and Enlil his counterpoint is always the one that is supposed to do the opposite. >> Okay. >> And it's a never- ending perpetual cycle. Let me give you an example. The yin-yang symbol. Yeah. >> Okay. You have light and dark. And then inside each of those inside those fish like people describe it as you have light and dark within eachel >> the the light can never eat the dark or they wouldn't exist for each other. They're in they're in a perpetual balance always. That's what Enki and ENL do, >> right? >> Their job is to maintain duality and polarity >> here. >> Okay. >> So they're like playing good cap, good cop, bad cop because that's one of the most fundamental things that exists >> in in everything. And so they're describ they describe it as um some other form of that's like them like a demigod version called the Aiji. Okay, let's like let's let's set this story straight. Okay, >> so that we so we don't have all this misconceptions. Okay, it's described how they came here and that we'll we'll lay it all out. The Anuma Alish, we'll take the Atrahas, we'll combine it with the myth of Adapa, we'll just put the whole thing together. Okay. They describe as the earth being a very special place, very special. That we are perhaps falsely trying to understand that there are infinite like worlds and there maybe not. Not like this, not like what our earth is, >> right? >> That it was actually picked for in the entire universe. That's the first thing they called it key. It was not called earth. The the earth had two names. It was called ki like ki or tiiamat. Tiiamat was the primordial name for Earth when it was violent. They describe coming to the solar system, the Enuma Alish, and the Earth was violent. No life was here, >> right? >> We're talking billions of years ago, >> right? >> That's why time doesn't matter for them. They don't exist in time. They're higher dimensional, multi-dimensional beings that don't exist in time or space. >> Okay? >> Which is okay. Right? >> They're omnipotent. They can do whatever they want. They can manifest in anything they want. We so that's where this whole thing comes from. And so they pick Earth because it's very special and they the enumalish describes it as somehow organizing the the the solar system everything Jupiter Saturn they're all organized as part of a balancer to to the whole system itself. Um which is really interesting. Then they describe how they came here and there was a demi-like god called the Aiji that worked like almost for them. Like they're really high level beings and there's this other form of them that is in physical form that is described as being on earth and building and doing all this stuff. >> Right. >> Okay. They called them the Aiji. >> Yes. >> And it's described that they were this is where Sitchin stole it from and manipulated it. It describes as they were clearing the lifelines of the land. I think what that meant was maybe not maybe something energetically but I think it had to do with rivers because streams like in ancient Mesopotamian the fertile crescent it's a very aid region and so the re agriculture was able to blossom because of using um those rivers and using them for um a for for for irrigation and things like that. >> A lot of rivers like that fill with silt. So, one of the theories I have is that clearing those lifelines was actually clearing the silt from those rivers and then using them as a basis for agriculture and all these things. Or maybe he was talking about something energetic. But either way, he used that as a means of mining, clearing the lifelines of the land. >> I see. >> Like, where do you get that from? >> Yeah. >> Um, it does talk about how the Aiji revolted. >> That's true. Mhm. >> It talks about how they revolted and didn't want to do these things in this physical world any longer. They were they didn't want to do it. They were like gods like them and they felt like the responsibility of being here and doing these things was way beneath them. >> Mhm. >> So they revolted. That's what the tablets describe. They went to Enlil. They stormed Enlil and said we we don't want to do this anymore. You need there needs to be another solution. we don't want to maintain this world like maintain the world the physical world all the different things that go along with that. So they had to come up with a plan. The plan was they decided to create mankind to alleviate all those responsibilities but it talked about not only that but becoming um becoming them eventually. So it wasn't it wasn't like we were created to be a slave or some kind of a a lower form of life. In fact, it's quite the opposite before people jump on that notion. I will jump to the myth of Adapa and the myth of Adapa. Can you pull up the myth of Adapa really quick? Adapa. I would love you to see it for yourself. >> And didn't the Anunnaki start like mating with the Aiji? >> They they may have had some interaction with No, no, no. Not um the actual text. Um can you get the actual translation myth of Adapa translation for me? >> Try chat GBT, bro. >> Yeah, if you can look up um please give me the trans in chatbt. Please give me the translation of the myth of adapa. I I need you to read this because when you read this, >> make sure you say please. >> Please >> so it doesn't come kill you when it becomes ally when it turns into a god. >> Relationship with mine. When you read when you read this, it's going to fund fundamentally change your perspective forever. >> Okay. >> Are you ready for this? >> I'm ready. >> Because this gives us the like the answers. >> Oh, really? >> Yes. The myth of Adapa is the oldest ancient text ever written. >> Okay. Adapa and the food of life. >> Let me see. >> Wow. This is not a good version. Hold on. Hold on. Let me let me see if I can find it. This is a perfect example of a version that is not the original version. >> Interesting. >> Very Yeah, because I know the wording is different on this. Hold. Let me pull it up. Um, one second. Myth of Adapa translation. I'm going to find you it >> because you're really going to love this. >> Okay. >> Okay. Let me see. >> Tablet one. >> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. This is it. >> Okay. >> You found it. Thank you. So, see what I'm talking about how difficult it is. >> Yeah. >> Okay. So, let me um I don't have my glasses on, so I have to like >> I can read it. >> Can you read to um read right to here and then pretend that's a a period. Okay. Go ahead because the world needs to hear this. >> Tyla number one, myth of Adapa. He possessed intelligence. Okay, Steve, what are you doing? All right. His command like the command of Anu. Hea granted him a wide ear to reveal the destiny of the land. He granted him wisdom but he did not grant him eternal life. In those doves >> days >> in those days um in those years the wise man of Areridu Ia had created him as the chief among men. A wise man whose command none should oppose. the prudent, the most wise among the Anunnaki was he. >> Okay? So, you can stop right there. It's telling us about the figure that became known as Adam. His original name was Adapa. This tablet is the oldest single written record in human history. Period. The myth of Adapa is considered the first Sumerian tablet that's ever been recorded in terms of for its age. It's one of the oldest tablets ever written in mankind and it tells us profound things. >> This is the oldest written document in history. >> Yes. The myth of Adapa. It's very the very beginning of everything. >> Now what's really interesting here are a couple things. Number one, did you see that he has been he says he he was been created >> as chief among men, >> right? that he's basically perfect. Remember like like the description of Adam? >> Yep. >> Okay. Now, this is the line that really brings it home, though. The most wise, the most wise among the Anunnaki, >> the most wise among the Anunnaki was he. So what it's saying is that the first man, the first perfect man named Adaba, the the first great sage from a city called Areridu, the first city ever created that he's considered the most wise among the Anunnaki. So what does that mean for us? We are the Anunnaki. We are them. We just don't remember anything and we don't have any of the gifts anymore. He's they're trying to tell us that we started in a place where not only was he most wise, but it's described even further. If you go to um the Nagamadi scriptures, the secret book of John, it talks about how Enlil became jealous over how perfect man was >> and then deliberately threw him into it was what it says, threw him into a lower form of existence to trap him. So we became we were created by powerful fractals of source that are like omnipotent creator gods, right? And amongst them we were created in such perfection that we were more wise and more potentially more powerful than even they are. And because of jealousy by the gods, by them, specifically Enlil, he creates an entire world and and hides us in a veil of war and deception and confusion to lock us in an eternity to never remember who we really are. Whoa. That's powerful, bro. So, we are them. >> Yes. And we have all the gifts they have. We just don't remember or have them unlocked yet. >> We are. Now look at how we're perceived in the world today, how we're taught, right? Darwinianism, we're just like a we're just a survival of the fittish species that's destroying everything around it and we got here only because we got smirk and the l luck of the draw. >> It's a complete opposite of that. We're like a divine being of the universe. So what are we doing killing each other and doing all these horrible things? >> Do you know what happens when someone kills someone? >> No. What happens? >> They are the judges of all. You ever seen in Egypt where they show a feather the the the symbol or the analogy of it like the metaphor a person's heart on a scale being weighed against a feather. You ever heard that before or seen that? >> No. >> That in ancient Egypt is a depiction that's commonly seen and it's very known where they are the judge the judges of our entire existence. That every single thing you're doing is being judged. And that the way that you can unlock higher places is because those things are allowed to happen. Like you earned them and you you proved through these trials and tribulations that we don't even know are real. That everything we're being judged on. They call themselves, it's the most amazing term. They call themselves in at least three tablets the ordainers of destinies. that they're literally in charge of everything and that we that there's a really fine line between free will and destiny that we don't really understand. And we don't have as much free will as really we really think. That's really what it comes down to. Which is good because let's let's face it, I don't want to be at the mercy of some mad men. They're going to send off a bomb and blow us all up, >> right? So if we're not really in charge, it gives me a lot of peace of mind >> knowing that there is something much higher that's actually governing a lot of the path of humanity. >> Well, I mean, if there is a God who is all omnipotent and all knowing, that means God knows everything that's going to happen in the future. >> Yes. >> Which means there's no free will. >> No, there there isn't actually really free will because time isn't what we think. Time is there's no beginning and there's no end. Time is like a giant circle, right? Because it's been described in esoteric traditions, right? >> That there isn't no there is no beginning and there is no end. That it's a giant circle and that the whole point is that we start somewhere and we we get completely lost. >> That's the fun the fun in the game of it, the story, and then we find our way back. >> And it's through those unexpected and impossibilities of us making our way back that makes it such an interesting story. And if we were to advance to a level where we can figure out things like zero point energy or crafts that can manipulate gravity. Well, that means we create time travel machines. We we in conjunction we have something that that glo that global um golden age civilization didn't have. They may have had all the knowledge and being like masters of their physical body and the metaphysical, but they didn't have the kind of technologies we have. And so I like to think that >> how do we know that though? Like >> well they don't they don't leave anything behind showing that they have some technologies. >> We have ancient texts and depictions of these angels or like UFOs if you want to call them that, right? Like Ezekiel's wheel and throughout the middle >> a symbolic though. Are they Is that like a literal thing though? >> That's the thing. >> Is it Is it I don't know. Is it Is it like this whole UFO phenomenon? Like how far back does it go? Like how how far back was are were these things flying around? Are they the Anunnaki? Have they just become some breakaway civilization? Who's here that we can't see? >> I think that most of what we're seeing is secret government technology. Most of it. Because frankly, do you really think that a civilization that reached such astronomically conscious levels and and morality to be able to go to some star system somewhere, do you think they're just going to willy-nilly like pollute another culture like without even caring? If you're if you're able to reach the level of of traveling the stars, >> you would have to develop a certain conscious level or you would destroy yourself through technology. You would never. There's like there's like a gatekeeping concept there that seems to be very established that you're not allowed to do certain things. Like Danny can't create an empire on Earth with the most powerful weapons known to man and decide to like go destroy the universe and go destroy everywhere else. You're not going to you know why you won't be allowed to do that? >> Because you will end up self-destroying yourself before you ever reached heights with your consciousness and your multi-dimensional side. If you tech the technological side of developing weapons and that kind of mentality always is self-destructive. >> Empires are always unseen. >> Well, maybe yeah, even if it is like secret stuff that the government has, maybe it's not stuff that they developed and maybe it's ancient stuff that they found that's been here the whole time. >> That's the question that nobody knows. >> Like, you know, for example, in this labyrinth, in this Egyptian labyrinth, there was a guy who found that there was a big structure when they did those satellite scans on that labyrinth in Egypt. He said that there was a a massive 130 foot long object that was not wood. It was not stone. He says the only the only other material it could be based on those scans was metal, a metallic object that was the size of, you know, 150 ft long. I would like to believe those things. The problem is that number one, what kind of technology is he using? Does he know how to read those scans correctly? does like there's a lot of questions still that I would want to ask before I jump on something like that. The problem I have is that studying every ancient civilization around the world and everything they left behind, they don't seem to have any depictions I can find of aliens. >> It's the Anunnaki seem to look >> It doesn't have to be aliens. It could just be It could just be >> It seems to be the Anunnaki over and over again is what I'm trying to say. Like over and over again like they're the ones who are responsible for all this, not someone else. >> No, I'm not saying it's someone else either. I'm just saying that this is some sort of time travel. This is some sort of time travel that the Anunnaki could have figured out. >> Yeah. Yeah. That and that's actually what George Smith >> Maybe they were future us. >> Well, that's that's the the the other really interesting thing what you just said because let me tell you, George Smith again, the great hero of translating and figuring stuff out before anyone else ever did. >> He he he knew more about the tablets than anyone. He read every single one, right? He broke them all down in his book called the Chaldane account of Genesis. At the very end, he summarizes his understanding. It's really profound. And he says, and I will paraphrase, he says that the only thing that makes sense for him about the Anunnaki, this is before it became like a dogma that you couldn't talk about in academic world, right? >> Okay, this is the 1800s. He said the only thing that made sense when he read every single tablet was that the Anunnaki seemed to come backwards and forwards in history, >> right? >> He called them time travelers, right? That's what he said in that. He said that that's the only thing that made sense to him because the Anumish Illish is talking about them here with like the creation of our solar system, right? That's like billions of years ago. And yet then they're also here at every other interval and every other time. So, I think that the big thing that's going to shock everybody in the future is realizing that we're part of some kind of like a closed system in which it's being governed and managed. I think that will be what shakes everyone the most of anything. It's not even necessarily who we are. I think that will come, but I think it's more or less like what we're a part of that we're not aware of. >> Yeah. >> And then people will be like, I don't want to do any of this stuff that I'm doing, you know? And I think that there's a danger to that and that's why all this has been hidden because, you know, Danny's not going to want to go flip burgers at Burger King anymore, >> right? >> Yeah. I think I think that the the whole idea of disclosure and it's not is not about >> extraterrestrials. I think it's about exposing like a greater control system that could be like what you were explaining earlier, >> you know, who who was controlling all of this? Who are the people above us? >> The Gnostics call them the archons. So the archons mean ruler. So they call them that and they they talk about them as being the rulers of reality. And that's why people this might sound crazy to someone people on the surface, but I strongly encourage people to go read tablets like you just read. Go read the naggamati. Go read the the hippoasis of the archons. Like it talks about it. They seem to have a deeper understanding a long time ago than we do now. If anything, it's been lost. Mhm. >> That's why people like Zechariah Sitchin did so much damage because one of the only people that was talking about it then throws in into like left field and makes everyone think it's not real. >> So then I I came along I was like well what do the tablets actually say? >> What are the best translations? And that's what led me down a lot of this rabbit hole that I did. >> Yeah. That's kind of like the double-edged sword of like technology and like the proliferation and ubiquity of media nowadays with podcasts and YouTube and all that stuff is that like it's a lot easier to find out who is full of [ __ ] and and and and what's real. You know, even even though AI can't really accurately isn't like accurately translating ancient texts yet, I don't think. I'm not sure. >> I think it is now. >> Um but like the story of Atlantis is a great example about is is like how that story has been bastardized over time. And I actually come from a completely different angle of that. >> Um to the point where I feel like I've found some evidence that actually brings a lot more credibility to that entire story. >> Yeah. I I I uh the Atlanta story is fascinating. Like when you when you actually understand the real chain of transmission with Atlantis, you realize how [ __ ] crazy it is. Like if you think the train of chain of transmission with the Bible is crazy, >> Atlantis is that on steroids >> because it was it was transmitted orally for a thousand years >> before Solon. >> Yes. >> And then it was passed to the Egyptian priest who had no records to to corroborate any of it. And then it was passed down to Ply the Elder and then the younger and then you know eventually it's to Plato ending up in the Tus and Critius. It's It's crazy. >> There's a whole facet to that story you may not know. >> And and Plato wasn't a historian. >> No, he was a philosopher. >> Yes. >> Okay. So, I guess we should bring I should bring this up because you just brought it up. I have a whole another angle that may give validity to the Atlantis story that people don't talk about and I found it in in digging into a very interesting individual named Plutarch. >> Have you heard of Plutarch? >> Oh, yeah. I've heard a lot about Plutarch. >> Okay. So Plutarch um he came hundreds of years after he was he was actually 400 years after Solon visited Egypt. >> Mhm. >> Okay. Plutarch's story is a dangerous one because Plutarch brings credibility to something that's supposed to be an allegory >> like nobody else does. So I would also like encourage people to look into Diodoris too. Very interesting. But you sound you're very well versed on this. So let me see if you know this. So Plutarch is he's a very unfortunate individual that what he's known for is almost unknown and what he is known for is somewhat irrelevant. Okay. So Plutarch was a he was a he was actually a temple priest. I don't know if you know that of Deli. So he was actually a temple priest of Apollo at Delelfi in in Greece. He was a pretty high level individual. He was, you could call him the last of his kind because after him everything changed. And I'll tell you what I mean by that. He was a great philosopher. He was a temple priest. He was a mystic. He had knew a lot of knowledge. And he has been totally glossed over in history for some reason. >> And so I've been digging into that and found some really interesting stuff regarding that. So why is Plato's work considered an allegory and not real? Well, Plato doesn't give us any specifics about >> who these temple priests are he meet that Solon meets with. >> He doesn't actually say any names. The only thing he says is the name of the temple. He says it's the temple of Seace. S A I S. >> Mhm. >> So that's all we get. So what happened was scholars came back and said, well Plato made the entire thing up. None of it's true. The only part of that story that's true is that Solon did visit Egypt, right? >> Well, also all of the people around Plato were constantly telling he was a liar and he was full of [ __ ] including Aristotle. >> Well, I think it's because there was a mandate and there was a an effort to basically disprove and quiet that whole narrative. Like for instance, Socrates was murdered. >> Yeah. >> Right. Socrates was murdered. He actually ended up being able to decide his own death. Did you know that? >> Y. >> So he picked Hemlock to >> Yep. instead of instead of leaving. Yeah. >> Plato was devastated. Socrates was his great mentor. He was devastated. I think that was why he hid a lot of that information as an allegory because I think he would have they would have killed him too. I think Plato hid that information because he knew the nature of the world that he lived in. Okay, that's why I think that's why I think he did it. But the reason why scholars and academics don't think the story is real is because they think that it's only based on Solen's visit to Egypt and that everything else was made up. Okay. But what Plutarch brings is credibility to that to that early information that nobody else has ever done. So what happened? Well, Plutarch came out with two books. One was called the life of Solon and another one called called Moralia that has a chapter in it called ISIS and like Ishtar or something and it is two different parts of his work that have been like ignored by history. >> So anyone listening to this go look up what I'm talking about. It will blow your mind because and I'll read I actually have a really cool quote that I will read that I don't know if anyone in the world has ever even heard yet. I'm very excited to do that. So he writes these two books, they get glossed over, they get kind of ignored, which is really strange. And I've looked it up with chat GBT and I asked why that happened. And they think that it's because people end up focusing on Plato and basically just somehow ignored. >> Yeah. >> Um, Plutarch. >> It's funny. All the classical scholars I've talked to, they all hate uh Plato, >> do they? >> They all say he's boring. >> I think he's the best. He's amazing. I love Plato's work. It goes very far beyond just talking about Atlantis too. >> So anyway, >> Plutarch ends up providing these details in his in his works that anyone can go look up that is gives credibility to that entire visit that Solon went on in a way that changes it from allegory to fact. And the reason is when we look at the the Plato story, it's just that oh Solon met with like a hypothetical like a priest in a temple. Sure. Okay, fine. Solon went to Egypt. Fine. But no, >> Plutarch knew details and and why he knew details. Well, Plutarch took a very interesting trip, if not trips, to Egypt during this time. And he did a lot more than Solon did. He went to nearly every ancient Egyptian temple, >> including Aman Rah and all these different temples. and he met with all these different priests and learned about ancient ancient Egyptian history. One of the things he did is that he went to the temple of Neath at Seace which is where the entire story comes from that Plato talks about from Solon. It's this temple that is supposedly not real, right? It's like a mythical allegory. Well, Plutarch is like, "No, no, no. It was a real temple. I went there." And not only that, he has an inscription from one of the things that was written in the walls, >> and I can read it. Um, and I don't think any I don't know if anyone's ever read that before, like to have it come out. But let me say a couple other things before I read it. >> Okay. >> He names the two temple priests that that Solon met with. So instead of being like this hypothetical thing, now it's two very indiv specific individuals. The first one is known as Sanchez. S O N C H I S. His name is Sonchius of Seace and he is a priest that is in charge of that region that temple. Meanwhile, another priest from Helopoulos comes up from the journey to meet because they hear about Solon coming. >> Is it the story that it was a priestess that he met? >> No, two priests. So, one of them is Sanchez. Okay. >> And the other one is a priest from Helopoulos. Okay. >> And his name is >> Senophus. Sonopus is his name. Do you have that up? >> Sonis. Yeah. >> Yeah. >> And Sonis. >> So he meets with these two priests that are supposedly the greatest elders of he says the greatest elders of wisdom of anyone that was alive. >> Okay? >> Like they're the two individuals that knew ancient ancient history and information that that nobody else knew anymore. They were like the last two. And that the entire temple of neath the purpose of it was a temple of knowledge but not just knowledge of the current times. It was a temple that was dedicated to the knowledge of of everything like the past civilizations what they knew the stories of them and that's why Solon was able to learn the story of Atlantis and that the walls actually had the story inscribed into it >> of Atlantis. Now, and this is where it gets really interesting is that um Senus of of Helopoulos is you he writes all about those two temple priests and then he talks about how when he went to the temple, he wrote down the only inscription that's ever survived because after he left, he went there 1,940 something years ago. >> After he left, the Romans and others destroyed a lot of Egypt and it was it was lost, right? So the temple of neath it at sea was never seen ever again. Plutarch was the last person >> here. Picture Mike talking. >> Plutarch was the last person to ever potentially at least a philosopher or scholar to potentially ever visit the temple of neath ever again. >> After after that it was destroyed and never never seen ever again which is wild. So he says this >> in the temple in the temple walls he wrote down one of the inscriptions. I don't know why he didn't write all of them down. I don't know. But he wrote one down. >> And where did he write this? >> In his in his book. Um it was from I um it was from his his chapter in Moralia called Isis and Osiris. >> Isis and Osiris by Plutarch. >> Yes. >> Okay. >> And so it's in a it's in a body of work called Moralia. >> Moralia. Okay. >> Yeah. So if anyone wants to look it up, this is what it says from the temple. You ready for this? >> It's from Ne. So neath is like um the Egyptian equivalent of Athena in ancient Greece. >> Okay. >> Okay. Says I am all that has been is and shall be. No mortal has lifted my veil. >> Huh? >> How wild is that? It's beautiful, isn't it? >> What does it mean? >> Well, we have to figure it out. But the point is that >> what does it have to do with Atlantis? It shows you that then the conversations that we then pick up with Plato, the temple priests say to Solon, you Greeks remember one deluge, but there have been many primarily of water and fire. And he then goes on in the critius to describe and say that this entire story is not fiction but is based on a real story that has been recorded in the temple. What I'm trying to say is if we get validity to the who the temple priests were both of them >> that the temple was real >> and we have all of that then at what point do we do we then say at what point is that information that's being told from Solon fact or fiction? >> Is it all true? >> Right? >> Is the entire thing true? You see what I'm trying to say? It then makes it a real event, a real place that real things were being described to him. Does it make any sense? Let's say let's let's go the other way for a minute. There's two priests that we know are real. There's a temple that's real. We know they visited. It was that was all real. Why then would they meet up with people like that and then tell them a bunch of [ __ ] or not tell us anything like they said at all? If it was if if if he made the whole thing up, then what did they actually say? More or le more importantly, maybe that is what they said is what I'm trying to say. At what point does it become something that wasn't that they didn't even say that became like an allegorical versus something that used as a real world comparison example of a civilization that became corrupted. >> Yes. >> As an example against another civilization which then implies and we have evidence archaeologically to prove it that Greece had a proto civilization before. He calls them the Athenians. Do you remember in the in the in the Tomas and Critius, Plato says Atlantis went to war against another >> democracy, another civilization? He uses >> an advanced civilization. Yes. >> He uses the Athenians, the proto Greeks as a model for a perfect society. Right. >> Right. But Atlantis existed how uh according to this text, how long before Athens? >> He only tells He only tells us the date of its destruction, but he says that at the time, >> but yeah. So, so its destruction was was how many thousands of years before Athens? >> Well, Athens or pre- Athens? This this is what I'm getting at is that >> Well, we've excavated all the way down to bedrock. >> Oh, we've found there's a place called the Pix Wall. Can you look it up really? It's called It's P Y X. It's in ancient Greece outside of Athens. I might have not spelled that correctly. >> No, no, no, no. It's It's a whole wall. It's an ancient wall. Mhm. >> P Y >> want pictures. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> I'm not spelling it right. Um people are going to I'm going to get blasted online about this. Um there it is. There it is. Right here. There it is. Right here. That's the wall. >> Okay. >> Yeah. This thing. >> Yeah. That's the wall. That is your pre Greek civilization. >> That is your Athenian civilization. That wall has some of the largest stones. In fact, I think it's the largest megalithic stones in all of Europe. And the the the level of masonry is is absolutely superior to anything we see in the Greek culture. After >> when they built after they built with col like coliseums and different designs with limestone this wall is right in outside of Athens and it is it has not only massively perfectly cut blocks put together, >> right? Look at that angled one right there. >> But each edges has has three levels on each corner like that concept of three that we had talked about. Uhhuh. >> So when I read about this Athenian civilization that is fighting against the Atlantanss, I actually take it as fact and that what we're looking at is the reason why Greece flourished as such a democracy is because they preceded a much older and more ancient culture >> that was there and most of what it built was destroyed and wasn't didn't survive. being as it proximity to the Mediterranean, it was likely a massive tsunami probably destroyed almost everything that we had of that culture. And that wall called the Pix wall may be one of the only things we have left to prove that that civilization ever existed. >> Wow. Where exactly this wall is in >> right outside of Athens. And if you look at all the architecture in Italy and around that area of Greece, the the surrounding region, none of it looks like that. It's all called cyclopian building. So you're saying so so you're even though the the um >> those are all fit together individually >> even though the archaeologists have excavated Athens down to its bedrock. You're saying that there was a completely different civilization that was built right there on top of it before. >> And very little of it survived. Very little of it survived. We're talking about tsunamis during that those catastrophes that may have been miles high. Miles completely obliterating everything. And so why did that survive? Well, that wall was probably in a really particular location and that maybe was it got kind of buried or something. I don't know. But it survived. And there's no other architecture in Greece or even surrounding Italy that looks like that. It's like completely out of place. >> Yeah. >> And it happens to be right in like next to Athens. >> So, we know Athens was very important. And so that's where I get into looking at this from the standpoint where even though Plato may have turned those civilizations into an allegoric allegorical example of a corruption versus non-corruption, it may be based on a literal real thing. >> No, I agree with that. I agree that the allegorories uh translate into real life like just like the allegory of the cave is very relevant to society today. And uh you know I think the allegory of Atlantis vers Athens even if it was some sort of a hypothetical war game could easily have been modeled from reality and something that that has happened in the past and could repeat in the future. >> Aren't most of those lessons taught to us through whatever religious text or others are based on something real that then is a perfect example as a lesson to teach? >> Yeah, totally >> right. You wouldn't just create something hypothetical. It would be based on something real which is why he had so many details of Atlantis. the ring c um the the rings how many of there there were its location um and why in the Azors we have what is clearly like conversations I've had really good ones with Randle Carlson clearly a submerged continent underneath there the Azors which is exactly where Plato described the location of Atlantis being >> and now we have just the volcanic tops of those of those volcanoes and if you look like all you have to do is go look at Google Maps with aerial imagery and you can look at the Azors and see an entire um sub sub um subcontinent that basically like sunk which is exactly what Atlantis is described as not being destroyed it's described as being sinking underneath the ocean >> right >> and so if you have plate tectonics like what is that the Azors at that location it's one of the only places in the world where there are three plates that come together in one spot >> you have the mid-Atlantic ridge the Atlantic ridge others they all come together. Eurasian. >> Yeah. If you look at the pull up the oceanic tomography of the Azors and like the surrounding ocean basin there, it's crazy. >> And so you here you have a place where three plates come together right in one spot and you have evidence of submerged continent and it's west of the pillars of Hercules. It has all the parameters. And so I think Glantis was likely a global civilization. But that location, the Azors, was where the city that was described by Plato was >> the city, the central city. Like for instance, if um the United States was a country that covered a much larger area somehow and DC was like its capital, >> right? >> Type of thing. >> Yeah. >> Like that kind of concept. >> Yeah. Yeah, that makes sense. >> Not entirely sure. >> Wow. >> Um all you need to do is pull up even just a Google You can just use a Google um Google Maps and show um just go to like the Azors. You can see it. >> Yeah, you can see that there. There. Yeah, >> that was >> Yeah. There you go. Pull. Now pull up satellite for me. Oh, the satellite. >> Yeah. Don't zoom all the way in yet. Stay a little out for me. Yeah. Okay. Go in a little bit. Now look right in the center. You see that shallow that entire shallow land mass. The darker blue represents deeper waters. And so lighter is shallower. Now look, it's an entire convergence of where they're likely. That's a a continent that what's what's called sank. And you can get that if you have a type of fault that's that that that basically sinks and and subducts. So, it's called a subducted fault that can create a situation like something like that that can that can happen. >> Mhm. Yeah, man. There's a whole, you know, and as well there there's theories out there that the eye of the Sahara could be the Atlantis. But, you know, >> there's some problems with that theory, though. It's like 1400 ft elevation. >> Yeah. And that whole part of Africa is like super unexplored. Like, no one's ever been walked around that area. That >> reshot it's it's inhospitable. Yeah. It's a crazy dangerous place, but you know, it's just fascinating that no one's actually been there and like documented it on the ground. You know, people have flown over it, but >> So, why is there nothing left? Well, it looks like those tectonic events and what happened to it were so severe that nothing could survive. Nothing. So, when people are saying, "What's the evidence of Atlantis?" I point to things like that wall I just showed you, to things like Ionis, to things like in Peru, in Bolivia, and Egypt. I think that is all Atlantis. M >> it was just a globally connected civilization that was all sharing knowledge and was all maritime, >> right? >> They were all just traveling around like it was the whole world was connected. But I think they were living in conjunction with indigenous groups at the same time. >> Yeah. Just like we are today. >> Exactly. Which is like if you think about who the the Inca were, right? Well, I think the Inca like they were only around for 400 years or less. And we're crediting them as building with some of the greatest megalithic structures on Earth. And yet they have very primitive building on top of this amazing stuff. Right? It's more likely that the what we think of as the Inca were actually a group that was living perhaps closer to like the Amazon rainforest and that that area was not impacted but the higher areas were. Okay? and that that culture that built everything in the highlands of Peru were wiped out and that the Inca were just people that wandered up there and then found it and then adopted and built their whole culture around it. >> Right? >> That's what we may be seeing around the world in a lot of cases are civilizations that know that something is there that's that's important, sacred, and then build on top of it and try to incorporate a lot of it into their culture but lack complete capabilities for how to build it. Yeah. Yeah. I think you're right. I think you're right. And try to try to model it and try to reconstruct it in their own way as well. >> Exactly. >> Well, Matt Lacroy, thank you for doing this, man. This has been [ __ ] mindbending. >> We'll have to come back. I'll have to do the whole dead star thing with you. The whole binary thing. We'll have to come back and do another show cuz that's another rabbit hole in itself. >> I would love to do that, man. That would be No, I appreciate this conversation, Danny. I really like talking to you. >> Yeah, of course, man. Uh tell me uh tell people out there where to find your work and uh your books, all that stuff. Yeah, please check out my website, thestage of time.com. Uh my YouTube is Matthew Lcroy and I'm on Instagram, The Stage of Time. We are I'm in the process of editing to finalize the documentary. Yeah, thank you. To finalize the documentary. I'll be editing for a whole month and then we we're going to be releasing it next year, Q1 or Q2. It's going to be huge. We had 10 experts from around the world join us. Three archaeologists, Dr. Robert Shock, a geologist. We had Robert Eber Grant. We had all kinds of people join us. Yeah. Thank you. And we went around the world to explore what I just showed you to find if it's valid. And we put a documentary together that basically asked the important questions needed, but rather than just telling people how to think, we just simply take everybody on adventure to all these hot spots, show all the connections, show all the evidence, and then ask questions and let people decide for themselves. But I'm hoping that in conjunction with my new book that they are the things that finally shift this paradigm. It's long overdue. >> Well, I appreciate your work, man. Uh there's not many people who have the enthusiasm as you do for this ancient history stuff. So, so it's much appreciated, man. Um we'll link everything below and we'll definitely do a part two. >> Thanks. I look forward to it. >> All right. Okay, good night everybody.