I will be listening to Heavy Metal and that's the exhaust, my favorite kind of music. This car, the Benino's the most expensive production car ever sold to the best of my knowledge. Stick it out in US dollars at $4,106. At the point that I found out about a Benino was they had released the Adventure Tour J. Immediately I started making calls saying I want that car, I want that car, I want that car. From there I took the necessary steps to be considered for a car of their hypercar magnitude. I purchased the car without seeing it. I believe I committed to the car around November of 2012. I'm a very big fan of Lamborghini and the history and the heritage of Lamborghini and having the opportunity to be a part of something special that they were planning to celebrate the 50th anniversary was an opportunity that I wanted to be a part of. Like I said, I had never seen the car before I committed to it. Time for a rep, Benino's time. He's a very special to me and sharing that experience with other people is just a lot of fun. I would love to be a part of everybody's never-kinging. So I've met a lot of the people at Lamborghini. The people in charge like Regionny, Winkelman, Harini. They're very approachable and very good people. So over time, I was capturing them letting them know, hey, would you guys do something special please think of me? And they did and I'm very honored. The entire experience has been unbelievable and I feel like I have something very precious because to car people like myself, a car like this is like owning the Mona Lisa. I will not track this car heavily. I will drive it on the roads and I will take it to certain events. I prefer to track the V10 Lamborghinis. They're the best track cars I've ever driven where they still give you a very special experience in their unbelievable on the racetrack. The options were red, white or green for the trim. I was able to select the green trim to my Winino. And I went with green because green is what I consider to be an original Lamborghini color. I believe that Rizzio Rijionny has done a perfect job that I cannot possibly think of anyway to him. I hope that this car stays in my family for as long as my family and this plan it exists. I have been reading the DuPont registry since as early as I could read. In fact, I partially learned how to read by reading the DuPont registry. When I was a kid, there were, of course, you're learning how to read with all these kid books. And since I was born, I was obsessed with cars. So naturally, I wanted to read about the cars. And the DuPont registry was a big part of my childhood and still today. And Lamborghini didn't end this.