Alex Brooks would thank you for doing this. Very nice of you to do this. So here's my Perception here's the overview. So we're in this war obviously to disapprove whatever I've said that many times Then the president decides we're getting out and the vice president articulates how and why and That couldn't be more supportive of that. I was thrilled by that Thank God and then all of a sudden there is this just Flurry of attacks on the president, but mostly in the vice president from people who don't have an alternative plan But basically just calling the vice president to someone's other president names It seemed to me as an outsider less fluent in the internet than you are that this is coordinated Like what is this? What are we looking at? That's a great observation. I believe that there is definitely is a coordinated effort For to put pressure on the president and the administration to continue the conflict Anyoron and I believe that there is potentially even foreign influence involved And you know not just from one country So I think it's definitely a coordinated effort. You're seeing a lot of these voices They kind of move as a pocket. They talk about a lot of the similar issues They oftentimes do the similar paid media campaigns around other related topics and there's also evidence of Millions and millions and millions of dollars flowing to certain right wing influencer marketing companies From countries who might benefit from a prolonged conflict So I believe there's definitely a coordinated effort Similarly Right after the war was about to end or I guess the MOU was coming out. Yes A lot of the anti-war voices Were also spreading misinformation about the deal They were pushing a line about how United States taxpayers were somehow going to give $300 billion to Iran And I look at people like Thomas Massey who's been on this program He was very quick to share the statement saying that This MOU is terrible Because we're going to give $300 billion to Iran, which is not true It never was true. It's money that can be unlocked over time Not a single dollar will come from American taxpayers But people like Massey were also spreading misinformation So I think that there's a lot of Coordinated misinformation being spread Firm pro-war side And also some anti-war critics as well Interesting So can I just Get your take on something before we proceed into the details of what you just alleged You're latching things out. Exprussu. It's which seems true to me But I want to know why you think it But first to the question of the people criticizing the MOU Okay, I Plenty of ways to criticize the MOU But all of that criticism I think needs to be viewed in context of what the alternatives the MOU might be Like okay, maybe it's only the MOU But then then what? Right did any of the people In this campaign that you're describing Offer like an alternative to the MOU Like we continue this war and then what happens Right no, there's been no alternatives offered There's just straight criticism. It's keyboard warriors. That's what we deal with Fortunately, their opinions have very little impact on the the Electorate the populace, you know, we've seen polling from Daily Mail for breezy O. Lee Magloflin all these different polls that show present Trump's MOU is widely popular with the American people 67% Actually 67% And so this the framework of the city deal with the wrongs of 14 points that have been everywhere Yes, it's 67% 67% of Americans who've been pulled on that issue are supportive of the Trump Vance Agreement But if you look at social media, you think that nobody's in favor of it because of coordinated influence campaigns from uh Unique actors and foreign parties. Interesting. It makes you I'm not actually surprised because again You know that they're offering no alternative to the MOU So if there was like some way for the United States to get more Um, you know, I could I could you know, I could see the criticism as being valid So I'm not surprised by that number But I it does make you think maybe there are other issues where our view of it is totally distorted because our view comes from social media Definitely and a lot of the press rooms they get their Stories from social media They they get their the producers they get what topics they're going to discuss in their shows from social media for sure because they think that is what people are talking about and Some people are talking about it, but in the grand scheme of things a very small percentage of people are talking actually talking or caring about these issues And so I think it's very healthy and important for Americans in our countries to start pulling back From believing everything that they read on social media and start questioning a lot of the people that they're getting the information from And on all sides of issues There's a lot of influence and a lot of money from special interest groups from foreign countries that have poured into internet ecosystem and and you know I don't think it's been healthy for our democracy for our country And so you know, I've been working actually with Congresswoman Anna Paulina Luna and some other friends in government to maybe strengthen some disclosure laws But there's a lot of influence ops that happened on social media and You know, I think for if we just continue talking about the the war in the Middle East for example There's an information up on the pro Israel side And there's an information up on the anti Israel side I'm just getting paid to be anti Israel I've been very critical of Israel. I've never taken a dollar from anybody. We have no investors and no debt So I know for myself. Yeah, I've never and I would never take money To give an opinion so you're not Tucker, Catarleson. I actually really like Catar a lot and I think the people who run it are amazing But I've never taken any money from Catarne and I never would I think it's interesting To hear you say that there is anti Israel Commentary that's being funded by foreign countries. I've never heard that before and it also might be funded domestically and maybe What what I'm not gonna accuse anybody to take your money. That's not my position, right? But I'd like to I'm an expert on social media. Yes early on in my career I Started my company to help conservatives communicate better on social media. Yep, and so I would identify Conservatives that I wanted to work with and I would help them grow their social media presence oftentimes using Some other people's platforms, you know amplification or whatever some of those members of Congress that I've worked with in the past Margie Taylor green. Yeah, I started working with Margie Taylor green. She had 2,000 Twitter followers By times she won her election that and and entered Congress that January of 2021 She had over 800,000 Twitter followers So in probably a nine-month period. We took her from a no-name Congresswoman or a no-name candidate to the most one of the most followed Republican Congresswoman in America and How do you do that? I must admit I'm slightly disappointed with Margie's recent pivot You know, I think that she was slightly she felt slightly burned that people didn't support her ambitions for higher office She says that's not the case but She went from being the president's number one defender for six years first long as I'd known her She only won to run for Congress to get Trump's endorsement to be Trump's number one fan number one cheerleader She loved Trump she loved Trump and so I think that she was a little bit slited by the president and the team Not supporting her for either governor or senator or vice president or some other ambitions that she had and I personally also think she got board of Congress. I think she went in with tremendous Excitement she wanted to go there and make a difference She wanted to go there and help President Trump you know build the wall and deport illegal aliens and You know and foreign aid and do all these things and I think she got to Washington She realized a lot of those things are you know The president built the wall and he stopped illegal alien invasion in her country almost a hundred percent since he's been in office But all the other things that she wanted to do when you get to Congress you realize it's almost impossible And you realize that you're one of 435 people and you see people on Fox News The Congressmen at Fox News they talk a tough game. Well, I can write this letter I can do this. I can hold this person accountable But you realize the congressman doesn't actually have any authority So I think she went there having a different understanding of Of how much power she could actually have and how much change she could actually make Realized it was a system that was very difficult to change got burned out and it's now back to being a commentator Well, there's never been a better time to sign up for Dutch Pat That's because we have news in the world of dogs which we follow closely The return of new world screw worm has shelters debating whether they should euthanize kill Thousands of cats and dogs the new world screw worm is a parasitic fly that feeds on warm-blooded animals And public health authorities are searching for ways to contain the disease as it spreads One of the stories main takeaways is that now is a good time to bring your dog to the vet But a lot of people can't because vet bills are totally out of control because private equity is buying up all the local veteran Prices have double we did an old podcast on this Dutch is the solution License veterinarians tell a health unlimited visits As a list from the show you can start for just 82 dollars a year total 82 bucks Visit Dutch.com slash chakra to sign up The good news is that he Dutch vet can prescribe flee and tick medication that can also prevent life-threatening new world Screw worm again, that's a 10 minute call no waiting room no clinic markup free shipping on products not on by private equity Up to five pets 82 bucks a year Visit Dutch.com slash chakra use the code Tucker from to 50 dollars off. That's Dutch dutch.ch.com slash Tucker I think there's probably a lot of I don't want not my job to speak for her I Think it's obviously true that she was frustrated as held by Congress because it's frustrating as hell I don't think she liked the leadership at all. She said that while she was the hair She loved Trump. There's no doubt about that. They also had Substantive not fake but substantive policy disagreements that are just real No way around that on the war on Epstein Those are real things and I think you can make a case for you know everyone's individual perspective But I also think it's fair to say we disagree. Yeah, and they do disagree. Well, I think so you asked me how we took Margie from 2008 hundred. Well, how does the process work not just margie? But like how does the process work? So I wanted to explain that to you So with Margie for example She pushed the limits, you know, she she The most viral ad that we did for her that campaign cycle. She was standing on her front porch in Georgia Right after the Antifa riots broke out in the summer of 2020 and Margie, you know, she was early 40s You know little blonde girl standing at her as a porch with a with a gun and she says my message to Antifa terrorists Stay the hell out of north by Georgia and she loves a gun that was filmed on a cell phone Might have spent 10 minutes producing the whole thing that that that that video went bonkers tens of millions of views and then this was in the pre-eelan era of Twitter and Twitter banned the video for promoting violence Facebook banned it But then Fox actually to their credit they showed the censorship censorship of that was happening to to Margie And on the social media platform so she was on Fox and Friends that next morning. She was on late night She was prime time Fox layer that day. She had her accounts back And she gained like 300,000 followers off of one moment. Yeah, I was I was involved. I remember and so And so She was and then a lot of right-wing accounts started defending her. This is terrible go file Margie Taylor green Go support Margie Taylor green And these are all mega people these are all present Trump supporters is we're all mega people And I think that's why so many people are frustrated by by Her her her pivot and yet she got policy disagreements But I think there's a difference between having policy disagreements and making accusations And she's not the only one these people accusing the president. Wow. Let me hold on I mean, I love Margie so I mean and that's well known. I love Margie Taylor green and I think she's a sincere person They're I don't understand every nuance, but I but I do think it's an we don't have to like come up with We can like understand people's motives as they explain them And she's like I do you know, I think you should be doing this and we've been as rich and things they should be doing that and like that's fair No, sure. I definitely agree. I definitely agree that that's fair But then there's the extra there's the extra curriculars There's the and it's not margie. I don't actually speak on Margie for this But there's a lot of these people who used to be Trump fans and they were up their Trump fans Up until nine months. We had 10 months of you And they use the Epstein thing as the pretext of why they're no longer Trump fans And I think that's incredibly unfair. I think the president is the only reason We have Epstein files Trump's administration in the first term arrested Jeffrey Epstein You know he put him in bars behind bars put him in jail and Yes, he died in jail. Do I think it was a suicide? You know, I'm probably with the internet on this one But but definitely not but the president arrested him. He took him I agree off the streets So he couldn't hurt any more people and then He campaigned in 2024 and people said oh well Trump campaign on the Epstein files No, actually he didn't campaign on that. He was asked by Lex Friedman interest in character He said will you release the Epstein files Trump said yeah, I'd be inclined to do so and Then he did it and guys like Thomas Massey Like to take the credit for the release of the Epstein files But during four years of Joe Biden The Biden department of justice was sitting on these files How many times in Massey tweet about Epstein? Zero not a single time for four years of Biden And so a lot of people see you know some of these guys now and Massey's never liked the president like Trump endorsing against Massey in this election isn't the response to him being critical of Epstein Trump endorsed against Massey in 2020 Trump's never like Massey and You know For he's an interest he's an acquired taste not everybody likes Thomas Massey Right But it wasn't a response he didn't lash out at Massey and endorse this guy against him because of the Epstein files He's never liked Massey Massey's always been a thorn in some capacity and and and so There was no cover up. I think people who suggest that there was a cover up are not being honest Could you disagree with the messaging rollout the media roll out the attorney former attorney general strategy around it? Absolutely I wasn't particularly thrilled about the binders I didn't nobody know what the hell the binders came from all right but the president did not participate in a cover up in fact he's the only reason that these documents are out and He's also exonerated by it. There's three million documents that have been released Not a single person can point to oh Donald Trump did something wrong You know the people who did do something wrong or a peer to have done something wrong or guys like read Hoffman Would I like the Department of Justice to go after read Hoffman? Yeah, I probably would you know How much is calling for questioning? I would I would support that absolutely I wonder why that hasn't happened Well, maybe it will Maybe it will but I think that I think that this I think giving um Control of the government process to a handful of hysterics on social media Is bad. I think it was bad for Epstein The with that's Dean files. I think it's bad right now for all of the hawks who are continuing to press the administration to continue I agree with that I would also say though that the that the attorney general at the time pam bondy He had an interview on Fox and which she said I thousands of files on my desk The show Sexual abuse of kids. She said that that's the attorney general in the United States And I've always liked pam bondy I'm not it's not personal But the attorney general says that and then no one gets indicted for you like you're the attorney general you're the chief law enforcement officer of the nation What the hell are you talking about? I didn't hear the sexual abuse of kids part But I did hear say that I have these documents on my desk should she have said that that was in should she have said that You know probably not or maybe she should say I'm by the way I was glad that she said it wasn't that she said it. I want more disclosure I want to know what the government is doing. That's my right. That's all in the freaking government not pam bondy I'm a citizen, but anyway I just where's the follow-up if you have the evidence you told us you had the evidence where are the arrests Well, it's a great question. You know and I think that a lot of people are asking the same thing But the accusation that the president was involved in the nefarious cover up that's completely ludicrous I think people like Rita Hoffman should absolutely be brought in for questioning and perhaps it will happen I think read Hoffman is one of the worst characters in America Not just for that. He was also a finance here of e.g. Carol if you remember her the woman who accused president Trump of You know harassing her in the 80s or 90s. Well, I'm pretty sure I can't prove it But I'm pretty sure that he helped suck me into a lawsuit I had nothing to do with and tried to destroy my life I've never met the guy I got nothing to do with him. I was just giving opinions. He doesn't like so I'm I get it But look if you want people to trust the government we need more disclosure more follow-up I mean, that's true of every administration including this one and like I don't know Uh From my perspective. It's the war. Yeah, it's the war that I I talked to Trump multiple times about Epstein My advice to him which he ignored was this has really nothing to do with you Like read Hoffman Reassure people by like bringing the guilty to justice release investing any in a transparent way Didn't happen, but I didn't really say anything about it in public. It was the war that just absolutely Distressed me and I've talked about it. Wait probably too much already But when from You know, eight this you know basically said we're gonna do things We don't want to do because it's in the best interest of the country the same. Oh you know And wants the MOU but it's better than the alternative I admired that I said so And I immediately see these people who were like Trump's best friends crew maga people Like Mark Levin and the rest like they're the true maga You can't get anywhere near maga. You know what maga is okay All of a sudden they're like Trump's a big hit or whatever. You know what to be in or JD Vance's an anti-semit That's where You know, I was like I thought that was most interesting. I've ever seen. Yeah. It was certainly coordinated absolutely and so by whom Good question. There's people that certainly speculate And look, I think Mark Levin I think he's friends with the president And maybe maybe he's friends with the president but Mark Levin was a guy Trump likes Mark Levin at all Mark Levin was somebody who opposed Trump in 2016 Yeah, he actually encouraged his audience in 2016 to stay home. Don't fall in the general election He was a disantive supporter in 2024 So he's not like this ultra maga guy And so it's a little frustrating. Look, I've disagreed strongly with many statements that you've made recently and so all these coordinated accounts, right? They're saying Alex You call up Mark Levin, but you don't call out Tucker Why and I to be honest, I think that's kind of a fair point. You've criticized the president I haven't called you out and I haven't called you out for a couple of reasons. Call me out on social media Because I know you personally Yeah, I'd rather have a conversation with you about what I disagree where I disagree on in person rather than being a keyboard warrior I don't know Mark Levin personally, so I have a philosophy in my life If I don't know you personally, I can hit you on social media if I don't all of conversation to your face. I generally agree with that So You know early on when the war started there was predictions by some voices including you that Striking Iran could lead to World War three You know voices like Ian Carroll who's also been on the program predicted that we put ground troops Any run by now those predictions haven't haven't materialized and so I think I think You know sing saying that it would be important to the audience I think there's a lot of hysterics on both sides of the issue early on it was president threatened to eliminate the Civilization of Iran so that that would qualify as World War three He threatened to put ground troops on the car island in mainland Iran many many many times on true social like I've been reading it for three months None of that happened. I'm so grateful I'm not a I don't care I don't I'll just say it didn't happen because it didn't it not happen because of pushback A voices like Ian Carroll and then they come out they take a victory lap and say see you know We prevented this from it. Nobody's listening To the grifters on the pro war side Or the anti-war side well, let me just correct the record and say I I Am under no illusions about my power. I don't seem to have any power to change any of For you. I think you have a very powerful voice. No, I don't know. I I argued with Trump for a you know 10 years against doing this He took other counsel that shows you how much power. I have zero and so I Was not able to prevent this and I don't think I had any role in ending it so I just want you Know I don't think I had any effect. Well, I just think that I just think that The hysterics start off as being the the anti-war hysterics And maybe they had reason to be you know the president's position on Iran I don't believe has changed for 30 years. You can find statements of him saying you're actually never have a nuclear weapon In 90 days. He delivered on that promise. You struck them. Okay 90 days later MOU says Iran will not see a nuclear Richmond. He never wanted to do a forever war He never was gonna put boots in the ground if he has to I'm sure he will but I don't think we have to um But but his position hasn't changed. He also is against forever wars. He's always been against forever wars. So I Think that Doing a quick military excursion is different than obviously Iraq and Afghanistan and what the neo-cons fever dream is You know Mark Levin probably wants to send a million American troops no doubt about it and and you know the president is not about that um and so so I think there was a lot of hysterics who who just Didn't know don't they don't know who the president is and they are acting like he was inconsistent in that position But when I don't think he actually was so lots of reasons to get obsessed with Mars meant low testosterone is Bad in a lot of ways kills your vibe. You lose your peak performance nearly all aspects of life. No one wants that Mars men can help the body makes testosterone a key hormone the key mail hormone But a lot of it gets stored away and remains impossible to get to this explains why some men feel low energy all the time Using Mars men is the answer to unlocking that so you can actually use it no synthetics No needles real ingredients that help optimize energy focus and strength Made the United States tested by a third-party bill with just eight natural ingredients Mars men supports healthy testosterone levels energy and standards create a steadier sense of drive all day long There's a 90 day money back guarantee if you don't like it, but you will for a limited time our listeners get 50% off for life plus free shipping and Three free gifts available now at men go to Mars.com Men go to Mars.com 50% off and three free gifts Please support our show and tell them that we sent you there. Can I ask you so it was a year ago that the president and the live in were at some event and live in goes and basically put some in a headlock Donald Trump is much large a big man live in as a dwarfish man So he kind of leans up and pulls him down like that. Yeah, and the president It will first of all he's the president. Okay second. He's famously not the guy you put in a headlock. He's not into it or off Yeah, it's just not into it. Yeah, and live in does that and so and the message of course is like, you know You're my boy. I control you right? I was disgusted. But whatever That happens And so you look at it and you're like, okay, and then Trump tweets like if you want to get the real truth Watch Mark Levin's lowly rated show on Fox weekends And so all of a sudden he just like pivots in one day And starts saying things that are true in my view brave I'm cheering Trump when he says this and he's like up. We're out. This is too much. Can't deal with it We're gonna run out of oil. You're not gonna be able to get gasoline like that's terrible for America. We're stopping What caused that change? I believe he felt the mission was accomplished And it goes back to the fact that he is not somebody who wants forever war. She's not somebody who wants forever conflict He felt that he was able to deliver on his campaign promise of preventing Iran from ever having a nuclear weapon in a little over 90 days And we have the Iranians now at the table negotiating a deal with J.D. Vance and our team and I think the president is happy where things were things lay and now he's Now people on you know, Mark Levin crowd who were the president's biggest cheerleaders Are now opposed to what he's doing because they have different they have a different agenda for Iran They have a different vision for how to handle Iran And I think that's wrong, but the president's position has been consistent for you can find videos of him in 1987 saying Iran should never have a nuclear weapon and He was given certain intelligence But how to take it out and he did a Eliminated their Navy that intelligence did not come from the United States He eliminated the he eliminated the Navy He eliminated their Air Force and he has got them at the table to ensure that they never have a nuclear weapon So but this is my complaint for the beginning. I'm not here to defend the IC Or 18 intelligence agencies, but like there was no American intelligence that said Iran was on the brink of building a nuclear weapon That came from Israel and they lie and they lied to Trump And I told him that you know before the started because it was obvious So like why would the United States ever rely on Israeli intelligence again if they just lied us into a war That got a bunch of Americans killed in that raised gas prices like very sad to see The loss of the soldiers lives and I know the president was certainly upset about that Look, I think that you know the president accomplished his his goal there And with with the MoU. I think people are confident. We're in a good spot I think the president obviously will reserve the right to to respond again with military action if he feels like things are going sideways But look, I think the president is now focused the president is focused on domestic issues lowering gas prices lowering economic prices Bring job opportunities back home. I think the foreign excursions have been successful and now it's time to focus on on home You know and the Israeli points again like I think this proves that the president isn't a slave to Israel Apparently or he's broken free. He's broken his feathers. You know, I don't think I don't support I don't I don't think the president was ever a slave to Israel And I think characterizing it is as that was was not fair. You know, I'm friends with Eight years ago. I became friends with BB net. Yeah, who's son. Yeah, you're yeah, he's a nice guy There was a moment in time fighting in Lebanon right now I actually haven't talked to him in a while. Oh, I think he's in Miami, but whatever. Okay. I don't think he's in Miami I invited him to my wedding so for the people who call me anti-Semitic. I invited the prime minister calling you at this They call me anti-Semitic now. So I invite the prime minister of Israel's son to my wedding because you know and And he's a friend of mine. Yeah, but there was a moment in time where I know where the record the president after the 2020 election and You know, we didn't have a great relationship with BB BB was the first world leader to congratulate Joe Biden. I remember after the ring 2020 election And I think that's made people feel you know a little bit different about that relationship The president now is a great working relationship with him, but he's certainly people feel, you know, a little bit different about that relationship. The president now is a great working relationship with him, but he's certainly not a slave to BB or slave to Israel. And I think people who suggest that are not being fair. I'm, look, I've been on fair many times in my life. And I've overstated things dramatically many times. And I certainly have been mean. And I really regret that. So I just want to offer another blanket apology for my bad behavior. Those are my mean since. But I still don't get it. Why, if no one in your cabinet isn't enthusiastic about this, no one in your Intel services says, yes, they're on the brink of like sending a nuclear tip to ICBM into Miami. If all of them like that's not true, you turn and you take is really intelligence, which is like fraudulent, obviously fraudulent and act on that. What is that? It also goes back to instincts. Again, the president has been on this position for 30 years. And we had a war in June that he said ended the Iran nuclear program. I was, I talked to him constantly about that. And he's like, no, no, we're done. We're done. And then a few months later, we're like ramping up for another war. And I was like, well, I thought we eliminated that. Well, you can see why it'd be mystified. Sure. Slavery was the most obvious explanation, but maybe I'm wrong. And I certainly certainly not slavery. It's certainly not. I think it's the president's instincts and the president the president wanted to do it. And so he did it. And you know, there's this report they tell people, I'm president and you're not right. Yeah. You know, you have people on your team, sometimes you listen to them. Sometimes you don't. Sometimes you take that you want their opinion, sometimes you don't. And you know, you do it with your show. I do it with my company, totally. And so that's clearly true. It was a presence in sex. It certainly wasn't black male related to Epstein. It certainly wasn't being a slave to a foreign country. So I think that I felt that I respect Trump's instincts. They made him president twice. He said an amazing life. And I think it's been on the basis of his instincts. So I have maximum respect for Trump's instincts and for his understanding of people and for power dynamics. Like the guy has got like X-ray vision. He's not good on details sometimes, but he's incredibly precise in his big picture understanding of people. And I felt that he went against his own instincts and launching this war. He knew the risks. He's, you know, he's not a crazy risk taker actually. He talks about gain is my analysis anyway. But he's not actually that reckless. Really? I mean, he's been successful. You can't live for 80 years and be that reckless, right? This was really reckless. And I felt that it was he didn't want to do it. I can't read his soul. Like maybe he really secretly did want to do it. That was definitely not my impression having talked a lot about it. So then I'm like, okay, you didn't want to do it. No one around you wanted to do it. Why'd you do it? I believe the president did want to eliminate their nuclear capabilities. And he also eliminated their ability to have a Navy and an Air Force and a missile program. So you know, he he he he did it. And now the the excursion I don't even like to call it a war because it was a 90 day blip. And and yes, we sadly lost some lies and got rest their souls. But the excursion as, as, you know, appears to be coming to an end. And I can't imagine that these these hysterical voices on social media are going to prolong it. So yeah, I mean, that's that's really it. I mean, I've given my we differ in our analysis of the war, but I don't want to argue about it. What I want to understand is how public opinion on the question is shaped in your one of the experts on this topic. Well, we'll love to dive in on this one. Okay. So in by the way, if you ever discover that anti war sentiment is being funded by a foreign power text me because I'd love to know who's paying for it. How I can get on that payroll. I think you're doing okay. That's studio. It's great. It's so fun. This is our we had this long before the show. This is just our family barn. But um, uh, so there's that. But I certainly the let's prolong the war on behalf of the Netanyahu regime. That does seem to be funded by somebody because that's not an organic position in the United States. You're not, as you said, 67% in favor of the MOU. So I don't like this. It grounds while a public support for following this lunatic path even further. Who was paying for that? That's a great question. And for getting foreign influence out of the political ecosystem specifically online is a very passion, it's a passion project of mine. Yeah. Uh, you know, I'm Trump social media guy. That's what I'm branded in the press. Yeah. So you can only imagine the type of money that these countries and other companies have tried to throw at me. I do not take any foreign money. I don't take any money from the golf countries. I don't take any money from India. I don't take any money from Russia, China, no, no foreign countries. Uh, how much you make if you wanted to? I've probably rejected close to $20 million in contracts over the last 15 months. Damn. Yeah. How old are you? I'm 29. That takes some restraint. So, you know, it's, uh, I've, I've had some, I've had a really interesting career. Uh, I've made some money. I made no money. I made, you know, and I'm not really focused on money. And, and I think that's what separates me from a lot of my colleagues who are competitors, if you will, in Washington. Uh, however, uh, I've actually never shared this publicly. In June of 2025, mid June shortly after the first Iran strike happened, I got a message from a friend and he texted me when I was in an airplane. He said, Alex, great news from Israel. And I want to read the message. So I don't, so I don't butcher anything that was said at 247 on June 16, 2025. Good news from Israel. They have budget for the American market to make a strategy in social network against Iran. I talked about you and they want to work with you. It is through a foundation. Call me when you can, and I'll tell you all of the details. I said, I appreciate you thinking of me. Likely can't get involved with this one. Good for you. So what's in your toothpaste? If you're using the brand you grew up with, you probably don't want to know the ingredients likely include fluoride, something called SLS glycerin foaming agents. It's a chemical cocktail. Van man's toothpaste is different. Their miracle tooth powder is changing everything and people are ditching traditional toothpaste, both chemicals by the thousands. Van man's tooth powder uses ingredients with the same mineral structure as your teeth that remineralizes them and strengthens your enamel naturally. No fluoride at all and totally edible. You could put it on toast. Not that you want to, but you could. People who use your report, wetter teeth less plaque, they wake up without that gross film on their gums. And here's the amazing part. Vivid dreams are back. You dream clearly when you stop coding your mouth in fluoride every night. Did you know that? Pretty amazing. It tells you a lot. So make the switch. Visit van man dot shop slash tucker use the code tucker for 15% off your first order. Van man dot shop slash tucker use the code tucker 15% off. Van man reeling ingredients zero exceptions. So in June of 2025, it is documented that in Israeli foundation wanted to hire me an American social media strategist Trump's social media. So I'm social media strategist to help disseminate information related to a run. I never got on the phone call. So I don't know exactly what they were looking to get amplified, but I didn't do it. You know, and so foundation, do you know, the foundation was never specified. However, two months later, an organization ran run by President Trump's former digital guy who the president hasn't talked to in six plus years, Brad par scale ended up filing a far contract with the state of Israel for $1.5 million a month, a month, a month, which in comparison, Brian who is potentially the top lobbyist in Washington, DC charges the country of Saudi Arabia 60,000 a month. Brad par scale has no experience being a lobbyist and he certainly isn't selling access to the president because the guy's got zero access to the president. So two months after I was reached out to to work on an Israeli social media campaign related to Iran. Brad gets this social media contract with Israel, paid through by a German entity called Havis Media Group. And I'm going to read you a part of Brad's initial fire filing related to his deliverables for this particular contract. It says quote, production and delivery of a minimum of 100 root creative assets per month, spanning video, audio, graphic and written formats, creation of 5,000 monthly variants of creative, at least 80% of content is tailored to Gen Z audiences across platforms, including TikTok, Instagram, YouTube, podcasts and other relevant digital and broadcast outlets, integration, here's the kicker, integration of narrative messaging into Salem media network properties and a line distribution channels. And then lastly on this section, paid media campaigns, delivering a minimum of 50 million impressions per month with a target average CPM under USD $2 across the combined budget pool. So that's what the far filing says. Wow, that's what it says. And so that means that the Israeli government is paying Brad Par scale to spread its propaganda in the United States through various vectors, most of whom are maggot influencer types. So it doesn't specify maggot influencer types actually in that contract. I just don't know what he's getting paid 1.5 million a month for. And then actually the most recent report that I saw on Twitter on XR. Sorry for dead naming it. It's very offensive. Let's see. This was reported by a gentleman named Nick Cleveland Stout, never heard of this guy. But he sent an updated filing that he found from that shows these Israeli government is now paying former Trump campaign manager and Salem media executive Brad Par scale, $46 million in one year. And he also adds for some perspective Saudi Arabia pays Ballard one of the most connected firms in Trump's Washington 60,000 a month. 46 million. That's what it says. And so who's on Salem media network? Well, so I don't want to speculate or accuse anybody. No, I just want because the fair filing says, but we'll disseminate our propaganda through Salem. So that's what it says. Right. Yeah. So Josh Hammer, I'm not sure if you're familiar with him. He's got a very low-rated podcast. He's, I think he's a columnist. He was a never he was a Josh hammer until that he started hasling Charlie Kirk. But yeah, he was a big disanctess supporter. He's at Salem media network. He's one of the loudest critics against the Iran war. You have people like Larry Elder, which is surprising. You know, because Larry Elder is typically a pro-Trump cheerleader. He's been very critical of the Iran war. There's a lot of other these radio hosts who are syndicated on Salem who have been opposed. Hugh, Hugh, obviously, but Hugh, you know, he's always appreciate war, to be honest. So I don't think his positions have changed. So it says right there in the contract in this initial filing that he's integrating messaging into Salem properties. Salem also owns red state town hall, podcast network. They also have an influencer network. So like I would love to know what Brad is actually doing with this money. There's, you know, there's a no, I know certainly the part of the project is to help coach AI chat bots into being more pro Israel less anti-Semitic. And you know, look, I think the anti I think there has been a rise of anti-Semitism in the country. You went disagree with me. I think anti-Semitism is high. It's wrong. You know, I see some incidents in Brooklyn. I think it's wrong. I think hate against any religious group. I couldn't agree more. I've said that many times. So I'd amount of posts to opposing BBs foreign policy is not anti-Semitism. I'm not opposed to Brad getting paid to combat anti-Semitism. But what does that mean? Well, that's it. What does that mean? What are the deliverables anti white hate is encoded in the US legal code when hate against white men is like the foundational fact of college admissions, federal contracting, hiring, and we're spending all of our time worried about whether people are being rude to Bill Ackman. Like this is just a misalignment. This is not reality. Okay. I also want to just add for context to the viewers and the people who are going to clip this that Israel isn't the only country that is paid for influence or support in a matter. Sure. That's right. Ukraine is paid a ton. You know, there was recently a field trip with a bunch of right wing influencers, if you will, who visited Russia? So I don't think that they paid for that trip out of their own pocket. I don't know. And so, you know, they went to Russia. They go hang out with the Russians and whatever. I don't have I don't hate your own. I don't have particular issues with people visiting a country. Right. My issues lie in do you visit the country and then change the way you you speak about the country or use your platform to talk about the country? You know, Qatar had a similar situation during December. Some influencers who are used to be opponents to Qatar, they flew to Qatar in December and then they did some beautiful posts about Qatar. I also think that's wrong. My position is if it's Israel, if it's Qatar, if it's Russia, if it's China, if it's India, we should not be able to pay. I don't think Qatar paid the influencers. I think they came on a trip and then they posted nice things about the country. I still think there should be some level of disclosure around that. I don't care what country it is. You should be disclosing if you are in any way, shape, or form, promoting the interests of another different country. I think that's right. The my focus recently has been on Israel because of this massive contract that that they've engaged in with Brad, then nobody knows what the hell he's doing with the 46 million dollars. I texted him to find out because a lot of that money is going to attacking me and my family, which obviously I resent though, I try to think about it too much. Don't want to become what they call you. Anyway, I know Brad per scale, I've always felt sorry for him. I still do. He's troubled man, but I did think he would at least respond to my text. He didn't. I have you called him? No, I haven't called him and he hasn't called me. He responded to one of my tweets. He responded to my tweet saying that, because I asked him, I said, hey, Brad, what's up with this? Why are so many sale of media personalities trashing President Trump's war? Here's the far of filing saying that you're going to integrate messaging into sale of media properties. Brad responded to me and he said, Alex, I actually want to thank you for bringing this up. I don't know who pissed in your cheerios this morning, but what you're looking at was an original draft. Not what happened. We never executed that plan. We never paid hosts or influencers to say anything. That's the beauty of Fara. The receipts exist. Well, the only receipt that exists right now is Brad's initial contract where it says point blank. We're going to integrate messaging. So he's saying he's not doing it. So what is he doing with this $46 million? What? And you're in this business. Obviously, you're one of those famous people in the business. You may be the most famous person in the business. Have you ever heard of anybody getting $46 million from a single client? No. And even his 1.5 million a month is initial far of filing. I believe is the single largest far a single far of filing for one entity in history. Really? I have no perspective. So that's great. If you ask Chad GPT or whatever chat platform you use, I prefer Grock to be honest because I trust Elon more than I trust Altman. But when I asked Grock, what's the largest far far of filing for one entity to date? And it came back with some $9 million contract that I think Nigeria paid. I don't know what the hell Nigeria needs to do, but they paid it. So one country, $9 million. For as initial contract, $1.5 million a month, you do the math was at $15 million a year. Now it's up to $46 million according to a recent report. And again, they're not paying him for his relationships in the White House. I don't think Brad Parscale could get a meeting in the West Wing to save his life, specifically not in the Oval Office. You know, I don't think people still remember what he did during the 2020 election. Okay? And, but he's going around different countries. And if you pull up his website, it's called clocktowerx.com. He spells out exactly the services that his company offers. And so, you know, I think that he should clear the air on the services that he's providing for these foreign countries. I'm going to go to his website right now, clocktowerx.com. It starts off with a header that says narrative infrastructure. The system already shapes what people believe. We help determine who prevails elections, narratives, markets. We don't react. We shape the conditions they operate in. So, talks about how they've had $2 billion plus in influenced outcomes. No clue what that means. It says that they work in 10 plus countries. They're deployed in 10 plus countries. Then it says, if you if you've heard about our work, it wasn't ours. And then it gets into some of the services that they offer. They offer narrative intelligence, continuous monitoring of the information landscape to identify leverage points before competitors, audience segmentation, behavioral mapping across millions of data points to identify the nodes that move markets, message testing. Here's one, influencer ecosystems, manage networks that amplify narratives through credible distributed voices. That's on this guy's website that he gets paid millions and millions of dollars, 46 million. Yeah. So right there on his website, influencer ecosystems. So I think Brad should, you know, if he's doing it, I think it's wrong. I can't say for definitively that he's doing it, but these are the services that are offering the website cross channel distribution, performance, analytics. And so, well, I must say I've noticed that every sale and media property that I'm aware of has the same view, you know, more wars, good. I'm an anti semi, you're both, those are two lies. By the way, not an anti semi, it war is not good. Your anti semi, they all have the same view. Now, maybe it's just that every Salem host or influencer, whatever they're calling themselves is like crazy in exactly the same way, but maybe there's more to it than that. Maybe maybe. And a lot of these same influencers have been, you know, organized against you for the last couple for like last year. Constantly against you for the last year. A lot of these there's one account for example, named Eel Yakobi. I'm not sure you probably have never heard of this kid, but all he does every day as he tweets about you, the only time I see any of your clips, are on the accounts of people attacking you. Really? I, you know, I don't watch, you know, similar to you. I don't really watch podcasts. Yeah, you know, but the only time I see people's clips are people attacking you. Your clips are when people are attacking you. Eel Yakobi, I was looking this morning. Who is he? You know, it's just some influencer, if you will. And not, these are non-influential influencers. I call them, but he certainly is involved in, he's certainly been paid for some of his tweets. Do I know that he's been paid for tweets against you or against the Iran war? I can't say that for certain, but he was not honest. He's not honest about tweets that he is paid for. And then, and so, so would I be shocked if he was paid for some of, I don't know, but he's tweeted about you probably 1200 times in the last eight months. All compliment. No, no, I'll all negative unfortunately for you. But, you know, and look, I agree with some of his criticism. I don't think it's, but I don't see it organic. People, you know, he's one of the loudest voices who keeps tagging my house. Uh huh. Alex, you criticize Mark Lavin. Why don't you criticize Tucker? Why criticize you to your face here? Yeah, but you hurt me, man. But all of these social media accounts that have been targeting you are not targeting me. And they were targeting JD Vance when he appeared on Meghan Kelly show. Because, oh, how dare you go? I'm making Kelly show. That's what they said. So slowing down happens gradually. Work hard, shut up for your family, but slowly, but surely your energy dissipates. You feel tired. People often hear that this is a byproduct of just getting older, meaning you should just live with it. That's not true, actually. Feeling rundown is not a symptom of physical failure. It's a signal that your hormones, your metabolism, your nutrient levels are off, your balances off. Joanne Blokes exist to help you break free from this cycle. First, you undergo comprehensive labs that show what's happening inside you. Then you'll have a one-on-one consultation with a licensed clinician, someone who listens, explains, and connects the dots between how you feel and why you feel that way, what your body is telling you. It's an algorithm or chat about it's an actual human being who's there to help you. Next, you get your personalized plan, hormone optimization, for men and women. Targeted supplements designed by clinicians who understand the body's a system. It's all connected. It's not just a symptom checklist. So no more settling for okay. Visit joy and blokes dot com slash chucker, use a code tucker for 65% off your labs and 20% off your supplements. That's joy and blokes dot com slash chucker for some excellent deals. Get your edge back with joy and blokes. Isn't this exactly why we all voted for Trump in 2016, 2020 and 2024 because we don't like cancel culture. The idea that if I don't like you, no one is allowed to talk to you, that's a left-wing idea or I thought it was. It turns out it's like a human idea, but I reject it just the same. But Trump was elected in November of 2024. That was like 20 minutes ago. Within just months, all of a sudden you had the Josh Hammers of the world who I'd never even heard of saying that if I don't like somebody, nobody's allowed to talk to him because he's got naughty intentions or he's a bigot of some kind or whatever. How is that any different from screaming racist? It's the same thing. Right. And that's why I'm here because are you shocked by this though? What the hell? I mean, these people aren't the most honest or some brokers. Also, that's one of the people who's been allowed to send this issue is actually a friend of mine, Laura Lumer. I have not liked seeing a lot of the vitriolic messages towards Lumer. People calling her, you know, me names. I know that she dishes it out as well, but she's a friend of mine. And during the 2024 election, everybody kept telling us this of Val Lumer, this of Val Lumer. She's bad news. Dis of Val. I wouldn't, and they would put pressure on me. Are you friends with Laura Lumer? I'd say, yes, I am. Oh, do you think she's trouble? No, I think she's actually a very good ally to us when she's focused. And so I wouldn't never disavow Lumer. Similar, I would never disavow you because you've been good to me. I consider you a friend. It's okay to be, uh, had different opinions. I think telling people that they shouldn't have conversations with people or telling people that you should disavow someone. Um, I'm not, I'm not about that life. So I'm not just telling but demanding that it's the price of your good name that how dare you talk to this person, I'm dinner with this person. And if I find out that you do, I'm going to hurt you. Yeah. That's the definition of witch hunt. That's what the George Floyd era was about. That's Black Lives Matter. That's everything I despise. And to see it happen among people I know who I thought I agreed with is like the most shocking thing that's ever happened to me since when did all the nail cons just become flat out like college level liberals? Uh, they have that way for at least my entire adult life. I guess you're right. I, I, right. Those are the process of losing my name to tell you. Those, those particular characters. Um, but no, I, I, I, I won't disavow Lumer. I won't criticize Lumer. Even if I disagree with her, I'm not going to take the Twitter and say, hey, Lumer, I think you're off base and, you know, you're wrong, wrong, wrong. Same with you. Like if I have an issue with you, I would never attack someone's family or daughter-in-law. Yeah. So I think that that, um, I just want to say in reference to no one in particular, yeah, the tack attacking people's families for crimes they had nothing to do with just because they're related to someone suggests a view of the world based on blood guilt, which is not a Christian view. It's disgusting. It's North Korean view. We don't, we don't punish people's families. Yeah. I think that's, I think those are low. Uh, and it, you know, when I was, I was actually a big defender of Buckley, uh, when he was facing some of those attacks. But just like not having anything to do with me or my family, just in general, as a principle, because what matters are principles, it's not about what you do to me. It's about what you do or what I do. We're all held to the same standards because there's one God. Yeah. And those standards apply to these railies and they apply to the Russians and the Ukrainians, they applied to me. They applied to you. They applied to every human being. All of of us created by God. And one of the core standards is you do not punish the innocent ever. That is the basis of all justice. You punish people who commit crimes. You do not punish people who don't no matter who they're related to these rallies reject that view. That's what they're doing in Gaza. They're killing people because they're Palestinian. The North Koreans did that. I think the US has done that over the year. It's always wrong. It doesn't matter who does it. And I just feel like that is that principle, that one specific principle is the basis of our country. That's why we welcomed all these people from random countries where like, you may be for a country we hate, but like, are you a good person? That's all that matters. It's the content of your character that matters. And if we give that up on the right, then the whole country is gone. That's all I'm saying. Yeah. I'm strongly against targeting innocent people and I'm targeting against targeting family members. Yes. And to be honest, that's why I find a lot of the attacks in Erica Kirk to be repulsive. I totally agree. There's a lot of people who have made a name for themselves in social media by spreading certain theories about Erica. And I think Erica is a good person. She's a friend of mine. I've known Erica for almost as long as she's probably known Charlie. And I was with her a few weeks ago on Palm Beach. And you can see that, you know, the attacks affect her and they hurt her, but she keeps moving forward. So I think that I think having vitriolic targets on family is certainly wrong. Certainly you can't punish people for something they didn't do. Yeah. It's just that simple. That's why segregation is wrong. That's why they anti white racism that dominates American life is wrong. That's why anti-Semitism is wrong. That's why any worldview that punishes people who didn't commit a crime is always in everywhere wrong. And that would include attacking people's families. If they didn't do anything, you know what I mean? That's true. Anyway, that's why also, you know, like the blanket, like Jew haters, there's, you know, there's people who are critical of Israel and then there's people who like tweet things like it totally anti-Jew things. I think the anti-Jew, the Jews control everything crowd. I think they are, I think they're not the brightest as well. Yeah, look, attacking people for things they didn't do is wrong. Period. I would like this administration to take the anti white stuff seriously and stop lecturing me telling me that anti-Semitism is the biggest problem in America. It's not. You have a much tougher time getting into the eye. I would like this administration to take the anti white stuff seriously and stop lecturing me telling me that anti semitism is the biggest problem in America. It's not. You have a much tougher time getting into the Ivy League. You would not notice from the behavior of the justice department if you're white than if you're Jewish. So that's a fact. It's provable that these numbers come out in court. And like it's unfashionable to say that. I don't care. And by the way, if Jews or blacks or Filipinos or anybody was being discriminated in the way that whites are being discriminated against, I would be opposed to it vocally. If you look at a lot of the job creation in our country, a lot of the new jobs have gone to natural born white Americans in the Trump presidency. I don't know those numbers. I don't know if I don't know if I don't know if I want more Americans going to universities. I just think all I'm saying is as a principle, this is the core principle of America that you were judged by who you were as a person, not by the group. I don't think that the administration is overly prioritizing the protection of Jewish communities. Are you joking? I don't think that. Listen to Leo Terrell recently. That's Leo's job. His job is there an anti-Black czar is anti-Black racism is anti-white racism. Are this isn't same? I think there should be. Maybe there should be. How about we treat everybody the same? So I agree with you on that point. But I don't think that it's just part of it. I don't think that the Department of Justice is, I think wakes up in the morning and thinks how can we personally protect Jewish Americans over it? As they do, are you joking? I don't think. There's been, they reached a settlement with it. Look, I just want to be clear as clear as I've been all along that I oppose any kind of discrimination on religious grounds and on secular humanist grounds. It's just wrong. Always, judge the person, not the blood type. However, they went after Harvard and Yale and Columbia and Cornell and Princeton and Dorothy Ivy League on the basis of anti-Semitism. It's the center of anti-Semitic. They should not get federal money. I totally agree with that. But everybody knows because it's been proven that the barrier at those schools is being a white Christian male. Yeah. That's right. And no one mentioned that. So it's like, what the hell are you doing? They're telling me I live in a world and have for 57 years in this country where being a white male is a disadvantage in official America in hiring, federal contracting and school admissions. And no one says anything about it. That's fair. That's fair. I think that obviously they've also, they've also discriminated against Asians at the 100%, which is totally wrong. It is wrong. And David Hawg got accepted into Harvard. That's how you know that the institution is nailed. He built Ackman with the Harvard, the guys are more on. But how do people get into Harvard? I think that higher education totally means that overhaul. And I don't encourage young people to go to. Of course, you know I agree with you passionately strongly. But I just think even more important than overhauling college is reminding every American that you're judged on your own merits. Period. And to the extent of federal government, we have laws on the books. We have a civil rights division that's supposed to be enforcing this, which is not making an authority. I'm sorry. Sorry. They're not. And I got a call today from some of the administration will stop. You know, they're doing some work. It's like they could end it tomorrow. He will not allow discrimination in our country period no matter who you are, whether you're black, Jewish, white, Asian, doesn't matter. And they won't do it because their donors are single-mindedly focused on one of many forms of discrimination, which is not the most prevalent form. So I'm pissed. And I'm going to keep saying this until they change their ways. Well, I'm not going to tell you to stop. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. It's just like, I had this like furious text exchange in some of the administration. It was like, we're doing stuff. I was like, this is one problem we could actually solve. No more discrimination. It's totally unchecked on the left too. They're always like lecturing about white men. Yeah. Definitely. I mean, the left is certainly the worst offenders at that. Openly raised. They are opening racist and they're proud of it. And so I think that's why we're talking. I know that you said you're leaving the Republican Party. Yeah. Which, you know, I want to come back. I understand your frustration with the party. I had the frustration all the time as well. I'm frustrated right now. I'm sitting here on this podcast while the Senate refuses to pass the safe America. Exactly. That would enforce voter ID. But we're doing hard. Why can't they do that? Well, maybe they don't want to save our country. So maybe they don't want to save our country. But we're doing the best. Which has asked you a question why that's such an easy one. Yeah. That's a priority that I strongly share with human administration. Like why not have a voter ID if you're going to be a country who chooses leaders through elections? Right. I think it might be the most common sense piece of legislative. It's totally every come through the Senate. But for whatever reason, there's obstruction to it. But who's obstructing it? Do you know? Well, we have a leader in the Senate who just can't get the job done. And maybe he can get it done. But he hasn't shown that he can get it done. And he hasn't really made it a priority. I think this is a major priority for Republican voters. It's a major priority of President Trump who is the only reason that we have a Republican controlled Senate. And we have a Republican controlled Congress. And I think oftentimes Republicans forget that. And in Congress, they forget that. The only reason the Republicans have any power in Washington, DC is because of Donald Trump and the mega movement. And time and time again, Congress drops the ball. And so I hear your frustration. That's it. Like if you vote for Republicans, the kingdom get a voter ID law. That's why that's why the primaries are so important. And we're working in the primaries. We took out, we took out, we took out, we took out Cassidy. We're taking out some of the weakest Republicans on our team. So the primaries process is where I believe that people like you should be taken out here. And I just think you've gotten behind some of the wrong candidates. I think like James Fishback, by the way, that guy tried to scam me. James Fishback hit me up asking me for $50,000 into an investment fund before he was larping as a president or governor candidate. You know, like Fishback, but I like him, but I don't know that much about him. I just don't think that the state of Florida should be limiting the first amendment that God given first amendment rights of Floridians because Israel demands it, which is exactly what they did. That's not acceptable under any certain, my favorite has been your for like 400 years. Like I'm not going to stand by and let that happen without saying something about it. Period. I hear you on that. There was probably a different candidate you got behind then and Fishback because that guy's bad news and he's not a non as person. And I don't know. And I think you have a massive platform. When you put your platform to use and with, you took out, you helped take out Dan Krenshaw. So I thank you for that. And President Trump did an endorsed Dan Krenshaw. So we've used this primary source that creepy fat guy from Florida who endorsed genocide who laughed at a picture of a dead child in Gaza that disgusting, I can't even remember his name, but he's the only candidate ran in that seat. And I get someone new like why we were there. That's why I said you're going to be a slave to Israel. But now we have the flip side of Dambles, Aaron, right. We have two extremes wearing that race, both I don't agree with. Okay. So we have Dan Bels, Aaron, maybe one of the people who's helped bring the generosity to young men in America more than anybody. I don't know. And Randy fine. Maybe we need some, maybe we need some better choices. Florida's been a great state for a long time. In my opinion, it's kind of hard to eff Florida. Florida's got loads totally. It's got load taxes. It's got beaches. It's got great weather. They get crowded and you'll just say, I think we can. I think that's been a major thing that's been one issue. But that's a valid person. This is happening under DeSantis. I agree. I completely look. And there are things about DeSantis. I really like like he's a very impressive guy as you know, DeSantis. There's a lot about him that's impressive. That's just a fact. He's smarter than I am. But you have to take the big picture. Like you have to care about the people who live in the state, not just people who send money to your campaign, whether it's a pack, whether worse than a pack, or the, you know, the strip mall developers and the people who just want to pave the state, like want to destroy nature to make a quick buck. Like those people are worse than a pack in my opinion. Yeah. I've had some conversations with some data that you agree with center. You live in Florida. I don't think that the Floridians want to, I don't think the Floridians want major data centers coming to their community anymore. I don't think we do. But there are a lot of them already there. And I've actually been talking to some data center developers who say, you actually don't need that much land anymore. And so there's a concern, but you need a lot of water energy. There's concern from some of the data centers that they're over building that, you know, few, in a few years from now, the technology will be better. The energy resources will be better. And so you're not going to need a two million square. Can I see one thing my fishpect though? Like the effort in Florida has been to prevent fishpect from back or back. I don't, I don't, I don't, I don't, this show what close friends I am with it. But, um, I like the guy, but why not just have a debate between Byron Donald's and fishpect? That's a good question. I, so virus can decide. I would debate him. But, but the Byron Donald won't. Cause you guys smoke well, that's not part of it. Cause he's 60 points up. Fishbacks, I don't even think he can qualify to become a company. No one will give him money. And no one will give him a hearing. And that's what I give him a hearing. I don't think that he's even qualified. Like because he's not lived in the state long enough for my understanding. Byron Donald's and New York. Okay. But he moved there 20 plus years ago. Fishback was living in Washington, DC until just recently. So you want to get into people's paths. And also, I think, I think actually, and the expect is from the state, his family's been there for a long, long time, many generations. Byron Donald's moved to Florida and like immediately gets a rest on a felony charge. So like, I just not just qualify, but if it's as long as you combine. Right. My personal, my biggest gripe with fishback is he tried to scam me. Personally tried to scam me out of 50,000. I don't know anything about that. When he was pretending to be a financial expert running different fudge. You know, I met him through, through Twitter, you know, he used to be, he used to be, you know, buyer beware, Alex. He used to be, he used to be one of the presence biggest defenders. Do you do a lot of your, your investment deals through Twitter? No. Okay. I don't do any of them. However, anyone who approaches you for an investment opportunity, I'd put her probably down. He was not just a Twitter guy, but he was a economic pundit on Fox. He was an economic pundit on CNN. He was the head of this, you know, different funds, right? That's what he said, a Zoria fund. And so he also really wanted a job with the Trump administration. He really wanted to go work for the Trump admin. He wanted to be on the commissioner for some agency and he asked me that. I'm sure they're looking at it. And do you want me to compare this to Byron Donald's biography? Which I know a lot about. I don't think you do. What I'm getting the background on is how I met fishback and him asking me for money. And then in person, we met you send him money. I didn't send him money. We're square. Two weeks later, that was fun. Shut down. Yeah. Well, so maybe he's not a great fund manager. I don't know anything about it. My question is what was he going to do with the $50,000? Do you want to talk about Byron's arrest record when he was a child or not? Charlie's not a child. He was a teenager. No, he was not a teenager. He was an adult. Whatever. I don't care about that actually. All I care about is like, are you a committed to serving the people on his behalf? You're going to be elected and two are your ideas, right? And right for those people. Who are you serving? That's it. Do you think I'm asking you not just Byron, if you think if somebody got arrested when they're 19 or 20 years old for selling weed and they're now 45 or 50, I don't care. You don't care. No. So I'm only throwing that out because it's like, okay, whatever. But no, what I do care about, I mean, I guess I care. I'm against weed for the record, by the way. That's fair. But it's not even I have. By the way. Good for you. You know, I totally fine with medical cannabis. I don't like cannabis, you know, recreationally being high all the time does not make you better. I've done it by the ice milk. We just a child a lot. It's not. Come on now. So life is amazing experience it. But no, I was just throwing that back to be like, okay, great. But the point is, A, we should have a democracy where the people get to decide who they vote for. And they can decide that on the basis of maximum amount of information about those candidates. And so why would the Republican Party florida being shutting down debate? I want to hear the issues. I don't care so much with the people. That's why I got mad at Trump. It's like, I like Trump. I always like Trump. I just like the guy. Speaking of debates, one of my fair moments ever was during the Republican, first Republican primary debate of 2024. And you know, we had got a call, something called counter programming when Donald Trump sat down for an interview with a guy named Tucker Carlson. Yeah, remember that? And you guys crush the ratings hundreds, millions of views on social media compared to whatever the RNC debate pulled. Then why do they suck up to then why here's a question that I have. I know you're not running a comm shop directly, but like or indirectly or you're certainly involved in thinking through messages and how to get them out there. Fox news like why the emphasis on Fox news, all these Trump employee employees, all on Fox news, it's got a tiny audience. It's controlled by people who hate Trump, the monarchs. I know that personally because I know them personally. And they're like against his agenda on a core level. But no one ever gets sent out to podcast. You're like the first one who's been here in a long time. Have you sought out anybody? Of course. Well, that's a good question. But Fox news like it's a relevant why make it relevant? So the podcast, that's a great question. You know, we had great success with the president going on podcasting. Oh, and Joe Rogan and yours and Andrew Schultz. And I really like these guys and they've been critical of them admin on issues. That's okay. I still like them personally. But they don't want to have a lot of the people on anymore. They don't make enough. They don't want to have the president on the event sought out an interview with the president. And I'm sure if they asked, I'm sure you would do it, but they haven't asked, you know, but that's it's not just about the president. I mean, he's the president. But also people like the admin, like I think these guys like, no, those are questions shut down. My request got shut down and I was like, I felt like I had been a pretty faithful Trump supporter, certainly like a lion. You thought that would be with the president. No, no, I just call him directly to that. But like, you know, the secretary of awesomeness or whatever, you have at least secretaries in charge of things. Like get him on. Nope, can't do it. And I'm not whining. It was fine. My life turned out okay, but I don't understand the emphasis on Fox News. Like, it's sometimes it's the only platform that will have us on. Dude, that is not true. I mean, CNN, for example, Fox News to have Stephen Miller on. Okay. Right. But again, cares about CNN. Nine people watch it. Right. I don't know. I think that if you started inviting people on the show again, maybe they'll come. but why just why continue to make, I mean, once Trump is gone, CNN and Fox are done. Yeah. They're literally done without Trump to talk about no one's going to watch them. They will probably close down literally. And you know this better than anyone. You're the new media guy. Why keep them on life support? I don't understand when they hate you. They hate you at Fox. They hate you at CNN. And that's probably like, she's more than most of things like why do this? Well, it's important to get the message out and people are comfortable going on Fox I suppose. And a lot of the administration officials, they have relationships there. So they book that. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's true. And it's just muscle. Also, a lot of the podcasters, they don't want to interview random cabinet members. Maybe you do. But other podcasts in, I guess, the podcast ecosystem, they don't want to interview a rank and file Republican Congressman or a senator or I interviewed Ted Cruz. That was was a fun interview by the way, which, which you know, it was. for me, I have disagreed with a lot of what you said over the last, you know, here, or any, any take down Ted Cruz is fun for me. I don't like that guy, but Ted Cruz's views are identical to Randy finds. So why is Ted Cruz bad but Randy fine is good? I don't say that Randy finds opinions are good. I think Ted Cruz's personality is just worse than, than Randy fine. I do. I do. I think Ted Cruz is not a likable guy. Well, that's obvious. Yeah. And so do I agree with everything? I think Randy fine has tweeted some ugly things really ugly things. And his views do not represent the views of the Trump administration or my views. But I think Ted Cruz is just an unlikable guy. And I want to share with your audience a little story in January, a few days before my wedding. I did this Trump accounts event, which I think Trump accounts is actually one of the great programs of the Trump administration. Every baby that is born in America for the next four years gets $1,000 invested in a tax-free vehicle that they can access when they're 18. And every year the parents can contribute to it, et cetera, et cetera. So I did an event to help introduce this new new initiative with the president was there. And I brought a very famous rapper named Nicki Minaj. And Nicki Minaj and I, we did a little panel on stage. When we got off the stage, we were going to go to the White House to see the, the president and show Nicki the oval and have a good time. We were walking out and all of a sudden I hear like these footsteps were running down the hallway. And I turn around and Ted Cruz and his team chasing after us. Nicki, Nicki, Nicki, please can we get a picture? Can we get a picture? I'm like, holy shit, this is Senator Ted Cruz who probably hasn't ran in the while running down the hallway chasing Nicki begging her for a picture. Like he was a fan girl at a concert. And just to be fun, I said, sorry Ted, we're out of time. We can't do any more pictures. His face was so pissed. And he like cornered us. He was trying to, and Nicki was like, you know, I feel back as Nicki's now kind of collateral in this because she, I mean, she doesn't know who the help Ted Cruz is. And so like I'm blocking him from getting a picture with her and his teams like trying to snap angles of it and they're all blurry pictures. But I prevented it. And as I was leaving one of his staffers goes, we'll remember this, Alex Bruce with. Oh my God, this is good. You're on Ted's list. I'm on Ted's list now. But no, I think Ted's a jokeer. I think that him saying his number one priority as a US sander is to be a defender of a different country. I think that was a stupid thing to say. And I actually do think he believes it though. What do you think he believes that? That's his position. That's his position. I don't know why he believes it. But I'm not a fan of Ted. Ted still thinks in the back of his mind that one day he can be present in the United States. I think it's going to happen. It won't happen. And I think I actually spoke of the Jerusalem Post conference a couple of weeks ago. And Ted prides himself on being Israel's number one defender. Oh yeah. He loves Israel. And I think he's really so badly. I think he genuinely loves the country though. But he, he has hurt the country and I gave that speech at Jerusalem Post. They said, I'm here today as an ally and a supporter of Israel, somebody who wants to see American is an Israel heavy strong relationship for decades to come. I truly believe that. I highlighted how I think they're a great battle field proven partner. We've, you know, they have great technologies that also can benefit American companies, medicine, etc. And I said, however, Israel's approval rating in America, especially with my generation Republicans under 30 is at an all time low. And that's not great. And one of the reasons I think it's so low is not because necessarily of podcasters who are anti Israel, but because of some of Israel's most ardent supporters in the United States, people like Senator Ted Cruz, push people away. And this was in early June, right after there was this idea that an Iran deal was close. And nobody knew what the Iran deal was, etc. Ted Cruz took to acts and he slammed any prospects of a deal. You can't make a deal with the Iranian regime. You can't do this. You can't do that. My dude, this guy has no idea what the hell the deal, what's in the deal, of course, and he's trying to get out in front of it to trash the president and undermine the administration. And I'm looking at this guy. And if he actually wants to help Israel, he would shut up. So I said that at the Jerusalem Post conference. These are all Jewish people with love for Israel. They all cheered for me after I said Ted Cruz should shut the hell up. And so if he truly loved Israel, I think that he would be better served them by not constantly defending them. So I think that's a very wise point. And it's not just Ted Cruz. As Mark Levin has inspired more people to join BDS than, you know, campus group ever. I mean, Mark Levin is like, he's clearly trying to get me fired by the way. So that's the question. It's like, okay, Mark Levin hates Trump. He's always hated Trump. He's worked against Trump openly for a decade. And then Trump does something that he agrees with and he's the gatekeeper to Trump and Trump's best friend. Now he hates Trump again and he's attacking Trump. How long does Trump continue to be friends with the sky? I don't know. You know, the president is unique. He can handle people who criticize him and, you know, he doesn't think they're low IQ crazy people. Only some. Fair and and and look, but but I don't think Mark Levin was over the president's best friend. You know, the president has different opinions around him. Well, I don't think Trump likes him. So that's my opinion. I'm actually used to saying it to F with you. You think that's that's totally possible. But that's literally possible. So look, I think Mark is, I think he is part of a Republican party that has been left in the past. And they are desperately trying to remain relevant. And they use conflicts, whether it's in the Middle East or Mark Tyson. For example, the conflict in Ukraine, they use these issues to have a little bit of relevance to maintain their presences on Fox News. But the people aren't with them. And you see it in polling again, 67% of Americans support MOU. You look at Mark Levin's Twitter feed. He acts like everybody's against it. Nobody's against it except for Mark and his friends who are probably coordinating in their messaging and talking points. But can you ask you one last question? Yeah. And I think it's a totally correct analysis. And by the way, I fall for it. And I always try to remind myself Mark Levin is not a player in any affairs, global or local. He's irrelevant. And his job is just like, make me mad and sucked me into his fantasy world. And like I should just ignore this. And you clearly have already figured that out. So good for you. Don't take the bait. Don't take the bait. And that's real quick and a little ex-psychology. Yeah. I tell my clients ignore the comment section. Yeah. Because because you're not changing opinions on X, nobody sees something on X ago. Oh, wow. I changed my mind on something. X is a nasty place. It's where you battle people. It's where it's a war of ideas. And some people cheat in the war of ideas. They use bots. They use coordinated influencer campaigns. They sometimes they cheat in the war of ideas. But it's not a place that you should get any like, you shouldn't think that's reality. Because it's all manipulated. I agree. So and that's the final question I wanted you to unpack. You've alluded to this a couple of times. You said if somebody, I'm embarrassed I forgot who you're referring to. You said, I know that this person, oh, that you a Kobe kid. Yeah. I know that this person has taken money for other opinions and not been honest about it. And that's the most exact thing that you said. What were you referring to? Well, there's a few different tweets that he's posted about. And to his credit, actually, I did see a paid partnership post underneath this one. But in the Georgia, most recent Georgia election, he was paid to go to the country or state state for governor. He was paid to go after this guy named Rick Jackson. It says Rick Jackson brands himself as aligned with conservative priorities. But his businesses tell a different story. D.E.I. initiatives, diversity focused leadership and roles supporting generally to procedures. Voters should look at actions, not slogans. And right at the bottom, it says paid partnership. And then right above that tweet is another tweet that's very similar in language. But it didn't say paid partnership. Was he paid for it? I don't know. But it certainly looks like it. And here is the talking points that went out by a company that word for word spells out what he wants, what Jacobian out tweeting messaging Rick Jackson claims to want to ban D.E.I. his own company has a track record of advancing the ideas of D.E.I. So all of these influencers were sent this memo here, as you can see. And then I did a screenshot put it side by side with you, Kobe's tweets. It's verbatim. And the company that was hired for this project just happens to be associated with Brad Parscale. So, yeah. So it looks like you don't have evidence that this kid is working for Brad Parscale. No evidence that. I noticed for the Iranian campaign, for the Iranian campaign. So I noticed on those rare occasions when I look at the stuff, because it's designed to make you mad and the limit your ability to think clearly. So I really do try and stay away from ex and cigarettes because both are just so addictive. But I break down occasionally. And I noticed that there are people who are constantly sending these long tweets about how we need endless war, who are also promoting some very specific kind of car insurance. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's another one. This girl, Arian Wexler. This girl. Who is that? That's a great question. Nobody knows. You came out of nowhere in 2324. What is her name? Arian. Arian. Arian. Arian. Yeah. Nice name. How does this species name? I don't know about that. She's a pretty girl and she started showing up at conservative events. And she got introduced to her on the campaign trail. She really wanted to get involved with the Trump 24 campaign for whatever reason. But the girl says to me out, I'm very suspicious of people who come out of nowhere and they have a big following almost instantly. But nobody knows who the hell they are. And so she really wanted to get involved with the Trump 24 campaign. I said, no, it never actually never even entertained her. And I would text it. I actually texted some of my friends like this girl. She a fed. Yeah. And I don't know if I don't think she's a fed. But I'm sure she's a lot of that. But she came out of nowhere. She's one of your biggest critics on social media. Mind. One of yours absolutely. So back this Wexler check, by the way, I did see something that you were on a podcast. Yesterday, you said, you think Israel killed Charlie Carter. I did not say that. What was it not say that? What was the clip that I said? I've never said that. I know a lot of people including in the Trump administration who think that, however, there's no proof of that. I said was two things. One, I don't know when the command came down and from whom that we have to trust everything federal law enforcement says, but I'm not obeying that. We have a moral obligation to push federal law enforcement to the job we pay them to do, which is to investigate the crimes fully. And so for example, if there are people who predicted Charlie's death on Twitter, I think the rest of us can expect that they've been hauled in by the FBI for questioning. And I don't think they have been. So I don't know about that. But I do know what the disc, will you talk about the discord chats? No, I'm talking. I'm specifically talking about. I'm talking about the Twitter post that seemed to predict Charlie's death. Maybe that's, yeah. I would, I don't know if that's been investigated. I would love for that to be. Yeah. So that's number one. Number two, just because someone is shot by one person doesn't mean others weren't involved and don't like berate me into accepting that assumption because I would never accept that is why would I assume that? And three, to tell me that you know the motive before the trial even starts that he was killed for his views on transgenders. Maybe he was, maybe he was more complicated than that. How would you know you don't know? So stop yelling at me to accept a conclusion that you can't prove. I hear you. Why would you do that? This is my friend. I'm not, there's, in by the way, if I was murdered, I would expect people who loved me not to jump to unwarranted conclusions, but to press federal law enforcement to do its freaking job and stop calling people names because they're asking you to do your job. I think a lot of people did jump to unwarranted conclusions. Maybe. If you're a foreign citizen or not and, you know, right after the assassination, many people were with big platforms, not you, we're saying that Israel was behind it. Many. And, you know, right after the assassination, many people were with big platforms, not you, we're saying that Israel was behind it. And there's platforms were saying that he was killed for his use on transgenderism. And we don't know that actually. We don't know anything. But Charlie was killed as he was talking about transgender. And this guy was Tyler Robinson seems to be in love with transgender people. That may be absolutely true. For me, and I think a lot of Americans, that seems like the most plausible situation. But so, you know, never going to catch me saying, because I don't know it, that Tyler Robinson wasn't involved. I'm merely saying to foreclose the possibility that others were involved. Is he responsible? And then to attack other people. Yeah. I'm certainly not here to attack you. No, no, you're not doing it. I'm just saying like, but in its interesting, the people who have been, like, I've been a journalist my entire life. I'm not proud of that because journalism is pretty gross in the way that it's practiced in this country as you've just proven. I mean, you've tell us like how fake a lot of this stuff is. But the basic process of journalism is not so different from the process of gathering evidence in a criminal investigation, which is you like, all leads should be run down that are not utterly preposterous. And if you're not doing that, then I have a right to ask why are you not doing that? And if Joe Kent, who until the day he left at highest level security clearance in the Trump administration of Joe Kent says, hey, I referred these leads to the DOJ and they ignored them and then got mad at me for referring them. What the hell is that? And if no one can answer you, other than to call you an anti semi, I'm like, that's not a real answer. Yeah. I don't think Joe is an anti semi and no, me. I'm like, yeah, I don't think you're not alleging Israel did it. I can prove that. But that well, then so then I guess that is an example of a clip of yours that was being taken a bit. He is a real did it. I was the message yesterday. And that's what I saw. So it's just interesting that I will say this, it's interesting that all the people who are telling you to shut up and accept a conclusion that hasn't even been reached in the court yet, they're all neo cons. So why is that what is that? Who's running that campaign? Talk about a campaign and as his friend, here's what I want. I was just and I've said it to the folks at turning point who I talk to who I like in some cases. No, everybody who love Charlie has an obligation to push for the most rigorous, open-minded, exhaustive criminal investigation possible. And if you're not doing that, why are you not doing that? That's fair. And I had this conversation and I called people at the FBI directly not being paid to do this. I did because I love Charlie Kirk. And it's like, what is this? And they didn't give me a good answer. Did you see that recently at the court hearing that they're not making Tyler Robinson's lover testify? They're basically giving them spousal privilege. Yeah. What is that? That's a great question. And I think 30 points. And who's this guy who jumped up and claimed credit for the murder seconds after it happened? Who's that guy? Who all of a sudden gets busting on kitty porn charges and we can't talk to him? Well, I don't know what this adds up to, but I know weirdness when I see it. And by the way, is there not footage of Tyler Robinson pulling the trigger? Apparently they say that there is. No one has seen it. Who I know, including high level people have asked to see it haven't seen it. Why? I'm not saying it doesn't exist. I'm saying, why you acting like this? Sure. But I think it's, I trust you that you weren't saying it was Israel, but some people have just said if I have definitively said that. And I think that's also reckless. And so I've said it's real. I trust you that you said, well, I trust what you said right now. Right. But if I had proof there was Israel, I would just say so. Right. People have speculated that though and have definitively said that not you others. I think that's reckless and irresponsible and does it to service to to the investigation. I agree that we should have 100% invested in it. The investigations, the way that it's unfolded has allowed the space for all of the speculation to take place. Sure. And that is also the new media environment, the new social media system. But it's just funny. Everyone's mad at the podcasters for it. The podcasters, you've got a freaking department of justice that we pay for billions a year that has the right to shoot you. They have unlimited police powers. They can tell you any lie they want. And it's fine. If you lie to them, it's a federal crime. They have all the power. Therefore they need all the accountability. It's for, I mean, that's just kind of how it works. And no one seems to be mad at the FBI or the Utah State authorities for not answering simple questions about this stuff. And if you can't answer a simple question, maybe there's a good reason. What's that reason? Shut up, anti-Semite. I'm just not going to take that under any circumstances ever. Well, right now what it seems like though, at least in the right wing media ecosystem, you know, I agree that we should have a thorough investigation. Half the side, or actually more probably more than half the side says Tyler Robinson did it. And then there's a pocket of the internet that definitely personally 100% says Israel did it. And I think that, you know, one way of the tiebreaker with the DOJ giving us real information on this and answering the question. And I actually called it, as I told you, I was saying again, I called the FBI highest level. Have you guys interviewed the people who appeared to have for knowledge? We've got that covered. Have you interviewed them or not? This is just a common sense question. Couldn't get an answer. Maybe they have. I saw some TikTok posts the day before Charlie died that basically said, oh, Charlie's going to regret coming here and thank you. And thank you. Thank you. You know, we're certainly aware of those posts. And so that should be but aware of, yeah, everyone's aware of it was on TikTok and Twitter, but have the people who posted those things been interviewed. If I go on TikTok and threaten the life of a federal official, I get an immediate visit from the FBI immediate. And I should. I get it. I'm not against that. Have these guys received visits from the FBI? And last time I checked the answer was no. So I think it's totally fair as a friend of Charlie's or just as an American who believes that justice has to be done to demand an answer. And I'm not going to be deterred from having people scream Candace Owens antisemite in my face. I'm just not ever going to be bullied by that under any circumstances because why would I? Do you see what I mean? I hear you. I just think that jumping to your point, jumping to conclusions could be reckless. And so a lot of people are jumping to illusions that Charlie Kirk was killed because of his positions on transgenderism. That's jumping to a conclusion. We don't know that. There's been no trial. But there was the letter that was picked up. But what do we know about that nothing. That was a press release. There's more evidence leaning towards. Okay, transgender. Show me the show me all the evidence. So that's what we're having at court here. Exactly. So, but hopefully, hopefully some of these all sides are jumping to conclusions. Anyone who says shut up, he was killed by the trainings. I think what makes, I think what makes the whole process worse though is social media. Definitely jump for. And then that's why I haven't and then you tried to stay out of this and you have your teams and you have the clashing opinion. But how did Charlie Kirk's murder wind up a contest between people with different views on foreign policy? I think that's the weirdest thing I've ever seen. It's a good question. I think a lot of people are in a feriously using Charlie's passing for self game. I think that's wrong. But also for ideological ends and foreign imperatives. Like that's really clear to me. Like how did this become about that? If it's really just about transgenderism, then why is every person insisting it's only about transgenderism also attacking the MOU? Like what are we looking at now, Alex Bruce, who it's like, I don't know it. Look, I'm a medium IQ person, maybe even a low IQ person. But I'm just like noting what's happening and asking, what is it at up to? And I don't know. It's weird. I hear you. I hear you. You should be a shrink man. You're such a like a calming. I hear you. So I think that the whole thing was terrible. I remember where I was when he got shot. I was actually in a meeting in Washington, DC. I got bored in the meeting. So I started looking at my phone. And I saw Charlie got shot. I went with the... And I said, I saw the footage. I actually started crying because I did too. I thought there was no way that he was going to survive that. I did too. And it was tough. And the aftermath has been even tougher. And, you know, I think that Erica gets treated incredibly unfairly by the media, by the pundit class. I think she's got such a, I mean, a tough thing going on for her. It's the worst thing I can imagine. And you know, she wanted to be strong. And you know, Charlie, Charlie put on a show, everything he did, he put on a great show. And people are criticizing Erica for continuing in Charlie's footsteps with the fireworks. I haven't read a, I haven't read a word of that. I think it's been, I think it's been be honest with you. I think a lot of it's been pretty unfair. I think they asked some fair questions. But I think the treatment of her generally has been horrible. And I think people should apologize to her. Well, I was texting with her yesterday. And about, yeah, so whatever personal stuff, but I yeah, there are a few people I feel sadder for than her. Yeah. Because the fact is no matter where you are in anything. Here's a woman who's a widow with two small kids. And those two small kids just had their first father's day without Charlie. I'm aware. And no, we want justice for Charlie. And we should be demanding it. But I think it's a disservice to use him for political gain, a totally gain of viewership on their podcast. It's disservice for Netanyahu to make it about Netanyahu, which he did. That was a unique, it was disgusting. I didn't, I don't think that was necessary. And that's the one good. I think I think he's chronically online. I don't think there's anything overtly nefarious. I think Bibi's chronically online really. I think he very much cares about the sentiment about him on social media in America. That's why he saw and he has the problem of people that are chronically on. Ron DeSantis was chronically online. We took advantage of him for being chronically online during the 24 personally, checking his focus, scrolling, see what people say about him really. And if you remember DeSantis really had a moment when kind of Trump was kind of in no man's land after 2020 election. Yes, DeSantis started having his moment. And what he would do is he would see what was trending on right wing X that day. The next day, he would do a press conference. You're coming my show. Or going your show, addressing that issue. And it made him seem like he was one of us when in reality, he was just reading what we we were talking about. And then taking action. Oh, that's smart. It was a good political example. No, it's totally right. But he was chronically online. And so in 2024, when he ran for president, we muddied the water for him. Every time he looked on Twitter, people like me were tweeting about his boots and his choice of footwear or the makeup he was using that day. And we made X a place for him that he didn't like. And he kind of lost his mojo. He couldn't really figure out what's that said. So we got an asset. I think BB, there's theories about him that he's this grand mastermind of all his people. No, no, no, no. I think he's chronically online. He's a day trader. I totally agree. I think you see what people say about him on social media and he reacts to it. And I think that's when you're the world leader, I think it's terrible. And that's why I love the president for not feeling the pressure from the chattering class on these issues. He's not hearing it from the chattering. He's not hearing it. He's not taking the opinions of these paid influencers who want the water continue. I think that's great. But I also think you need to synthesize your own opinions with those of the people you represent. Sure. But I don't care about gas prices. But I think care about the, I think cares about the Iranian nuclear program. Like talk about getting in people's heads, convincing Americans that the Iranian nuclear program is more important than gas prices is like the craziest. I don't think expundance are a place where I don't think exit a place you can get the sentiment. I can totally agree with that. But public opinion polling over, you know, first on every poll, of course, but like what are American get fire President Trump gets his opinions from is when he goes to Pennsylvania where he went to a truck factory yesterday. Well, Marion, it also calls. So like that's bad. I'm sorry. It's bad. I think the president takes more direction from the Patriots who showed up at the Pennsylvania rally yesterday for him than his donors. Well, he I think he had always has. And that has been his great strength that has been his great strength. And everyone would always make fun of Trump for doing these endless rallies and giving endless speeches or whatever. But I always felt and I didn't want to watch them all because there's too many of them. But I always felt like it was important for him. It was like people he loved for one thing. But it was he could feel the energy from the crowd and like their interest. You can engage people's interest by their response to your lines. Yeah. Super important exercise. Well, I encourage you if you like those, I encourage you to watch this made Trump realize as he can because they're not going to be here forever. And you know, actually, I've been on a Trump release. One of the things I regret now in my life is Charlie and I both spoke at this. We both spoke at this event in South Korea. I spoke before him and I was tired, you know, the jet lag. Yeah. And Charlie was about to go on stage. And he's like, yeah, she was stick around. She's like, no, I got to get out of here. I got to go. I mean, I'm tired. And it was Charlie's last public speech. And I didn't, you know, stick around to watch it because I was tired. So you know, same with Trump, you know, look, Trump is not perfect. I think he, but I think he is the best that we've had at least in my lifetime. And I think he loves the country. I think he loves the people of the country. I think he genuinely cares about the people that he goes out and he wants to represent in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin and and Ohio and Florida. I think he genuinely cares. And do we have the greatest team around us in the Republican Congress and Senate? Absolutely not. But we have two years left of the Donald Trump experiment. And if the Democrats win, let experience going to be muddied by impeachment and bullshit. And so, you know, I do encourage your audience to, to get involved in the primary process as much as they can. If they don't like the Republican who's currently in office, go get somebody that you do but we have two years left of the down J Trump experiment in our country. And I think people are going to miss him when he's gone. I want the last two years to be wholly focused on the United States and not on Netanyahu's concerns or Slun's he's anyone else's concerns. Like that's kind of your problem. And you know, we don't hate you, but like deal with wrong. You know, we're having a discussion before this about Latin America. Yeah. I think it's exciting what's happening in Latin America. We're not completely agreeing. And and administrations before this one were more focused on the Middle East and countries that were thousands and thousands of miles away, while our own backyard has been suffering. And and because of the suffering and the backyard, all of these illegal aliens came into our country. You don't need to tell me, man. And so I'm so mad about the Iran. This administration has prioritized strengthening some of these countries, not at not at the cost of hurting our country, but but helping these countries become more stabilized, become more economically strong. But because if they have if they have strong countries, the migrants are going to come to our some the hemisphere. I mean, you're I think that creature quietness. No doubt. So I think that I think that the the president has been more focused on this hemisphere than that despite the excursion there, he's certainly more focused on on domestic policies. And I think that as we get to the next four or five months of, you know, as we ramp up into the midterms, you know, see a lot more of it. The last question. Can you ask him to just stop listening to people who don't like you don't have your best interest or the nation's best interest at heart, just ignore those people whether it's whatever Mark, thison, as you call them, or Mark Levin, as I call him, or the Murdochs or whoever people who are just like and just return to the concerns that, you know, your voters love you for caring about, you know, do I say thison incorrectly? I don't know who even care. Like what is that? I've never heard of this guy except for when I see him on social media. I don't know what he does. But I think that the president hears the opinions of as many people as possible. And he'll ask if the janitor was in the room, he would ask the janitor about his opinion on a topic. You know, he doesn't, you know, he's got his advisors, he's got his cabinet members. But in the end, he has the public sentiment. He goes to a rally and he pulls the crowd. Do we like sleepy Joe or or or a crooked Joe better? You know, he and that's a cute example, a silly example. But he feels the energy when he says something in a speech, he can feel let me ask you if the janitor and I love that about him, I try to be that way, you know, just like to keep your filter course. So you get a lot of information then went on through. I text with janitors literally. I'm with you on that. But if the janitor says to you, I got a hot stock tip for you. Take 500 million dollars and, you know, go into this IPO and the IPO tanks and you lose all the money. Next round, you're not taking investment advice from the janitor. You're like you cross him off the list of people to consult for investment advice. If Mark Levin and Mark T. Sin and Sean Hannity and Rupert Murdoch all come to you and like, I've got a great idea, regime change went around. All you got to do is kill you. I tell the place will collapse. They're going to put some pro Israel pro America guy to run the place. You're like, okay, you do it. It doesn't work. You got to have to cross them off the list of people to consult for future for a policy advice. I don't think it went down exactly that way. But, but the president seeks out counsel from many people and he doesn't take the opinion of one person to make a decision on that. But I do hear what you're saying. I personally don't want any advice from Mark Levin personally. I think he's incredibly unhelpful to the country. I don't think he's brought any voters to the Republican party. I think he pushes people away from the party. But it's not up to me. Then there's people on the other sides of issues that I also should think have no say because they're crazy. They're crazy the other way. But again, it's not up to me. The president, I think, would so great about him because he's willing to have conversations with people. Does he act on everything that people tell him? No. Sometimes he might be more aligned with that sometimes he might be more aligned with the way you think. But he's the president for everybody. He's focused on doing, in his opinion, what's best for the American people. That's his focus. We hit the fun part of just being cheerleaders on the sidelines for wherever the hell we believe and I want to do. That rides, the Trump experiments gone in two years. I think we're all going to miss it. So I encourage you, even if you disagree with him on something, even if you don't like what he's doing, I know you still love him personally. Just remember that. Two years from now, he's gone and we're going to miss him and we're going to be complaining that the whole process is so fucking boring again because everybody before Trump was so fucking boring. Unless it gets way more exciting in a bad way, which I'm against. Who knows? We'll find out in two years. I really appreciate your breaking the embargo and coming to see me. It was great to see you. Talk our