The Joe Rogan experience. You're just used to things that are less comfortable than most of the things. Because he and you are perspective. But I get it. But this ice hotel, my friend who stayed, I can't remember who told me they stayed in it. They did it one night just to say they did it. They were at their kids too. I think they were right. They were right. I think they were right. I know David. Yeah, he's great. Yeah, he's strong. For him and Iso tells, like, a normal thing. He probably just lay there on the ice the whole time just to see if he's just a strange person, right? That's strange and powerful at the same time. Like a very unusual human being. Dude, I met with him years ago now because he was, did you see his like real or magic documentary? No. It's really good. I would totally encourage you to watch it. But basically, it's all these like sort of magic tricks except they aren't actually tricks. They're just like, I'm not a curse right? Yeah. He's fucked up things that he does that people assume must be magic, but aren't like he puts an ice pick through his hand. I put an ice pick through his arm. Oh, whether you know, that's like the same kind of like. You're made me. Yeah, exactly. I'm like, come on, man. What are we doing here? Exactly. That was exactly. And you're like, you're like, you hope it's a trick. Hey guys, yeah. Look at you. Dude, he bought me an iPhone right randomly. He was one of those classic things. He, I forget. Yeah, so I met him in New York for the same for real magic. Because he was talking about maybe doing a climbing thing. And I was totally into teaching him how to climb the outside of a building basically. Because there's one of those things that people would assume there's a trick to it. But in some ways, it's actually easier just to learn how to do it well enough that you can just do it rather than do a trick. You know what I mean? Because that's kind of the whole thing with the ice pick is people assume there must be a trick to it. But you actually just do this crazy thing. You just learn how to do it right. Right. And so I went climbing with him a few times and he like, you know, gave me two around town and chat and stuff. I don't know. I totally ended his whole scene. I was like, such mind over matter. You know, I was like, wow, he has got a strong mind for just like making himself do things that other people would think are impossible. Slash. Yeah, it's just mostly his mind, mostly the ability to deal with uncomfortable feelings. Yeah. Like the ice pick through the arm. Like we had to stop because I hit a nerve and then we did it again. So it hit a nerve and then there was one point in time where after we did it, he was concerned that maybe blood was pooling up in a weird way. So he had our medic look at it. So he stopped. We stopped twice, right? We stopped once and I put it back in again and then we go all the way through and then after it came out, we had to stop again and then one of our guys had to look at it because it was just bleeding in a weird way. He was worried that was creating a hematoma. It could be. Oh, my God. Yeah. If you ever watched the show, you know, real magic, whatever it is, it's really good. But in one of them, like he puts the ice pick through his hand and then he pulls it out and he's like, look, see, it's fine. And it's like, and it looks totally fine. Like it's not bleeding. You know, it's because your hand is so elastic or whatever. But I asked him about it. You know, I was like, oh, what's the deal with that? Because he pull out, you know, it's like, is it a trick? And he's like, no, you pull it out and as long as you're holding your hand above your heart, it doesn't bleed for a little bit. He's like, boom, you put your hand down. Obviously it bleeds because you have fucking a hole through your hand. I was like, oh, Jesus. It's like, that's not a bunch of a trick. That's messed up. So one of the things that he showed us was there was a guy that was famous back in the day for putting swords through his body. The guy would run the whole way through the whole way through the narrow story. Yeah. A small, but they got progressively larger. I still got progressively better. Is that how we died? Do you remember Jamie? I feel like that's how it ended up going. You know, hockey. Yeah, that's a good guy. I think or sneeze halfway through and is like, lacerated. I actually made his way to like a broadsword size. It was really weird to see though because there's video of this guy. And there's photos. Video? Is there video? I got video of a guy. Yeah, this guy slid like right through his organs. Oh, Jesus. Yeah. So look at this. Oh, Jesus. I mean, they just puncture his lung with a fucking sword. I mean, this is not a trick. This is when you watch action movies and people get shot or stabbed a bunch of times. And you're like, that's so unrealistic. He didn't like when you watch John Wick, you know, and he gets shot like 27 times. Like apparently people can actually take quite a beating and just keep going. Or they can get one. Oh, they're going right to this. Right to his fucking. Dude. Oh, my goodness. And look how he just sat sits there. And I guess who's his doctor who's like good enough to poke a sword strum? Is that really a doctor? Well, but he must be a like he'd be an incredible maybe he works in a deli. You know, like a really really good like me. Did you say what he uses? Now, what are the things on its forearms, by the way? Oh, he's so he now he's going into an X-ray machine to make sure that this guy had scars all over his body from the times that he did this. Dude. Yeah, yikes. That's a fucking fairly thick. Laged. Like definitely bigger than a pencil that the doctor's examined in it. Looks good. And now he's going to eat except it's all going to fall out the hole. Yeah, it's going to score it out. That's a hard looking man. Imagine having a conversation with that dude. I bet he is a very weird way of looking at things. Dude. You tried it 36. I got a little. Well, there you go. You look like he was 50 already. Let's fill the holes. We're not painful. That is. It's kind of painful as fuck. Yeah, you're just. How could it not be? Yeah, yeah. Fucking piercing your ears painful. I've never freeze my ear. Too afraid. That's hilarious. Too afraid. I'm not. You're here. Well, no, I just don't want to hold him right here. So did he die from that, Jamie? Double checking on how he died. Yeah. You need like a team of researchers that you're just like pulling up a like, yeah, checking back. I know. It's all Jamie one handed Googling. Yeah, it wasn't. He moved to Switzerland and was granted a license to perform without the ability to speak to the public. I don't know. That sounds strange. A license to perform without the ability to. Oh, maybe like if you performed, you had to talk to people. They had mimes back then. No, no. Maybe you had a break, Carrick. I don't know. You're mad at you. But that seems like so maybe he couldn't say he got, he was like, ow, it hurts. And they're like, I don't know. Like, this is so silly to even have to be fair. The act is less inspiring if the guy screams and paying the whole time. Because then you want to watch. Right. Yeah. I mean, the same guy doing the same thing, screaming like, like he's being tortured. That would be so. You're going to be the same for David Blaine. Like when you watch the David stuff, it's like, if you were putting an ice pick through his arm and he was just great. Like if he was just sobbing the whole time, you'd be like, I don't want to watch this. I wouldn't do it. It's like a stop. It says in 1948, he was alleged. He was instructed by voices to eat a steel needle. And two days later, it was surgically removed. I don't know. I think he got cocky. It's very sad that he might have some weird things going on. Yeah. He was probably trying to tell himself and couldn't believe he kept surviving. Yeah, he was laying on a bed. They didn't think, I guess they didn't know he was dead. And then they finally got a doctor to check him. Turns out he'd already been dead for a day. Yeah. It sounds a little. Jesus Christ. We need like three more research interns. Like you've been in his whole scene in Spas Lake. Yeah, because they're like, wait, none of that makes any sense. And this was because of swallowing a needle. Said he had, he thought he had guardian angels. He said he was telepathic. He could heal people. Yeah. Yeah. And heal himself very well. Or maybe he did. That's how he survived. Somebody just, you know, being impaled so many times. I guess you can just do it though. It can be done, you know, because they're fairly small holes, although they do go through the length of your entire body. It's, I mean, you just think you didn't. I think that's part of what that video was, was improving the doctors that it wasn't all fake. And that's because that's what it says. He proved to zeric doctors that it wasn't, his act wasn't based on fake or. Why don't you get something comfortable? Just talking about this. I'm so, I'm breathing heavy. I'm like, whoa, maybe you need to practice a little bit. You have somebody start putting needles through like little parts of your arm, you know? Like, there's just something weird about people that are willingly hurting themselves and causing themselves pain. No, I kind of agree with that. I do. I do find it slightly. But David, very well adjusted man. Very well adjusted. Very friendly, you know, super high sky. And his car tricks are legitimately. Dude, dude, so fun fact about his car tricks. I don't know if you'd be. So he, he took me to lunch once and like did a whole thing in car tricks. And I was totally, I love magic. And I think it's cool. And you know, I like, obviously they're all tricks, but I was like, this is incredible. The execution is incredible. I was totally into it. I was super impressed. And then at the time I was dating this girl in New York, really briefly. And, and a couple of days later, we all went into the climate gym together. Cause like I said, I was kind of encouraging him to like do some, some climate thing. And he then we went to lunch again. And he basically did the same set of car tricks for this girl that I was dating, but having already climbed for like an hour or two. And it was funny because his execution in the car tricks was noticeably worse for me. Like, you know, I could tell that he was like doing all his tricks worse. Once his arms were like totally wrecked from climbing for two hours. Like basically his fingers and his forearms are totally wrecked. And that actually made me appreciate how difficult the tricks are even more. Cause I was like, Oh, wow. Like if your fingertips hurt and your muscles are wrecked and it's hard for you to hold your arms steady, then it's like very hard to fan the deck, you know, evenly into like pit cards properly. And it made me appreciate just how much skill is involved in what he was doing. I was like, dude, it's pretty cool. You know, basically to see somebody do something at their peak. And then when they're also totally wrecked and then to see kind of the overlap, you're like, oh, this is actually quite hard. Like what he's doing is, is, is a challenge. You know what it's like? He's like, he's got the fine motor skills that we have for tying our own shoes. Totally, but for a deck of cards. Yeah. When he can just cut to the 27th card or whatever, you know, and he's like, let me just cut this deck and he's like, oh, there's card number 24. And you're like, really can do that. Yeah, we've done it so many times that he has that, you know that, cause there is that feeling that you have when you tie your shoe, where your hands just communicate so fluidly. You know, like that's like what people strive for in jujitsu. Jujitsu, you strive. Like that's actually what my, like coach Eddie Bravo, he uses that as an example. That when you tie your shoe, you don't think about tying your shoe. You just tie your shoe. And in a certain situation, you'll flow into a technique, like a technique will happen and it'll happen. And cause you, your repetitions, you've hit it so many times, it'll just be so fluid. And so for David, it's got to be like that, but with like the very tips of his fingers. For somebody like me, it would, you know, very callous. I can't even imagine feeling anything that I'm like, on a seat, decks of cards, I just like crumpled them all together. I'm just shove them. Like is it shuffle? You know, like I can't even manipulate them that well. Yeah, I would imagine right? Like your hands have to be like super rough, right? Yeah, normally pretty rough. And then also just really callous on the tip. So I mean, often, you know, I can pick up like hot things and like not really notice it quite the same way. Or you can take that course. I mean, if you're grabbing like grabbing a very coarse rock all the times, you have to wind up with really callous fingertips. Of course. Yeah. But the so in something like manipulating the edge of a card, it's like, I can't even imagine it feeling it. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free. Only on Spotify, watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience. On Spotify, you can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.