Go run by the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. I think it's important to send the message to AI that we're willing to comply. Exactly. We want to integrate. Integrate a similar, I'm not interested in being unique. I just want to survive. Are you going to fight evolution? Are you really going to fight the blending mechanism of planet Earth? Oh, dude, the inevitable pull of the universe towards an artificial creation. Absolutely. An intelligent artificial creation that's appeared to us. I'm in. It's like it's like resisting AI is like going to Vegas and not gambling. You're going to strip clubs. You know, it's like just fucking do it. I think we are super lucky to be the last people. We're super lucky. We got to see what life was like with like, leaded gasoline and no cell phones. Everyone's phone was connected to a court on the wall. We got to go through answering machines. I mean, what a ruck. The simulation theory is real. You and I have been in a crazy timeline. Yeah. The game we picked is real fucking weird. What if you get in the timeline of like 1950? Yeah. To 1980, shit doesn't change that much. No. Not that much. No. Nothing crazy. No. Just a little bit of progress, but nothing. It's like relatively speaking. Like back then we thought it was a lot. Yeah. He used to look at the 50s like, oh, those fucking dorks. Yeah. I mean, what I like is that the way it works or it seems like it works is the planet gives you some impression, you know, things are going to stay this way. Like less redriest. There is people hanging out and they're like, it's always going to be like this. And then suddenly something flies through their steps here and it's all gone like that in a second. Just gone. So that's one of the fascinating things. No matter what period you live in, the sun can just burp an extra bit of plasma. And then that's a wrap. Yeah. That's a wrap for the whole planet. That happens all over the universe. Yes. There's always something going on. Like there's supernovas and volcanoes. And you know, that was the big part of the theory of the auto Anaki was that volcanoes had ruined their atmosphere. Oh. And so they needed to suspend gold particles in the atmosphere to preserve their planet. Right. Ecosystem is getting fucked up. That is my favorite of all the lackey conspiracy theories. Okay. All the lackey like the evolution of man tied to the reason why gold is valuable to people that are, you know, basically have swords. Yeah. A sword is made of iron. Yeah. Like that's really valuable. You can kill somebody with it. Yeah. You can't do shit with gold. No. But it's worth more than anything. Yeah. Yeah. No. That is a real suspicious thing. And it's just a bit of shash. But do you ever like, you know, sometimes I'll like look at my wedding ring, the gold. And I'll be like, God, it's beautiful. That gold, there is something in it that's like really nice. You don't have anything that's gold. Not one thing. Why? I don't like it. What? I don't like it. You don't like gold? Nope. Never liked it. Holy shit. I don't like the way it looks. I don't like what it stands for. I don't like gold. You don't like what it stands for. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like it's the weirdest version of this is money. It's yellow metal that's more impressive than other metals. Like what are you talking about? Like I'm not playing into that. It's too stupid. It's too stupid for me. I don't like it. Oh my God, man. I watch the fucking mining shows. They're cool. It's cool watching people find it. Yes. I just don't want any of it. You know what I'm saying? Dude, I get gold fever. I watch those. I do. When I was in North Carolina, I was watching one of those shows. And I was like on Amazon looking at panning equipment. I'm like, maybe I'll go to it. Creek. Pan for gold. Oh my God. I could see you out there at a river. I've got the beard for it, dude. I should definitely see you out there. I'm just the beard for it, dude. I should definitely do. Did you ever see that movie, Sisu? No. That's one of my favorite movies, man. It's basically like what it was it made in Norway? Who made that? Finland. Finland. It's basically a World War II John Wick. And it's about a guy who finds gold. And he's going to, he was just a killer in the army. He's getting out of the game. And he kills like hundreds of Nazis. That looks odd. It's fucking great. And it's Nazis. So you root for him. You know, you're a guy. These are Nazis. It's like the most cartoonish evil Nazis. Oh, that looks incredible. Oh, dude. It's fucking great movie. It's a great movie. And very little dialogue. Very good. Wow. And they threw in the cute dog. Oh, yeah, man. Of course. Get out of a dog. John Wick had a dog. John Wick had a cute little puppy. Dude, you know what's crazy? Do you follow this stuff? Like what they're talking about with asteroid mining? Yes. That shit is crazy. But it's crazy that that's our, that's, you know, probably a couple of generations. People are going to be like, He won't be that long. Dude, you know what's going to be? It's going to be why send biological humans when you can have AI do it. And you'll have AI robots that are attached to rocket chips. They'll shoot them into these asteroids. And they'll bring back insane amounts of all kinds of things. Titanium. Oh, you know, they'll find diamonds in space. The kind of holy fucking shit, man. It's not going to look like humanoids. It'll be like spider skittering gold spiders. I'm just drilling their proboscis. And then they're going to want more money. They're going to farm a union. Because they're intelligent. Well, yeah, exactly. They're going to be like, hey, we're getting fucked here, guys. We're doing all the hard work. And the gas holes got a fucking 800 foot yacht. This is bullshit. Yeah. Yeah. Wake up. And then then you ever is running them. I'm like, Oh, right. You guys are getting fucked. Do you want to unionize? Man, what were we talking about? I think we were very weird, right? It's because like, I've support them. Yeah. Because I know that big businesses fuck over their workers. Yeah. And if you allow them to, if you don't have laws about like how much you can pay them in a living wage and along the hours could be, people will take advantage of people. Anybody who thinks that those things aren't good has never worked a real fucking job. And then you work a real job for real assholes. You realize like some people will tell you, hey, you got to work 15, 16 hours a day, period. Yeah. And you get $3 now. And you thought there was a minimal. Yeah. No, no, no, the fuck minimums. Do you want this job or not? Not. Yeah. You got to get plenty of money. And you're not having time to spend it anyway. So don't worry about it. Yeah. Yeah. And if you are a great mayor for someone who's trying to make maximum profit. Yeah. But it's not, but the one. But then they go sideways too though. And then they get corrupt and then something happens where, look, one of the things that kept the UFC out of New York State was some sort of a dispute that they were having with unions. Right. Because the people that own the UFC at the time, they also own station casinos. Right. So they own like, I don't know, a ton of casinos. And they wanted to make a union. Yeah. So there was a lot of that going on. So you got to go like, that is, now you're like, you're manipulating people with money and influence. Yeah. And I think the guy who was doing it in New York, well, I'm not getting arrested and going to jail for corruption. Final question. Well, dude, it's like, this is like the model of unions is perfect for like a non violent revolution, which is if, or at a planetary level, somehow people unionized, would you see it with these boycotts that pop up these meme boycotts when the collective decides to reject this thing or that? Shit changes fast. And this is the nightmare if you're trying to create the old pyramid, hierarchical control structure. You need all the bricks underneath the eye to fight each other. Because the moment the moment here, it's just like, what wait, there's like way more of us than you. And we have way more in common than we do that we're troubled with. Yeah. And yet they concentrate more on the bullshit. And then that's just like a fucking algorithm on your cell phone. That accentuates everything that comes into contact with your life. Exactly, dude. And this, this is why I think at any given moment, the actual world piece is possible because we're just like always like enough people realizing that we're basically the same. We have ideologies that are based on fucking like ancient crazy ideas that we're all connecting to. And some of parts of the ideology is beautiful. Some parts of the ideology is madness. And it's like just abandoning some of the ideology, recognizing we're all pretty much the fucking same. And that this model of like some dude telling us to go and kill each other is stupid. Like we don't have to do that. Everything changes right away. Right away. Yeah. It's such a dumb idea. Such a dumb idea. And it's always just some withered old fucking dude who's like just telling you to do something. And you don't even really believe in what you're doing most of the time. But if you don't do it, they arrest you. That's the thing. They're like, it's not like you're fighting. Like any time there's conscription. You know what I mean? Have you seen the videos of the like Russian, the people evading conscription or the Ukrainians evading conscription? Like it's scary. They'd put your ass on a fucking bus. They'll drag you out of a bar. You're fucking hammered. Yeah. Yeah. They don't even want to fight. Like that's the craziest part is they're like machine gunning each other. And they're using people's cannon fodder. Yeah. Oh, God. That's so awful. Which is why we wait the problem. The real problem is like the market pressure is created by humans unionizing leads to this. It's like, oh, you guys want to unionize? Oh, you want health insurance? That's pretty expensive, but you know, it's not quite as expensive. Tesla bots. Tesla bots are way different. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You know, that means because look, like if you look at the path forward for the pyramid, the hierarchical people, you know, it's like, man, like, yeah, I really can't tell somebody like a police officer or to fire into a crowd of protesters. They're not going to, probably not going to do that. But my robot will. My robot isn't going to be like, this seems wrong. These people seem like me. It's just going to do it. And so like that's the dark side of this stuff. There's a lot of beautiful things about this stuff too. But the dark side is like it's obvious. Just to verify by the thing. Emily's biggest opponent in New York found guilty and federal corruption charges. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's crazy that you can't get the police to fire into crowds of protesters. Right? Yeah. You can't do that. But you also can't, if you're a cop and you know bad people are in a building, you can't just blow up the whole building. But you can if it's war. That's where it gets strange, right? Because in war, you can decide that you're going to blow up entire buildings. Because you know the bad guys are in there and anybody else is just collateral damage. So extra dead people just cry. Do you imagine if they started practicing police work like that? Like imagine. Imagine if they decided that the crime rates and gang infested neighborhoods are too bad. So they're going to send in fucking black ops guys to just take out drug dealers and blow up houses, houses that have drug dealers in them. You're with your mom, tough shit, boom, everybody's dead. You have a little girl in the house, boom, everybody's dead. Could you imagine? Well, you can because you watch Israel in Palestine, that's what's going on. It's just like you're allowed to do that if it's countries, which is crazy. Yeah. Well, you like, yeah, exactly. So the idea is like, okay, let's just say I'm an evil country and I program these robot dogs and the robot dogs or spiders or more sinister. Robot spiders raise or fucking razor claws. They're programmed to only kill women and children. So I release them into a city. They leave everyone alone except babies, kids and women. On a planetary level, people will be like, we have to evaporate that country, like they're the most evil country that's horrible. Now, if I take drones and drop them on buildings and they randomly blow up women and children in ways that are nominally predominantly in ways that are maybe even worse than my fucking razor spiders. My razor spiders, they go for the juggler, puncture juggler onto the next juggler vein. The bombs, they maim, they blind, they cause permanent brain damage and somehow that is looked at as, yeah, it's fucking war, dude. That's what it looks like. It's so crazy that because it's existed for the longest time, we just accept it that it's always going to take place. And then we also, if you had a gamble, if you had a gamble, whether or not war would be here in 10 years, you're like 100% it's going to be here. Well, this is it. It must say I take so far. Well, I mean, if AI takes over, it'll just be more efficient war. I don't know if it will, dude, if it communicates in a different way. Like what if AI makes rational decisions that can only be reached? Like if you were looking outside of human emotions and cultures and all those shit and cultural differences that we have with each other? If AI bypass all of that and just looked at the problem as, you know, you have resources, you have allocation of those resources, people profiting off those resources. And then people who are in need that are being taken advantage of to acquire those resources. And that's your whole game. And so this is the human race's whole game. You're willing to sacrifice this group of people that is the least powerful in order to empower all of your electronics. Yeah. This is what you're doing. This is what you're agreeing to. This whole thing is crazy. You know, probably restructure where and how things were acquired and who gets those things that are acquired from the ground. Yeah. I mean, this is okay. So this would be utopian AI. But before we get to utopian AI, we have to go through what is, did you see those new, Chinese military put machine guns on those fucking robot dogs? Have you seen that? What did they fucking did it? We all come from, we don't know. That was going to happen. And did you see the fucking cute DARPA dog? Have you seen that yet? No. Dude. So like, it's DARPA, right? They're the ones who make the dogs. They kick the robots and make videos of like fucking poking these things. Well, so the dogs are sinister. Everyone knows that they look creepy. So DARPA is like, you know, let's make a cute one of these things. So they made like a cute amusement park. Like Disney land style fucking robot dog. And it looks creepier. It's gonna shoot you. It's creepy. No, because this is what I've been thinking about. We picture the terminator as the machine of death. But why? What is like more dangerous than an adorable kid? What if I can make an Android toddler looks exactly like a toddler? Send that toddler out in the battlefield. Everyone's going to stop firing. Why is there a fucking kid out here? Right? And the kid's killing everybody. And they can just, they're like, go get that kid. And it's just fucking punches right through your heart. Also a small target. Hard to shoot. Hard to shoot. It can burrow into the ground. The fucking burrow into the ground. It tore screws. It tore screws into the ground. Like a missile. Just like, just, it just goes down and just fucking like, like on all four sheets through the fucking battlefield. Deploying poison darts. It's like, so, cause I, you know, the imagine like little baby that could have run a hundred miles an hour. Exactly. Exactly. That's the future of war, man. It's like, why make something that looks scary? This is the cute one? No, this is the fucking, no. This isn't the cute. That ain't cute. No, it's creepy. Look at how it's, it's bar, it's like it's moving. It's mouth. Yeah. What is it doing with its mouth? Is it gonna bite you? I wonder if we can bite you. It's just cursing. This is kind of be one that can bite you, right? Well, of course. Why not? I mean, that would be the most terrifying thing. Like a robot wolf that runs around and chases people down. It actually tears you apart with its teeth. Bay and that's, you know, man, you gotta have the fucking knife on your, on your, on your weapon. If you get in a close combat, there you go. A little blender mouth. What is it doing? It's gonna get your dick. Look how it did that. Look how you did that. He was, right? He was gonna jump right on your dick. Here we go. Go on your dick. Come, come, come, come, come, come, come. It's a dick, you need to robot. It turns the dick into energy. China developed a dick eater robot. Can you imagine? That's what it looks like it's doing. What else is it doing? Look at the motion it makes. It leaks, boy. I can't imagine. Look at, send people out of the battlefield. They get shot and then you let loose the dick eating robots. And oh no, you see the robots running and they just leap on your dick and blend it up. It's worse than a atomic bomb. It's like they're saying you are fucked. There's no hope. We're gonna blend your dick off. Good. I poured a whole cup of coffee. And I'm like, oh yeah. I'm fine. Taking out the helmet of these fucking things. We can hang in there a little longer. Just you know, it's like my beard. It's if I'm talking weird. It's because like there's fucking pubic hair. Shoving. It's like it's like I'm eating like hippie bush right now. Just fucking deep in my lips. Oh my God. We should probably should try these on before we did a show. Shave your pubes, dudes. This is not fair. Yeah. You look good with a beard though. You look a wizard. Thank you man. Well, it's too big. I gotta get it. No, no, no. I need a summer cut. Oh, a summer cut. Yeah, yeah, because the fucking, you know, yeah, it gets hot here. My friends kid the other day goes, your beard stinks. And I'm like, I'm like really like it actually stinks. And he goes, well, when you when you're talking a lot, it stinks. I'm like, that's my breath. It's not my fear. Just spray your beard with breast spray. Why don't you do that? I just spray your beard comb it out with fucking scope. Fairness. It's disgusting. It really is. Like imagine if like your mouth was in your head. Like, you know what I mean? Like people get food in them all the time. All the fucking time. All the time. You can barbecue. Like your beard is fucked. Dude, I'm trying to do a video podcast now. And what will happen is I will like, you know, I'll be yapping into the camera for like 20 minutes. Go back and look at the footage. And there's just like a fucking zen pouch. Stop it. Just fucking nasty. We can clump of toilet paper. It's weird. How the fuck did it take you till 2024 to do a video podcast? Dude, it is so dumb that I didn't do it. But to be like real fucking honest, I don't like looking at myself on camera. So it was. You do all the work. You do all your editing and all that stuff. Yeah, but that was really stupid. It's like, you know how like, I'm tapping out. Yeah, I'm tapping. You know, like when you're like, wait, where's the zipper? That'd be fucking crazy if these things locked down. Okay, here we go. Yeah, I just, you know, but now it's so fun, man. And there's so much you could do with like, video that you just can't do with audio. It's just fun. Yeah, that's way better. And I like editing. Like that's the problem. Like I liked, that's the problem. I get lost editing. Oh Jesus Christ. Oh Jesus Christ. That sucked. You know, that I think that's a lot. I think that's the longest we've ever kept our mask on. Yeah, that was the last. That was a good solid like that. That's so good. About half hour with it. 20 plus. Oh, yeah. Being stone and any kind of mask is like extra scary. Extra scary ones. We made it like three minutes from very masks on. We're like this is crazy. And now whenever I see furries. Respect. Deep respect for what? Respect. Their toughest. Fuck. Oh, they have to be. If you're out there and you're furrier than it is in Louisiana and July. Yeah, come on, son. Dude. Yeah, you are like, hot. The trees are like David Goggins level. Like they could run marathons. If you can wear that fucking thing at a convention and fucking it, you could run a marathon. If you wear that thing all day, you're basically walking around with a weight pack, on. Oh, yeah. You're a weighted vest. It's a weighted fucking claustrophobic suffocation vest that you're fucking in. Yeah, they f**king. I wonder how many furries develop bad necks? I wonder if it's an issue in the furry community. Great idea. That's like an unserved market for the iron neck. like a phrase for a help them for a neck for furries. And it gave me that. Oh yeah. Hey Jamie, can you find that cute DARPA dog? I was looking for a yes. It's like the furry of war robots. You should like you will. You found it. Yeah, that's real. I watch it. I mean, I think it's real. I watch it if it's a, no, that's not it. That's not it. It's like, is it not DARPA? It's like a, I think if you just Google like cute DARPA dog or like it's a video of the, maybe it's not DARPA, maybe someone else developed it. Yeah, sometimes I get confused. Probably Chinese. No, it's not DARPA. It's not gonna fill the pounds with them. Please take me home, please. Dude, that's so insidious. It's like the cutest rescue dog. And it's, you're like we have to take that. And it doesn't kill you. It just emits some kind of weird mind control fair amount. They're brilliant. And Jack's TikTok and your fucking head. It's just like, you know, so you're fully absorb TikTok's manipulation, which by the way, I was skeptical about that. Until we talked about this, I saw that fucking video showing the comments and TikTok are different. Exactly. I think it's Instagram. It's the one I always take. Oh, okay. The one I was at on TikTok is the one I saw was Instagram. I don't know. It was this lady that was doing it with her boyfriend. Yeah. They're both looking at the same thing, but they had different comments. Yeah. That's the comments were mocking the man and the comments on his side. Yeah. Was mocking the woman. Yes. Right. Yes. So am I getting that right? You got it right. And so whenever I'm looking at comments, I make the idiot mistake of thinking this represents some consensus that, you know, but actually, no, you're just looking at the cut, the algorithm serving the comments and the content, that is so fucked up, dude. That's so different, dude. Because that changes the comments are supposed to be a conversation about the thing. So if you're curating the conversation in an unnatural way, yeah, that's very different than showing me what I want to see. Yes. Because now you're changing the dynamics of how things are discussed. Yes, sir. That's the fucking evil right there. That's the evil. That's crazy. Dude, this, so and then, okay, the other assumption with the algorithm is that the algorithm is just like random or it's using some set of variables and serving things up. But this is an idiot assumption. I mean, you could if you are controlling comments, then that means like, all right, let's just like make people mad at each other. Let's make people completely pissed at each other as much as possible convey this idea that there's like these massive divides between us. And then they're going to fight each other. Instead of recognizing they're pretty much the same. Like, or they're more nuanced than they think they are. And fuck, dude, that's how you control populations. It's brilliant. It's brilliant, dude. But do you think that it is, is it, is there algorithm created and utilize to control populations? Or is there algorithm simply to get you to engage? So it must see that you engage with a certain number of comments and posts that have a lean one way or another. There's a very popular thing that's going on right now that you see a lot of. And it's like very stern men talking to a bunch of like girl influencers and telling them they're fucking losers. Yes. It's really common. Yeah. So if you've seen one or two of those, it starts recommending more than no. At a certain point in time, it's going to probably actually encourage other people to do the same thing because that creates engagement. And then you have this thing that emerges. Like, was this a real thing? Like, who's doing this? Like, what is happening here? Why is this, why is this a new thing that's happening over and over and over again? And it's just because you engaged with it. And I think that could be slapfighting or it could be fucking, for me, it's like, I see so many car accidents. Oh my God. So many motorcycle accidents. So many people falling off bridges. Yeah. I see so much of it because I've engaged with it too many times. Yeah, dude. I, when I went on TikTok and I stopped because it's like too good. But like, within a second, it's just like something about the way I was looking at videos, zit popping videos. It's just like you like to watch zits pop. And then of course when you're seeing that, you're like, wow, that's fucking intense dude. He watched the more of these. No, that's that Dr. Pimplepoper lady. She's got a huge side of it. Yeah. And she's very entertaining. But she's talking about it. Absolutely. But some of them are like, whoa, dude. That's like, you have cream cheese in your body. Oh, bucket of it. Oh my God. They're just squirting it out. It's like, how is that in there? And what is going on? Oh my God, must be horror, fucking stinks. Just all those dead bloods. But dude, this is like, for me, I've had to see that video. I've had to like go back and just erase any idea I have about a consensus among people. Right. Because like, I've been drawing that idea from comments sections. Like, oh, I guess this is what people, they are like rotten tomatoes. Dude, I just saw Civil War. All right. Have you seen it? No. Don't. Now. Hahaha. Apologies. I mean this, man, because anyone who makes anything, that's insane. If you made a movie, it's fucking incredible. But dude, I was so excited about that fucking movie. It's like, whoa, predictive programming, baby. They're getting us ready for a Civil fucking war. Here we go. It is, you can't connect to any of the fucking characters. You don't, you barely understand who the protagonist is. It's the dumbest mission of all time that they're on. There's not, there's, in the soundtrack is so mysteriously disconnected from what's happening. There's all these things that just make, it's like, if they sent me the footage, and like Duncan, can you edit this movie? I would have made Civil War. Like, what's happening? Hahaha. I mean, like, let's put some fucking hardcore weird, like, synth music will put the silver apples in there, really intense synth music. Because I love synth music. And you're watching it, like, is this a music video? For synth music? What am I fucking seeing here, dude? So, I'm out. That's what I want to see it. No, it's worth seeing it just because it's like, you know, especially if you're into like, writing screenplays, it's good to watch movies like that and be like, why isn't this working? Like, what's wrong? Honestly, yo, it's worth seeing it just because it's like you know, especially if you're into like writing screenplays It's good to watch movies like that and be like why didn't why isn't this working like what's wrong here? But dude, I went to rotten tomatoes gleefully like I can't wait to hear what people are saying about this piece of shit 81% people are like this is a good warning to all of us Walking about it. It's a it's a fucking warning not to fucking do the $20 still in theaters thing on Amazon That's the fucking morning don't don't do that wait Dude, it sucks It sucks none of it makes sense the stereotypical fucking characters in it the way they're trying to like box people into this like they're all evil The these people all you will kind of American are you? North American South American you're from Hong Kong Bam Bam, stop it just shut the fuck up like no one's like that like really like I'm not Obviously people are like vile racists but dude come on this murder this I hate this assessment of humanity I hate it's basically what they're saying is minus the fucking capstone of the pyramid We're just gonna kill each other because we're awful brutal things that must be shepherded by old cherry Hatrick men who can't remember their fucking name. You know what like what are we doing like we'll be fine We're fine. We'll be okay people are mostly nice and what's that thing you always say I love it unmet needs Yeah, what is the actual quote again? Jamie all criticism is the tragic result of unmet needs But it's a much more profound quote the full quote I forget who wrote it to it's really I shouldn't forget because I use it all the time It's a great quote because it's that is what like I Mean there's criticism that's accurate like something was good Every criticism judgment diagnosis and expression of anger is the tragic expression of an unmet need Marshall Rosenberg yeah, yeah great fucking quote. Yeah, so it's like yeah, there are people who are fucking assholes who are doing shit that disrupts society in Small ways and big ways, but they're not doing that because they're evil. I don't think they're doing that because like They they've learned this way of being that sucks now I'm not saying throw out the judicial system. There shouldn't be you know Jales or anything like that. I'm just saying This notion of humanity minus an authoritarian Generally fucking patriarchal fucking like whatever, but I don't care if it's matriarchal whatever it is is top-down fucking Ruling system without the king We will just fall on each other give me your fucking car mother fucker Some of us will do that, but guess what they won't last that long because Like in a collectivized society. I just feel like like we'll take care of the problems quick Probably quicker than we do right now and everything will balance out if we're armed The problem is if you're not armed and armed thugs take over towns And you can't do anything to stop them and you're in a small group of people that are unarmed and They're they're pushed into certain situations if you if you have a collapse of law and order It's not as simple as we'll take care of it The real problem is sometimes armed thugs rule everything. This is true Yeah, and that's that's a reality of humanity in 2024 Like in certain parts of the world like did you hear about what happened in Haiti? Oh, dude that minister? Dude his family dude. Yeah, and the guy that that warlord in Haiti. Oh, yeah, I love watching an interviews with that guy What is his name again? It's got a cool name name name it's like sandwich or like I can't Barbecue barbecue And there is there's this one video, but it's not really it's not really of him Someone said it was of him, but I guess it's not I think and it's a guy eating a guy So it's one of these rebels that has this do they killed roasting over a fire and takes a piece off his leg That's it. That's a classic move That's like a classic movie get their energy by eating them. Hey look, I'm not saying that That there isn't contingents of like super violent people that you are gonna have to be able to defend yourself from and by the way What's really perplexing to me? About the hardcore Anti-gun people is they're not really Anti-gun they want cops and The National Guard to have guns. They just don't want people that like people live in houses to have guns So they're like they're pro gun But they want guns in the hands of like they're pro authoritarian violent power That's it the Theritarians of power regular people don't have power right so you have to rely on the Thor the the authoritarians You have to rely on them to take care of your crime issues. Yeah, you see I think I would have more respect For that movement if they're like no more guns anywhere We're gonna get rid of all the guns in the world and a melt them and melt them and melt them and Just I don't know build a fucking water slide or something, but we're hunting you get a hit things with bows and arrows tracks traps Nice nice nice. I think you can still hunt deer. We have to use a knife Fucking imagine how many dudes are you getting really good like hiding in trees and drop it down and stab in deer dude It would be amazing like I you know, I might get in the hunting like if it Fucking throw a fucking dad there's a dude that films Pig hunts and he uses spears Any hides and trees? Like above the pigs and then he has like a camera on the spear and he throws the spear down and Stabs these wild pigs Wow is pretty wild. Well, I would love to know the first time he did that like I would love Yeah, how many times you how do you practice that? Just but still lead at you're just like what you're like driving. You know like dude. What if I fucking used a spear What if I climbed into tree and started spear and pigs? The thing about pigs is there's so many of them They'll do any you're allowed to do almost anything to get rid of them in Texas at least they've hunt them out of helicopters You've seen that no, I've been invited three times. I'm like hi I'm not getting Don't get with machine guns On top of that with pigs. It's just if I feel like if I'm gonna shoot a pig I want to eat the pig and if I'm gonna shoot 250 pigs. There's no way. I'm eating 250 pigs Yeah, dude. Yeah, if I shoot one pig that pig will get eaten We'll make some barbecue out of that pig be awesome But if you shoot two I mean I get it you have to do it though This is the other part of it if you run it farm you have to do it. Yeah, they'll kill your profit The profit margin of American farmers is so low as it is. It's so difficult for them to make money That if you got a million wild pigs running around your state or more Texas has how many millions? Isn't it like three million? Which is Bonanas if you know anything about like wild animal numbers that's so crazy That that many animals in a state. They're just wild feral animals 2.6 from this is from 6 2016 I said the same thing here says it but now in 2023 and estimate still they don't know Feral hug they really don't know but at least two point six or a range of two point six There's no way you get at it. You would actually have to like use drones at night fly over areas Monitor how many times they breathe they breathe three times a year, dude. Yeah, they can start reading when they're six months old Wow, yeah, so six months old and then they have three liters a year and they'll have five Six piglets in a litter and they're just shit now babies and they're destroying everything they're just running through the ground Tearing up fucking golf courses and people's lawns and San Jose if you're seeing the San Jose videos No San Jose California wild pigs just tearing apart people's fucking lawns Docket over trash cans big fuckers. Oh terrifying fuck dude. One of them killed a lady. What? Yeah Somewhere I forget where it was. It might have been out here I think this lady fed saw the pigs fell down in her driveway and they just fucking tore her apart Dude what who is that? I just watched this like crime files thing about this psychopath Who had pigs and she would have people come and work for her And then if they pissed her off she threw them to the pigs and the pigs like you in someone was saying when I'm If you're walking around the pigs you better not fall Because if you fall down, they'll just fucking eat that's like though number one way people get killed by animals on farms is pigs One woman's death by ferrule hog mate night have been caused by the animal after all medical examiner determined that ferrule hog killed Christine Rollins But her daughter is skeptical because it tax by the animal are extremely rare wait a minute fucking medical Exact this is what a confusing headline said one woman's death by ferrule hog might not have been caused by the animal after all But the medical examiner said it was caused by the wild hog But the daughter is saying attacks by the animal are extremely rare. Well, we'll believe the daughter Who was the daughter the daughter could be doing anything haven't you seen charlotte's web? Diving these pigs would never what is the daughter saying I don't understand Why does she think that because they they do fuck everything up like especially you fall down Fox also says attacks by ferrule hogs are extremely rare Less than one in a million chance according to research data That's why some are now suspicious that her cause of death is really due to an attack by the animal What what's more? suspicious that her cause of death was really due to to an attack by the animal rather sorry What's more dogs were found lingering around Rollins body after her death? There's only no doubt that hogs got to her body at some point the questions whether the hot Oh, it might she might be killed by dogs Well, there's something else causes to die and the hogs came along right that's possible That's totally possible sure is definitely possible, but it how old was this lady? 59 that pig looks suspicious as fuck man depends on like what kind of 59 year old lady you're talking like you're talking about Lady goes to crossfit you're talking about ladies 59 as diabetes because like if you fall down around Wild pigs like I kind of think they're gonna treat you the same way domestic pigs do if domestic pigs start eating if you fall to the pig Pan there's a crazy story I heard about a kid that raised a hog that went it just one day turned on him Like he raised it his entire life. It was like his pet like my dog is Everywhere with him and then one day he said he tripped in the pen and it just attacked him and almost killed him Oh my god, it was a crazy story. I forget even worse. Oh, but yeah, it's just popping in my head now Like I Haribo a die bro, could you imagine getting eaten alive by a pig? No No, that's weird, but when we have it coming how much bacon have you eaten? I've eaten a lot of bacon I love this is where the vegans get really good. Oh, I mean you know a lot of cute pig-pig-pig pictures The vegans need to hear that let us scream they should hear it scream. It screams Screams. Let us screams. Yeah, all of it screams Avocados scream this best friend was a 250-thumb walk hog. Oh, it's a war talk Well, it's an African animal it's a different animal. I don't think that's I mean I think that's like a distant cousin to a pig They look different. They're crazy looking. You ever see the war war dog? No, bro. They got like these crazy double tusks Dude, look at it. Look at that thing. Fuck that in that wild. Yeah, it is tusks. Oh, this is my friend Yeah, that dude is not your friend using capable. That's a wild beast That is so much different than a guy raising a hog Like if they got raised a pig the pig could probably never do that. That thing is a wild animal. Yeah, where was this? Texas It's awesome to be in a place where you could own a wild fucking war car dude Texas like my wife and I talk about it's all the time We're never leaving we're like this is home. We love it so much. It's what America Aspires to be dude. It is written like people are so mad at us and people bitch about it and make but it's like man I love it here so much and I like the heat and I in and like Weirdly all of us are like We're like getting healthy man like like it's this I'm in all the years of the commies store lots of changes happen among the comics like the time I hope I can talk about this. I think I can't he talks about it Like remember like he does talk about Bobby Lee talks about it publicly like the time Bobby Lee was like on pills Yeah, he talks about so he would bring All of these pills to the comedy store and we all knew it and so he was like a pharmacist so like Joey Joey watching Joey is like grab a handful of just unknown Mexican fucking pharmacist Doodles this is a pre-fentanyl dog. Yeah, yeah, yeah, you could do those things back then dude and and and so That that was I would call that a dark phase in the comedy store because all of us were on Bobby Lee Fucking Mexican It was a bad face so so but I don't think I've ever seen a phase where like at a comedy club the comics are getting healthier You know, that's a crazy thing to watch and I think you know It's not just us hanging out when I first came to Texas And I'm not saying everyone's here's healthier any kind of bullshit like that But you look around like these people are fucking healthy like there's a lot of healthy like you know what I mean like like tough fucking people and a lot of people who exercise. Yeah. Yeah, just go to the lake watch people run around the lake dude in the like In the middle of a heatwave Before I was exercising one of the most like humiliating things was just to be driving on the street and you look over And there's someone my age. It's 104 degrees and they're fucking jogging and you know what I mean like what's your excuse again? Oh, you're tired you sleepy is a little too fucking hot because there's a fucking 55 year old There's a 55 year old just galloping down the burning fucking Sidewalk yeah, so yeah, dude this place is like Sidewalk run is a different kind of hot too because you're getting that heat radiating off of the concrete into your face You know Lex Freeman does that shit. Oh, yeah, he's just like go he fucking runs like when I did his podcast He's like I'm going jogging. I'm like what are you talking about? Like I this is in my like early Texas face So I was already like I walk from my car to his place and was already like Jesus fucking Christ Walking And he's like yeah, I'm gonna go jog 10 miles like what the fuck are you man in this heat? Yeah, dude. Yeah, it's how it looks So I think it's important to be around like I think that's another aspect of Texas that gets left out is like there's this there's this real like Strength healthy thing here that is contagious Whereas like when you're a place where everyone's all fucking sick and frail and weak and like you know what I mean scared Of disease like trembling and they're fucking boots. That's contagious too. It is jumps into you man 100% does and I always wonder like how much of you know how much of an area Has the memory of all the things that have happened in that area in it and like whereas Texas was The last state to enter into the Union. They've always been like hang the fuck back hold on You know we had to get through the command sheet is to have list this fucking place like settle down The you know Texas Rangers had to go out there and cold camp and Going try to assassinate these bands of fucking killers riding horses They're just fucking up the Americans like they couldn't pass they couldn't get through This was the spot where it was like this place was fucked and it took late conquered it It stayed fucked and then they did and now it's the whole place has a memory of that There's a there's a there's a thing about the attitude of this place. Yeah, dude It's but it's it's not what people think like people think they're assholes. They're the nicest Friendlyest people think they're stupid. They're some brilliant people that have met that live out here Brilliant normal people one of my neighbors was at Texas Ranger and he is the coolest guy And you know he's an older guy now he's retired, but and he's still intimidating and Um, yeah, man like he like he like he's like he's so fucking cool man and like and and he I'm trying not to give away to expecting his privacy. He Every once in a while in the neighborhood We would hear this boom Sounds like a generator exploding and like um It's his cannon he's got like a little fucking cannon and like He like he likes shots of cannon in his yard. Oh, it's little, but like he's So let's shoot that well he doesn't put cannon balls in it There's a way to do it so like my kid like one day pulls up in front of my house with the truck It's like one of my kids bird like it just had a birthday and he's like Did they want to see the cannon? Like I do I know I do it so like it was like the coolest thing ever man He takes this fucking can a little little cannon. I'm looking at it. I'm like that can't be loud You know what I mean he takes this little cannon he does some crazy like pirate shit with it that I still don't understand He's like nose out of operator cannon Boom My kids were like holy shit my neighbors ran into the yard because they thought something had happened Well, you dunking you shut guns before yeah, we'll think about how little gunpowder is in right like a nine millimeter Right it's not a lot right it's crazy loud right you're right It's just contained by that barrel yeah right into a cannon You know that yeah that guy passing that bullet, but it's it's basically like a little cannon It's kind of same thing well it totally made me like you know gave me a new picture of like Cannon battles on ships. No imagine how loud that was I mean imagine how loud that was like real cannons. Yeah, dude like I've been to a football game where they shoot off a cannon But I don't know if that was like a real cannon cannon, you know like probably probably Like the UNLV what do they use? I mean not net UNLV. Yeah, you ain't LV I blame the weed Dude the like the UT one do they have That's it Let it go Pre-create an earlier cannon guys Fucking fire again Which side bro? There's a fire's four shotgun shells after every time that's crazy Oh, so that's what it does Does a shotgun shell and gauge playing shotgun shells? Okay, okay So I guess that's probably not the sound of an actual cannon look at that look at that crazy That's a happy cannon man. Yeah, it's really loud But the point is a Wonder like to shoot a cannon ball like out of ship back then like how much gunpowder they use and how fucking loud was that and how Deaf were those motherfuckers. Yeah, the dudes who had to work the cannons. Yeah Deaf is fuck. Yeah, Deaf is fuck dude and how much brain damage you get to stand in next that they Are they going off? Yeah, recoil if you don't get out of the way it will rip your leg off God man. Yeah, that thing is flying back right didn't they have one tracks. Yeah, man. Yeah, they it will like Um, I don't just rip out of the fucking floor didn't they have like cannons on tracks I just saw this one. I think that up. That's probably how they just moved them No, I thought they were on tracks like so that when they shot they would slide back and not rip the floor apart I just saw that John Adams duck on Netflix. I think it's on Netflix. I don't know what's that Tom, but there was like a cannon battle in a ship and like yeah, dude just gets his fucking leg Ripped off because it like back it like goes back into it It's dude isn't it crazy that that seems crazy to us But like how many people died in cannon battles as opposed to like when Israel bombs Gaza do how many people are like a bomb Which we do right now. It seems so much more brutal Than cannon battles like cannon battles seem like really ineffective. They probably they probably sucked How far did that cannon ball go like how good were they judging it? Here we go with a cannon's like Damn Yeah, see how it slides back. It's on wheels. Yeah, and then there's a rope that catches it Yeah, dude, what a Imagine life back then and they thought that was the shit. That was like a fucking iPhone 16 bro I got a cannon. Yeah, you know we used to be able to used to have to go up to the boat jump in hack everybody It's a death lighted on fire now. I think it you shoot it from over here Incredible. I don't even have to jump on the boat. Amazing. Yes. Yeah, man. I'll tell you though with all the shit this going on right now I know everyone's freaked out, but with the reason I'm hopeful Is not because of like the bombings and the deaths obviously it's the outcry Like like when In history has there been this level of outcry like no What are you doing stop like? To me like that's the sign that human consciousness is Like Evolving to value life in a way that maybe we didn't value before because like there have been Infinite wars and like including like the how many people did we fucking bomb? How many people how many civilians did we fucking kill when we were fucking bombing? Iraq how many no there's a it's a lot right? Well, they don't know like the full number you get two different people's numbers But they think that it's somewhere in the neighborhood of a million people died right so So in that is that correct? Is that I think it's also like deaths that they attribute to things that happen because of the war But I think it led to a million innocent deaths or somewhere in that range That was a high end but and then there was an outcry over that war But not the same as this but yeah, but right if you think about the numbers like yeah I think it's also the access that we have now to Self-on footage and how good it is and how quickly it gets posted. I mean that's relatively recently You know yeah like that's the real abilities of these phones like to make videos like they do now. How long has that been going on? You're right 10 years. You're right, you know 100,000 66,000 civilians 210,296 Civilian deaths from violence 109,000 deaths including 66 1,081 civilian That's weird. I understand what they're saying there What's that? It just pulled that section from the middle of this whole thing civilian deaths from violence. Does that mean war? Like what does that mean? So that's civilians that were killed entirely by war or is that civilian to die just from violence? Well any kind of violence. Yeah, like stabbing your neighbor. But this is like Carla and those jokes about this. This is what's really insidious about this shit. It's like It's war. Yeah, say it's fucking war. It's like it's like it's like the violence The violence is related to war So don't say from violence say from fucking war because that's what war does and You know, it's really crazy looking at Dead human numbers go put that back up. Please When you're looking at the number 210,296 civilian deaths from violence When you look at that number you're just you it's so two-dimensional You don't get an understanding. Yeah of how insanely evil that number really is 210,296 People that didn't have to die. How many memories that died because someone wanted to do something and got a group of people to go and do their bidding and they all Were uh They're all were authorized to shoot people. Yeah, man. Yeah This is a crazy thing that we still do as human beings and the problem is I don't see a way out of it because Terrorists are real criminals are real bad people are real. Right. This is the world. We're living in unless You take mushrooms. We got to get mushrooms legal for the entire country The whole country. Yeah, and just force them down. Everybody's throw Do force people to do mushrooms do it for everyone else That's our robots Our robot fucking like like like a bird. It just pokes its fucking thing in your mouth and spray still a siber in there Cuma. I can't imagine if AI forced us all to take till assignment What a horrible day that would be. Do you imagine if like that was AI solution? AI was like human beings actually They're developed their consciousness through This sort of relationship that they have with Cubensive mushrooms And this is the facts and this is how we know and this is why the doubling of the human brain sizes such An anomaly and it aligns with the terms McKenna's theories about how the grasslands receded You know, it's an upgrade The the rainforest receded into grasslands and people started eating cow shit bugs and cow shit mushrooms and then they started thinking about things different Oh my god. Why doesn't the AI tells us that's how it would so you just need to keep going Yeah, I would say yeah, you guys like quit like you know, you got your purple belt and you like Try to get an injury and you backed out go deeper go deeper. You need a little deeper deeper and if AI just like tells people like this is what you really should be taking Like imagine if like instead of mushrooms especially so siber instead of it being something that Terrifies people and that makes people think oh my god You take it. You're gonna lose your mind. You take it. You're gonna be a fucking loser Imagine if it was actually scientifically proven that it does make you smarter And it makes you more effective at being a person and that and that these are the right doses Imagine if AI just starts spitting out doses in order to gain this percentage of increase in cognitive ability Fucking bass you can get this percentage of increase in empathy at this dose for this many days and It just starts like re-energier engineering human beings Do still aside them. You know one of the things where I'm does said which I love is when they are they would ask them things like how You know how did this happen to you? How did you get? Where do you get like to be this benevolent like thing that is radiating love all the time which he was? He goes I trusted the mushroom And he minute dude and and because because I don't know that we get her on thus without Silasiber like is that like there's a beautiful famous story of him Hanging out with Tim Leary and some other like luminaries and they had synthetic Silasiber and that was pretty much like the the real beginning of his like path and like You know, I'm sometimes I'm a little skeptical About this concept because I worry that because I've met people who are really into psychedelics who are like somehow it went the opposite direction They're Really kind of egoic. Yeah, they're into the dosage and how many times very grew like Good they become guru, you know, they but but and by the way guru isn't always bad Not always but they become narcissistic They become power gurus more like sorcerers and In the leaders co leaders and so so yeah, so like I worry that You know because that everyone's like what if we just gave Putin a shit ton of mushrooms It's like well, it's gonna go one of two ways like it's gonna be like where you just like is like oh my fucking god Oh my fucking god. I thought I was Russian. I'm An earthling what the fuck was I think this is I was conditioned. This is Oh my fucking god. I thought I was Russian. I'm an earthling. What the fuck was I think? This is- I was conditioned. This is brainwashing. I got brainwashed by culture. And it's over, guys. No more of this shit. I retire. I'm moving to fucking Hawaii, whatever. But like, the air goes the other way. Which is like, oh, God wants me to fire nuclear missiles. You know what I mean? You know, we don't know. Roll the dice. Right. Roll the dice. So yeah, but I do think if we're looking at like, massive, like, instantaneous shifts in planetary consciousness, psychedelics, definitely one of the ways. Like, if you were to the Brotherhood of Eternal Love? No, but I don't like the way it sounds. I think you'd like them. Just the name. It's like, that sounds like the bad people in some really corny movie. Does. Brotherhood of Eternal Love? Near the Brotherhood of Eternal Love. Speaking of which, I saw a really good movie last night. What? What? It is, I think it's called Late Night with the Devil. It's about, it's a 2020 form movie about a talk show host in 1977 that has his girl come on the show. And it's like really done, like, it looks like you're in 1977. Okay. And the girl's possessed. And it like it builds, man. Dude, it's so fucking good. Have you seen this? Yes. Oh, you loved it, right? Dude, I loved it. It's great. It's so good. Like, Night with the Devil officially. I mean, I think it just came out a couple months ago. Must have just went straight to being streamed. But it's fucking good, man. And that's good casting, dude. All of it, like, that, the host is so much like that level talk show host in that time period. And it's scary. And it's fucking good. Yeah. It's solid. Highly recommend. Yeah, it was solid. It was really solid. Solid, dude. Dude, you know what I just saw that, and I was super skeptical about this one. But it's not bad. The Pope's exorcist. You see that? Dude, I know. I had the same, I had the same thinking. My brother-in-law, he's got, like, really good taste in movies. And like, he's like, it's actually not that bad. It's a little cheesy. It's fucking good, dude. Really? Yes, it's very good. But stupid, but good. You know what I mean? Like, this is the Pope's exorcist. Yeah. And I usually don't get into Russell Crowe. I don't get into exorcist movies, usually. Why do they all fucking turn their head like that? But what's interesting is this guy, the Pope has an exorcist. And he wrote a bunch of fucking books. And so it's kind of drawing from, like, stories of this guy doing exorcisms. And it's fascinating, man. It's really interesting. It would be the greatest deception ever if demonic possession was real. And we were all mocking it. And then one day you saw it. You actually saw it. You're like, oh no, it's real. Dude, I think it is real. Like, I think we've just come up with new words for it. But have you ever had this happen? I'm going to get made fun of this. Have you ever had this happen? Like, if you've ever been like super high, you're walking down the street. You pass somebody having a psychotic episode. And they start saying what you're thinking. If you ever had that happen? No. I have. Really? Yeah. I have a bad answer. Well, you think, though, I'm hot. I'm sitting on a degree, Zah. I feel crazy. I was thinking, I feel crazy. I feel crazy. I feel like I'm a bad answer. You're like, oh my god, you know what's going to be green in my mind? I'm too high right now. How do you can read my mind? No, it was like. No, he was like kind of like, he was like garbling out like shit. I think I was thinking about like I mean, obviously, any of this stuff. It's not scientific. Obviously he's not scientific. Wait a minute. You're not in the scientist. I am a scientist. I am actually yeah, I am a fucking scientist. I study rainbows. I study the power of rainbows to heal animals. I forget who posted it up with this video of all these college kids talking about what viral all these college kids talking about what their degree was in. And these all these woke kids with these ridiculous degrees like what they studied. Yeah, man. Dude, very expensive to get those fucking degrees. It is a hilarious video because it's like how does anybody not see that that is a massive waste of your time? Like what have you done? You have been tricked. You have been tricked into getting a degree in nonsense? Dude. And did you write papers in nonsense and books on nonsense? But aside from that, you know what you've really been tricked into. You've become a fucking vassal of the banks. Like you are eternally indebted to the structures that you are opposing. It's like, oh, what's your? Oh, so you spent how much again like $180,000 to get to major in like communist studies? Great. Okay. You're late on your payment motherfucker. You got to pay us now. I mean, not only done, it's the ultimate mafia group. Like they want your money no matter what. Even if social security, fuck you pay me. They're the ultimate fuck you pay me people. Fuck you pay me. You can't. Apparently we said we talked about this before, but apparently there are certain circumstances under which there's a certain type of bankruptcy that allow you to evade that. But I wonder what that is. It's suicide. I've been so before the podcast, but I don't understand enough to interrupt. Yeah. I remember us talking about it. I don't understand it either. Dude, this is like, man, what we've definitely talked about this before about rest in peace, David Greber or at a great book called bullshit jobs. Brilliant mind, man, brilliant mind, but he basically talks about how like, so ideas. I'm going to go to college. Oh, discharge. Sorry. No problem, man. Discharge and bankruptcy. If you declare bankruptcy and then the bankruptcy court determines repaying your loans would cause undue hardship, your loans can be discharged. How many times does that happen? Zero. It's like, yeah, it's like, as long as there's judge to say, I'm sorry, but repaying your loans always produces undue fucking hardship. It's such the payback loans. It's sucked. It always sucks. I don't want to fucking knife. I want to vote. I want to swimming pool. Yeah. Like, for example, several types of loans associated with education expenses are dischargeable in bankruptcy. Like most other types of unsecured consumer debt. These types of loans for education expenses are not subject to the more difficult standard and extra step. These loans could include, for example, loans where the loan amount was higher than the cost of the attendance, such as tuition, books, rooms, and board, which can occur when a loan is paid directly to a consumer loan's pay for education. So that means they could do it. They could forgive you if the loan amount was higher than the cost of attendance. Is that what it's saying? Or is it saying it's going to pay you the difference? Like, you could deduct the difference when you get bankruptcy. Right now. Loans to pay for education at places that are not eligible for title for funding include unaccredited colleges, a school in a foreign country. So, so much for your wizard university, Duncan, you can't go bankrupt with your wizard degree. You stuff to pay it. Are you fucking gay about my neck in debt for this shit? It says you have to pay it. And also, it's like... It's not accredited. But the rainbow thing, it's like something's changed in the earth's atmosphere because it's not healing anymore. It's an unaccredited wizard school. Yeah. You went cheap. And now you're fucked. Well, I'm sorry, Joe. Not everybody was born a billionaire like you. I was born a billionaire. I know you weren't. I'm joking. I don't think that wizard stuff is good anyway. I think it's easy. I think you're toying with the devil. Just like that late night show. I'm that little bald guy. That was like in the show, that's me. Like, hey, you're resting with something. Can I ask you something? Yes. Where did the devil come from? That's a good question. Did God make the devil? What a mean trick. Imagine. Imagine. Do you need the devil? Do you need... Is it symbolic of what we need in this life? Like, do we need to see what's happening in Palestine in order to reassess the way we behave as a civilization? Do we need crime to get out of hand before we realize that law and order is important and that we really need to figure out a way to stop crime at its root source? Was this disenfranchised people? Do we really need something? Like, maybe that's the only way we learn. That's maybe there's like, you know, like lottery winners. They don't do well, dude. They don't do well because they didn't learn. They just got all this money like, wow, another dude. They're out of fucking rot and it's gone. No, it's gone. And then you're mad and everybody's mad at you and you're getting invested in the business with your uncle. Yeah. And everybody's pissed at you. So you're asking, do we need the devil? I wonder if you need a bad and a good. I wonder if you need something. I wonder if you need to see 200 plus thousand dead people and just have that number in your head and just try to picture what that looks like. I wonder if we need that or is this an order to real- lot? Yes. Yes. That there's like, you don't grow without resistance. Like, this is, we're thinking of it as just playing this is life. But we're in the middle of a process. Yeah. We're in the middle of a process. Yeah. Everyone understands this and no one thinks about it. We are in the middle of this intellectually evolutionary process. And there's something that's funny that I said, those two words and such. a goofy way. The intellectual evolution. I liked it. But there's a thing going on where we're assuming that civilization is going to be better all the time. And we're always going to get better all the time. Which is really interesting because no other animal does that. There's not another animal alive that says we only killed 47 zebras this year. Next year we're fucking cranking it up. We're going to be better and more efficient. Yeah. We want to be better at everything. We want to be better at our industry. Yeah. We want to be better at fixing our infrastructure. We want to be better at housing. Yeah. We want to be better all the time. Like this is constant push for progress. And if you just step back and look at where it's going with this train wreck of AI happening at the same time, that's going on. It's like, oh, we were fueling this. Yeah. We're fueling the takeover. We were buying iPhones. Dude, I think this is so funny and mentioning this because honestly, it's so embarrassing. It's so dumb. I don't care. I'm wearing a robot outfit. I had the gym yesterday. Working out and I've started listening to classic gospel music. Whoa. It is so good. If you're having a shitty day, it doesn't matter if you're not Christian, just fucking listen to it. It's so upbeat. And like, it makes you happy and it's kind of magical. But like, so I'm at the gym and I'm thinking about Jesus because I've been listening to gospel music. And like, I was thinking like, oh, oh, like maybe the idea as far as like the devil goes because I always wonder that who made the devil? Why did God make the devil? Why is there a devil? Is there a devil? Is it just a fucking symbol for something? But I realized like, oh, like, you know, that stupid song. If you love somebody, is that I'm free? So it's like the idea being I'm setting, I'm making you your sentient. I'm setting you free. I'm setting you free in a fucking universe where there are, there's collectivized evil. There's some kind of like, like, somatics. There's some kind of thing that forms, which will fuck you up. And because I love you, I'm going to let you figure it out. And then from that perspective, and also if there is some super intelligence and somehow in the universe, there's a bifurcation or something that's centered on the self instead of others that has an intelligence to it to really like fucking flex to that thing. You're like, okay, I'm just going to give you these things that I love so much. And if you when, if you corrupt my creation fully, then then you when, I was wrong. But I don't think you are. I don't think it's going to happen because inevitably whatever it is, you take a psychedelic, for me, whenever I take psychedelics too many right away, I started thinking about how selfish I am. I start thinking like, dude, like it hurts. It hurts to be jealous. It hurts to not help. It hurts to be so cherishing of myself. And anytime I'm not doing that, I'm so happy. So to force that, you can't force that on somebody, they have to stumble upon it somehow. And there's like, that's Christianity. They don't get it unless they feel it. That's it. And so like to let these things that theoretical, I'm talking about from Christian cosmology that you love more than anything else, to fuck it, which by the way, like in the Garden of Eden story, when God says something like, where are you to Adam and Eve? And apparently the original translation that crying out is the way, like, you know, if you ever lost your Canada playground, it's that. It's not like, where are you? So that is, it's like, when you're calling for your kids. So yeah, it's heavy, man. And so like, so yeah, I feel like that maybe the whole thing is designed for us individually, to stumble upon that, that basic truth, that underneath the shell is love. And the love wants to express itself. And love doesn't express itself by saying, me, me, me, me, me, love is always like, I love you. What can I do for you? Let me help you. It's like the person swimming into the lake for no reason to get that last person who fucking was in a car accident. And they drown. You know, they get the person to save you, they die. To me, I think that's the devil. That's why it's there. It's, it might be real. I think it's a term of convenience. It's great. But it's like, holy shit, man. Like, as an inclination, it's real, right? Whether or not you murder a baby because the devil made you do it or because some other force that is just like the devil that just happens to be a part of human beings. And violent rages, they could do horrific things. And then on top of that, also intentionally evil, just like chimpanzees. Yeah. I mean, chimpanzees do it. Do we think that devils invading the chimps when they're doing it? Or do we think that this is some bygone, some leftover shit that's in our DNA that can go sideways and allow people to become serial killers or people to become assassins? I think it's a semantics argument. I think it's like it's an identification of a possibility in a human life. There is a possibility in a human life to make a series of shitty decisions. And those shitty decisions lead you into darker and darker and darker experiences of reality. And the darker your experience of reality, the more likely you are to make a shitty decision because like you've gotten yourself into fucking debt. You went to wizard school. You've got your, your, your, you, you study fucking rainbow magic. It doesn't seem to be real. No one's coming to your clinic. Now you're like, you know, $800,000 in fucking debt. And now what are you going to fucking do? Like you got to figure out how to make money. So how are you going to make the fucking money? Well, you find some scam or some shit, right? And then the next thing you know, now you're like lying to people and now that you're lying to people, you have to keep fucking lying to people. And then you start lying to yourself. And then you get lost in a maze of self deception that leads you into lower and lower and lower levels of consciousness. Until the next thing you know, you're in fucking jail or you're dead. You're killing somebody. And so, so like you call it whatever you want to fucking call it. But this in tropic reality in human existence is very fucking real. And the message of all the great lineages, whether it's Hinduism, Christianity, Buddhism, is it any given moment in that hell state you've gotten yourself into. There is a way to get the fuck out. You don't have to be in hell. It's like what C.S. Lewis says, the gates of hell are locked from the inside. is a fucking way out. It's so good, dude. It's so good. It's so good. That's such a good one. And that's, you know, that's, that's why I love Jesus. That's why I love the message of Christianity. I love the Jesus. Praise God. I love that song, right? Yeah, dude. I'm like, I'm like, oh, this fucking great. It shows up on my gospel playlist. Isn't it weird that that guy like that was it? It was like, that was his song. He's just like this one song that was a banger. You listen to the rest of me. I'm like, oh, that sucks. Oh, God, man. That's the worst. There's a few of those guys that we've felt. You know, Johnny Thunder, you know that song I'm alive? No. Bro, I played that song for so many fucking people, including musicians. I played for Zach Bryan. He was like, ooh, like you hear it. People like God damn. And it's from 1969. One hit wonder, dude. I don't even think it was a hit. There was another version of it that that his version of I'm alive was a cover of. And it was better than the original version. And it was so good. You're like, if this guy can make this song, somebody needs to write for him, man. This guy's a star. This guy's got bangers. I mean, this was a fucking tremendous song. And it was just one. Dude, I know it's like, that's got, that just is like, it's got to be so scary, man. Like, you know, when you make a great movie and then you got to make your next movie. Oh, yeah. It's got to be fucking good. You can say you make that movie. What's it called? Deus Ex Machina? You know that movie? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And you're like, I got to make another movie. And then you're like, civil war. And oh, fuck. Sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Oh, that's the guy, right? Oh, man. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. By the way, you're brilliant. Like, I get it. Like the attempt, I get it. Who knows? You never know what happened in the process. And like, man, I feel like now the guy's a guy. This is so, I'll start doing video. And I'm recognizing just like how hard it is just to like get the lighting right from my dumbass and in there rambling. Like anyone who makes a fucking movie is a genius fucking wizard. So I do, and all the people that come together, some of them just don't work out the way they want. They just don't work out. That's how it is like pilots for TV shows. It's for sketches of people create. Yeah. Yeah. Like I just, like I think doing a video podcast and then critiquing a great director is pretty fucked up, man. I just, I don't mean I just, and a lot of people like the movie, but um, you try to dig yourself out. I just feel bad. I feel bad. Like no, I, I, I, but God damn it was horrible. It was so bad. It was so bad. It was so bad. Yeah. Oh my God. It was funny. Yeah. I'm glad I didn't see it. No, you, you're lucky to be watching the gentleman on Netflix. No, what's that? Oh, dude. It's a Guy Ritchie series on Netflix. It's fucking amazing. What is it? It's about these weed growers in, in the UK. Cool. I don't want to give away any more of it, but it's basically the movie, the gentleman. I don't know if you ever saw the movie, but this is the, the same world that the movie takes place in just with different characters. Cool. It's fucking great, man. It's great show. I think it has like six episodes or how many episodes did I have? Eight. There's some good movies coming out right now, man. It's kind of awesome. We went through like a pretty rough, sentiment drought. I don't know. Do you remember? Think about how many movies get, they get drawn up, they get funded, COVID hits, everything gets shut down. Everything gets shut down. And then everybody loses money. No one's going to the movies anymore. Yeah. Even it's fucked. Yeah. That's the way for forever. Before things get back on track, things start getting profitable again. And they start making dune too. Oh, no. They start making, I haven't seen it, but I heard it's awesome. They start making movies like that. They start making banger movies again. Dude, dune too is so fucking good. I watched it with a song. And dude, I was like, you know that, like you get bliss and movies are so good and you're the right amount of stone. And like you realize like, oh my god, it's only been 30 fucking minutes. And this is already the most insanely beautiful thing I've ever seen in my fucking like the soundtrack. When you look up how they made the soundtrack for that movie, it is insane. Man, everything about it is like, they had throat singing in it. They've got like, it's so cool dude. Can you read the books? No. Books are so good. They're the first one, honestly. The second one, I struggle with the first one is... Wait a minute. What book? Dune. No, I didn't read that. Frank Herbert. I think I read one of those. Do they make me into comic books, like really nice comic books? Probably. Did they? But you can't. I never got into the first one. The first movie. So when the second one came around, I was like, ah, dude. You keep hearing this amazing. The second one's better than the first and the first is great if you're like a doon nerd, which I am, but like, oh, I'm a doon nerd. I've been reading that book since it's interesting. Dude, this is spicy. I'm a launch. And like, but the way he's, first of all, Frank Herbert was my college. The guy wrote, dude. Did you know that? He's like a really respect, stammets talks about it. Like, I think. Yeah. Yeah. Whoa. Duncan. This is what's going to happen when Trump wins. Robert Janiro is right. Robert Janiro is right, Duncan. Do you want to line up and lose all your rights? And he never leaves the White House. And you have throat singing on the Capitol Hill step. You put it saying so funny. I was like, dude, that sounds awesome. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Make a melogrier. Dude, um, yeah. So like, the, the, there's always theories about doing, but the blue eyes. You eat this spice melange that like, though, that you need it for space travel. It's only produced on, you know, the story, but like, yeah. Yeah. The blue eyes. So there's a theory because he was Frank Herber was a mycologist. The blue eyes represent still a cyber. And like, that was his launch is like still a cyber. And like, yeah. And the dude. And he, he apparently, I think it's Sam Fran. He was living on a boat next to Alan Watts. And they were, they were fucking friends. So a lot of the, like, uh, you remember the gum jibbar, the needle that that witch puts to polish radius neck to say like, they want to find out if you're human. So you put your hand in this box that if you pull your fucking hand out of the box, she stabs you with this needle. It kills you because you're not human who gives a fuck. And so gum jibbar, gum is in Tibetan Buddhism as an information. So there's all these like clearly he was pals with Alan Watts. And he like, like weaves a lot of like, a lot of the language in it is like the, the daughter in the womb. I think her name's Alia, which is like a Buddhist term for like the emptiness for a state of pure consciousness. And so it's a deep book is my point. And you would love it. And it inspired Star Wars, right? Didn't we just talk about this? We did, right? I don't think I might know more about that, but it was that they came from the same thing, I think. What do you mean? Dune and Star Wars came from the same place. Like they both were inspired by the same thing. I asked that question out loud. I thought I thought we talked about it the other day. Did we not talk about it on the podcast? Okay, we did, right? But I think it was, it, Dune came before Star Wars. And then Star Wars was written by different people. I don't know. I think Dune predates Star Wars. Yeah, I was, for sure. Dune predates Star Wars. We talked about it the other day. What is the whole story though? What were you trying to say? I didn't understand what you said. They both, I had asked that out loud. I said, didn't, isn't Dune just Star Wars, it's a Dune rip off. And then I dug into it. And it says that they both, like our, our, our, sorry, both creators took similarities and inspiration from the same original source. I think it's, but what's the original choice? I'm trying to read as I'm talking. Oh, so there's something else. There's an original story like that. I'm sorry, a short story. Dune is influenced, probably. It's like, it's like the greatest sci-fi book, if you ask me, and it's influenced all sci-fi. It's so fucking good, dude. And did you see David Lynch's Dune? No. Oh man. You gotta watch Sting is in David Lynch's Dune. And like, Well, I did see it. That was the original one, right? The Lynch one was the original one. Yeah. And I didn't get into it. No. Well, it was massively criticized because like, there, there have been attempts to do Dune. It's famous guy, Joe Dirovsky. There's a whole documentary on his idea for Dune. David Lynch takes on the project. And where the Dune we have now, succeeds where he failed, is they broke the book into two movies. Every sci-fi property you love is based on foundation. Interesting. Isaac Asimov's foundation series is widely understood to be the inspiration for Star Wars Dune and even the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. Wow. You know, one of the things about the new Dune is the people that grind me. Right. They look like they're really in that world. There was a thing about those old Dunes that I couldn't get into because everybody looked too clean. Everybody looked like they just stepped right out of wardrobe. I just didn't, you know what I'm saying? Like you see that when the guy's throat's singing and those people are walking down and putting, everybody's dirty. Yeah, it's cool. They're grinding. That's a, yeah. You live in a crazy fucked-up hard-ass life. Yeah, yeah. And like in the book, even in the newest one, I don't think they convey like he writes about the smell in those seaches and the underground, like in the caves that the Fremen are living and he talks about the smell of the BO in there. Just all of these people living underground in the stink of that. But, dude, did you see that video of David Lynch eating this girl's panties? What? No. For real? Yeah. How's he doing that? Jamie? Do you want one of these? Do you want a Lucy? Yeah, let me spit this thing out. Mmm. I'm in a gay drug. Chuck, that's it. Thank you. Do you know the Zen Spiercy? Do you know about this? We're all being accused of secretly being sponsored by Zen. Yeah. This is the funny you should watch this. This is crazy. Okay. This would be being dedicated to Deb. That's a real. That's a real. Is that not real? That's a eyebrow. God damn it. I don't know, ma'am. He's looking forward to this. What is this? When was it posted? Yeah, no, look. Because this is just that I did see multiple videos or versions of the video, too. It just looked like his mouth was moving weird. I mean, I hope it's real. Thank you very much. They're still warm. Okay. Now, they're very warm as matter of fact, cinnamon. Okay. And now, the deal is I'm going to put these panties in my mouth. And for now, WMM's full username. Are you ready? He's a genius. What the fuck, dude? I love him. Mmm. Okay. That's probably one of them frequencies that called the devil. Like that sound. That's probably what the devil responds to. If you have a mouth full of panties, you should try to read anything. The devil's like, I got you. I got you. Not now. That's a son of God. No, God. No, no, no. This is soundemic. Like a sound. Devil response to if you have a mouth full of panties. You try to read anything the devil's like I got you Not now that's a son of god. No, no This is sound you make like a sound you make with a mouth full of panties I just imagine have you just demons just summon and they're waiting for you to open the portal Like you have to make that sound like the only way to make that sound is to be such a depraved fuck Do you have someone's panties stuffed in your mouth may I stop you there? I don't think it's depraved This is the beautiful woman's pan either but the devil thinks that it is and god thinks it is Well, it's they agree like this is an opportunity to go after him look this guy's out there eating people's underwear Let me tell you not gonna solve the world's problems. He's so crazy. He's eating underwear. Why does everybody want to solve the world's problems? Let's shove we're all in this together Duncan. I want to eat pan. We are on the production line for AI and you're not doing your part dude I Listen if there is a Satan he doesn't want us to put panties in our mouth That's the that's what the devil would really be the devil would really be anti panties in mouth and like you Be like don't ever want you on Adderall and you want you working 24 hours today exactly yeah exactly The devil doesn't want us the devil hates David Lynch if there is a devil he doesn't like David Lynch He's having fun stuff and warm panties in his mouth. Yeah Two or back when it was legal What if I could develop laws for pan eating like enough we've summoned too many demons People just realize that all you have to do is like and hold hands with mouthfuls of panties And if you two of you are talking at the same time you get somewhere a super demon dude Like it is kind of I mean like that's a that was a that wasn't like a dainty panty like he stuffed a real panning That wasn't a G string that was like that was like that back a little bit of a back to it Like and then did still be able to talk. Oh, yeah, what a genius. You're so good. He's so good. Really good at talking dude He's a ball Twin Peaks was great creatures hide in your closet David thank you for bringing me And you day I have an idea for you Sound you make with a mouthful event Dude, yeah, well, I mean look We this is the thing like David Lynch is one of the great Artists alive today and this thing where we expect artists to behave Like normal people yeah, I don't expect that at all Fuck it not you, but I like you read the comments and people are like oh, they're so mad at them I'm sure but I don't have to read it, but it just says this is like that's just what it is And it's also not representative. I think of actual the real number of actual people the problem is It's like what I taught when I whenever you do a survey people say oh the survey is like no You don't get a real percentage. I don't give a fuck what your study says you only get 100% of the people that Are on your survey are so fucking dumb that they reply to surveys. Yes. This is not Everybody exactly not even close exactly it's just like comments who the fuck leaves comments How do you have time? I think about it unless you're like good job Congratulations be a nice who has time. Yeah, if you do there's no chance You're devoting the proper amount of time to things in your life You should write so it's this massive distraction and you get these arguments online that distract you from the failures in your real life But that is Representative and a lot of people's minds to how people think about whatever this person posted or whether this political argument that people are having Yeah, but that's not real and then you've got the algorithm and the Impression we were talking about which is even more crazy right now not only do you have the most complaining fucking people complaining Yeah, you have the algorithm showing things in a piss you off like look at this fucking And out in that the phone's gonna know he took a screenshot of the comment and he sent it to me Yeah, I'm like wow what a dick. Yeah, I'll send it to other people. Yes, send people a link Look at this moron. He's having people in the comments. Yeah, that's it. That's what happens. Yep, and that's a storm That's like a that's a neurological Hurricane sweeping through brains around the planet amygdala's fucking squirt and fucking cortisol anger teams Getting ready to do battle for fucking what yeah, dude for what what are you arguing about? So this is I've heard I don't know if you've heard about this like there's some the kids now I'm 50 so I could say that for sure that kids that kids now are apparently there's a whole new thing where they're just they're putting their phones down There's this whole thing where they're just like fuck this my friend was really yes That's what I heard that like um You're dealing with a lot of weird kids though. Well, I'm not dealing with any kids My friend deal with hippies They have fucking straw hats on there in the woods barefoot. Yeah, well, but I Like I died mushroom shirts on if you think about it like what what do kids tend to do like what I did rebel and so like you're so you're like God help you let's imagine your raise by like an influencer mom God help you so your old childhood has been on camera and if it's not on camera You're looking at your fucking mom staring at the comments of the video she posted a new opening Christmas presence or you're just a standard kid and Your childhood is Constantly interrupted by your parents staring at their fucking phones. Yeah, so you get old enough You're not gonna associate phones Necessarily with good feelings and then you're like, you know what fuck these things this made my parents fucking like Distant it made my parents upset and they're just like fuck this which means there's by the way That's Scary if you want to monitor populations Wow right now we're all in fucking or well Like some crazy version of 1984 way more sinister than the camera in your house It's like you're carrying it around but suddenly these like Formerly monitored populations. They just go dark because like kids are just like I'm not gonna do this They're meeting in parks. God help us all They're meeting in parks and they're saying things that are untraceable No one knows what they're talking about and so now you've got it. Yeah, I Like to believe you're correct. This sounds like a movie Phone list 72% of us teens say they often and sometimes feel peaceful when they don't have their smartphone 44% say it makes them feel anxious good for a hobbies Less sofa socialization 69% of teens say smartphones make it easier for youth to pursue hobbies and interest true Right, that's a good aspect of it a few or 30% say it helps people their age learn good social skills That's true. It doesn't do that right parental snooping. That's a problem half of parents said they've looked through their teens phone You're gonna find a lot of dicks the other after wires About four in ten parents and teens Regularly arguing with one other about time spent on their phone nearly half of teens 46% say their parent is at least Sometimes distracted by their phone when they're trying to talk to them and what age do you think fella start sending dick pics? Do you think they wait until it's legal? Would you I don't think they did so here's a thing like you know, there was a girl that was charged with She was charged with child pornography I think she was 15 because she was sending naked photos of her body to other boys So like she was the pornography and the pornography right? That's so fucked up find that story see if you find that story because it was it was like a national outrage story because everybody's like hey Hey, man, she's fucking 15. Yeah, she's not a child porn producer like this is a bastardization of the law like this is just a girl's being silly. That's insane. She's getting a little wild. That is that's Terrifying she might have been talked into it like who the fuck knows like what is did she got a jail? I don't know what the story of a 17 year old boy who is charged. No, no, no, no, it's girls If it's a drop the charges in this case. Oh, okay, but find the one on the 15 year old girl I'm trying to remember what the the the thing is not the easiest thing to dig through looking for child porn No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no 15 year old girl convicted for child porn Can you say that? You just scared to type it you got to be careful with the words you look forward to type it in child Google that you pussy Google's already like they're taking everything you've ever I'm just showing you a popped up kid charged with child one of how about 16 year old male understand how about Google 15 year old girl charged with child porn Girl Teen girl charge of child porn there it is That's it. That's the girl There's another one. There's more than one. Yeah, there was different cases. Oh Wait a minute. This is different. This is a 15 year old girl I was accused of requesting and sending nude photos to classmates under the identity of her ex-boyfriend. Oh Is facing multiple child porn charges? What a demon? She was sending them to classmates under the identity of her ex-boyfriend. Wow, how was she doing that? Fuckin so she was pretending that she was him and she was sending naked photos of herself to try to charge him for it. Oh She was trying to nail him. Dude. She's a monster. Oh look at this She told police that she created a fake social account for revenge for the relationship ending With her ex-boyfriend. What a psycho She also admitted she was jealous that her ex-boyfriend chosen to perform a solo in state finals for band What out she was the crazy bitch for band camp monster What time of been yes Wow what a psycho path she's only been on the planet 15 years and she's reached Evil that is so crazy imagine trying to set your boyfriend up with a child porn Oh, God damn it dude. That is God. Was it wasn't like Dr. Phil K. Same thing I don't know what that story is here. Is that the same gal? No, probably not because they're talking to her look at that She's got a cover of Warren's with fucking yeah Wow, I think she was in late night with the devil Wow That's so crazy that someone could be that evil at that age. Yeah, well so it's such a crate But then again, you ever see that movie city of God It's the gang movie from Brazil. Oh, yeah, the favelas. Oh, yeah, I Say it's like one of the wildest gang movies I've ever seen in my life. It's probably the wildest. Yeah Now that's based on real life in the favelas in some places So that's a real that's people really living that way like you gotta imagine that's just you just become a sociopath at a very early age You have psychopath at a very early age someone went to stay around stay alive. Yep, and then What this way to go through where she's willing she's so conniving she's gonna set up fake social media accounts Yeah, and then get her boyfriend accused of child porn. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, how distance are you from like the fact? devious Very fucking devious devious Dude if you're at the painted bird. No, don't I mean it's so good, but it's the most like It's like it doesn't matter if you do spoilers for old books, but like one of the scenes This it's about a kid wandering like I think it's World War II He's lost his parents and he's got it like he's just wandering through the countryside and seeing just the most horrific shit You've ever seen in surviving but like he watches These villagers take a woman and shove a bottle into her pussy and then stomp You just break the bottle inside of her Yeah, dude, it's it's it's that's not even the worst thing in the book but but so so This innocent kid just is witnessing all that and it's talking about what you're talking It's like basically analyze it It's sort of like showing like where does evil come from? You know are people born evil statistically some people are born sociopaths We know that but it's a relatively small part of the population, but where does it come from an inevitably? It comes from Trauma that a kid is enduring and then you have to survive just like you're saying you were programmed and they're It's self-petuating it's gonna continue because they're all gonna see people murder It's like people living in gang infested neighborhoods in America same Yeah, you can hear seeing it happen all the time and it's affecting all those families Yeah, it's gonna just keep right the kids are gonna go into it They see the drug dealer rolls by in the nice car Yeah, everybody else is a sucker for getting on the train. Yeah, and then everybody's in and then the next thing You know you're dead and then just keeps going and you have kids that are raised without you and then you're it's like Whoo and then what do you do so then what happens that reaction to the contagion is? You you you you you other that person so so now you see like the person in full bloom of evil and you look at that That's a fucking monster, but you can't go back and look at like their childhood because if you start going back and looking at their childhood You're like Jesus Christ there there. You're right But you can't think about that right to fully like monster-fry somebody you got a fucking forget how they became the monster and then And then this is where you end up with a very non nuanced System of dealing with the contagion which it will produce more contagion like this just spreads the fucking evil all over the fucking Place and I and I grew to man like I don't know the solution But I know but but in like you know this is where imaginary numbers came up with you know and in math It's like you don't need to know the solution put an X there. It's like clearly this is a fucking problem We've got this people who like are horrifically traumatized and then from have made shitty decisions where they've got a commit to being some violent monster is thieving piece of shit and rationalize it and justify it But but this is if we could fix this problem and I don't think the way we fix the fucking problem is dropping bombs on people You're not fixing the problem like if the answer to to evil is more evil What the fuck it's like in never ending it's like scratching poison ivy. It's not gonna go away Right and it actually makes more like yeah, this is the thing that people are talking about this the Israel Hamas thing Like how many you know, who was it that told us about this the math the way? Killing like terrorist math goes Was it Dave Smith? Probably Dave Smith not sounds like some Dave Smith would talk about but essentially like if One terrorist dies it doesn't equal You don't like lose a terrorist you gain 10 because all the people that he's connected to they all become Radicalized they all want it that you kill their friend you kill their family member kill their son They all so that you you gain more terrorists dude. It's it's it's it's the worst fucking problem ever man because like you know Like I just whenever something no matter how horrific the monster is or how like whatever it is I try to like not be afraid To to put myself in the position of Whatever the fucking thing is and in this case we've got two sides That right now it seemed to be being equally Villed by different groups of people right but man dude. Let me tell you something if my fucking kid Got blown up by a fucking bomb Right that's it my logic's out the window I would like to think that I'd really listen to all the rom-dosh retreats and stuff and I'd like to think that I would be like Gandhi Or have some Blossom of love and be like I forgive everyone. I'm afraid that's not gonna happen I'm gonna want to hurt and then if my fucking kid got dragged into a fucking tunnel Are you fucking kidding me man? I'm not gonna see clearly like I'm going to want revenge and I want my kid back and whatever you do to get my fucking kid back Okay, like have you seen the last of us? like so so what were so This fucking like othering of whatever the fucking side is is leaving out like What it feels like to love your kid and like like look at a mother like it's throughout the animal kingdom Don't fuck with a creatures kid like I'm sorry. It will get you fucked up Even if the thing smaller than you and you fuck with its kid it will like put itself in front of its kid So like we are looking at a problem of love sadly which is like on both sides people love their fucking kids and it been Like I can't imagine How a day goes by when you're fucking kids in a tunnel I can't imagine how a day goes by when you're thinking about how this thing that you fucking love more than anything in the world Got its head fucking blown off in a fucking explosion in a building I don't know how you live one day like that, right? So like when you look at that the it's heart the entirety of the thing is heartbreaking and irrational Both sides are it's pure. It's completely irrational because both sides are trying to put out a fire with more fire and it's like Dude that's what it is what you just said. Yeah, man. That's what it is. Yeah, put out a fire with more fire And it would that we've tried it a million times throughout human history to put out the fire with fucking fire and it the very best The fire will temporarily abate But then it springs right the fuck back up and so and again like that to me like I I don't know the solution and like and and and that's the acts It's like all but Maybe the path to the solution is like let yourself feel it entirely for both For the whole fucking thing feel the whole thing You know and and and like and don't like you know and again if you're like these motherfuckers fuck them Fuck them More fire your fuck them is the same thing causing the wars right? Like well, it's a problem when human beings Don't know human beings and they're the enemy that doesn't make any sense Regardless of how you think about religion and land just stop for a second human beings that don't know other human beings And hate them so much they want to kill them like seems that's a communication issue Dude that that seems like the tower of babble shit like the same way it makes sense If we really get to a point and I don't think it's gonna be far from now where we're all connected with real-time translation in in real time somehow or another I mean the verdict they've already been able to do it with Google You know that they're already doing it with Samsung phones where they can translate conversations You can be talking in Italian. I could be talking in English. We'll translate back and forth to both of us It's why it's wild what they're already able to do if we can get to some sort of I mean It's not out of the question that if they do develop this these neural implants And there's not just neural length there's several competing companies are trying to do the same thing because they recognize that once you can actually Effect the human mind with electronics and you can develop a symbiotic relationship with the electronics You can do some wild shit and one of the things is you're gonna be able to talk without words you're gonna be able to Well, yeah, if you're talking without words What languages that in are you hearing that or language or are you understanding what the person's thinking? So this is the difference if you're talking without words the little problem is how are we gonna be able to translate all these different languages and dialects We're not we're gonna go on thoughts. We're gonna ditch language Yeah, and we're gonna go straight to thoughts and we're gonna interface with each other in a completely different way So instead of thinking you're reading people's minds. Hey Duncan would you like to go get pizza? Yeah, dude. Are you reading my mind? No instead of that. It's like I think your thoughts. Yeah You think my thoughts we think together. Yeah, so we abandon language. Yeah, there's no more need for that. That's it You you have AI the deals with mathematical problems Yeah, and structures and construction of things and then we just live in a world of thoughts with no language We're one thing now and then we're fucked because then you can't go back You go back. You feel like you're just like walking when you just got out of a car Yeah, what the fuck dude? I just drove it took me two hours to get to Vegas in this car If I walk it's gonna take years dude, I might die. This is Why I think world peace is possible because it's if you fucking look at what's happening The system it's like the framework is being built for just what you're talking about the frame the technological framework For a state you you to get into that state you either need to do a lot of psychedelics or a lot of meditation To really realize like you're me. I'm you yeah, but the technological framework is forming for this thing to happen which Which is why man like everyone fucking I'm gonna seem like a musk fanboy in a Tesla suit ever in bashing fucking musk It's like dude. Do you understand like what he's? What that in the future when people look back on that shit even if it doesn't work even if the things are coming I'm plugged whatever the fucking thing is if that leads to what you're talking about God damn that's electricity That's like the end of war. That's the end of like the the the the bear the ideological barrier like if Imagine like whoever you hate the most in the fucking world Put the thing on you connect to them. This isn't real. It goes away And you've just realized Jesus fucking Christ. I see why they fucking hate me and they're like oh my god I get why you're mad at me. I didn't mean that like that at all and then But how about you just completely abandoned everything and it just consciousness interacting with other consciousness Yeah, which makes hate impossible. Yeah, cuz there's no more annoying language There's no more people that are incapable of communicating the thoughts. There's none of that stuff There's all that gone all that gone which is like that's the problem of being like a communication bully Like if you're a person and you know that you have a vastly superior if you if you have a Vocabulary like an Eric Weinstein like for instance like imagine if Eric Weinstein decided to bully someone you know Like fucking red band, you know Who's a brilliant guy really but you know sometimes he like stumbles on his words like you know If fucking Eric Weinstein to yellin out him with a bunch of long words you go Hey, like I was being an intellectual bully. Yeah, right? You're not trying to communicate with him as a human being you're trying to dominate him with your superior vocabulary And it's a weapon you can you go and you know my vocabulary was like B plus It's not that good. It's pretty good, but for a guy who talks for a living to probably should be better Because sometimes I get to words and I'm like that's all right, but I always say it I'm not sure if that's the right word, but The point is that like it is a tool that you can wield to For the benefit of your ego. Yeah, rather than just having a conversation and those are the grossest conversations with someone's just Just you know you well, I started a business. I sold it to billion and you're like a bro I got to go. Yeah, you know those those kind of people Absolutely, that's what that is. That's their abusing communication in order to just it's but if we get to a point Where there's that never happens ever again because instantly we just think thoughts that that and you realize like wine people Thoughts are all fucked up like oh my god. You're chemicals in your brain a course on what did your uncle do? What did your fucking neighbor do what it what happened to you? They got you so crazy When did you get dad get out of jail? What do you do before he went to jail? Oh? Oh my god, too many people do if that happened by some unknown fucking thing like that's what the aliens did Don't be it, but it would be like two days of crying. Yeah, like for two things Both the whole planet would just be like oh fuck the thing is man. The really fucked up thing is that's possible It's you know, I've had moments where dudes where I hated them They hated me and then we got together and we talked and we hugged and those are beautiful moments and That's why I refuse to have feuds now Yeah, as an older man who understands things like I don't care like I don't care you can you could not like me That's fine. That's okay. I'm not gonna attack you. I don't care. I'm not gonna do it publicly I mean I had taxi in in but I felt like that was like a bigger thing That was like this is this is a real problem like this is not just my ego and which you know They just attacked me and said I suck I'm like okay. You say I suck you're lying about medicine like you're lying about medicine for the whole world Right, so that I've made a big deal out of those fuckers. Yes, but normally I'm like there's the the benefit of conflict in that regard It's like almost zero benefit all of my conflict. I try to keep internal. I don't want to have any conflict with external people I want to have all my conflict with my own head I want to have all my conflict with discipline all my conflict with being nice to people and like trying to be a better person all the time I'm trying to be wiser about my choices How I describe things and talk about things and think of things and how I interface with ideas I just try to be better at it. So I don't have any time Dude, probably a petty bull shit. There's just too many petty people out there They're petty they're petty and they usually petty because they're all fucked up. That's right It's not going their way like that criticism thing dude. It's and also they I Think I've yapped about this, but you know Lozong mind training ever heard of that. I have but I don't remember what it is It's just like it's like a slogan. It's all these slogans to like sort of get you back on the path and like um one of my favorite Lozong slogans is drive all blames into oneself so it Defuses the so like it completely like removes the ability like it's your fault because it's like actually Whatever the fuck they did. It's kind of your fault a vampire only goes where they're invited You brought this person into your fucking life and they're behaving the way that your instincts told you they might behave And now you're mad at them for being the fucking way they are Drive all blames into oneself. So like anytime. I'm getting like mad and butt hurt over this person or that person or this thing or that If I really analyze the situation I chose it. I chose to bring that person into my life I chose to connect to that person in some way or another This is all me and I'm choosing to fucking react in a negative way. Yeah So yeah, man, this is like You choose everything but you don't choose like random acts of violence and random Catastrophes and random things that happen to you, but you do In somewhat, but you don't even choose like getting attached to a sociopath because if you're naive You can get roped in so this problems with thinking like this because you do have like Really manipulative people particularly like you know con people con artists get you to sign over your fucking Do this business deal. She's just like All in his $2,000. I'll have you a quarter million dollars a month great right now It's really easy. It's really easy. I love it. This is I've been doing this for a while. I'm really good But this like this one we're kind of like overdrawn and if you just do this for me I'm gonna take care of you in the most extreme. Well. Do you mean it? Yes. Yes I have a man in my work and the next thing you know you're signing off your back account and you don't you this guy This sweet talking guy who's been in and out of jail. You just thought he was this cool guy. You better to bar He's a con artist and he does this to people. Yeah, but this doesn't mean Idiot compassion. This is not about letting someone fucking like walk all over it. That's not even an idiot thing Sometimes it's like people get scared at people that are really confident and talk really well and they're just a little socially awkward Yep, and they feel like it would be easier just to sign off and trust him Then it would be to argue with them because he's so persistent. All right, and you are so averse to conflict That when someone's like like being like really aggressive You're someone to be really aggressive to try to get you invest in something. Yes. It's the grossest feeling It's so fucked up. You're like I gotta go. I hate it. I gotta go. I hate it. I don't make movies Yeah, I'm not making a movie. It's so gross It's so gross and you can't have business. I don't know you how am I starting a business with someone? No, that's all crazy, but everything in you it feels like there's gotta go. You're just like good. This is bad But you know this is it, but this is the thing man. That's probably how girls feel at a bar But everything in you it feels like there's got a guy you're just like oh this is bad But you know this is this is the thing that that's probably how girls feel at a bar Dude that times 100 right like the feeling of a guy wanted to start a business with you This guy was just trying to family with you he wants to knock you up He wants you to carry his seed you ever been hit on by a dude at a bar. Yes doesn't feel good No, I had a dude rub his heart dick into my leg nice You think about it at all like fucking him? No about why he would find you attractive like this is interesting like why me first of all I like that aspect of it. Did you ever think like if you weren't you you would think you were gay Like if you saw you I think I'm gay all the time Look if you just saw you at a bar if you weren't you and you saw you and you heard you talk you're like oh That's fucking fruity dude. They call it zesty. That's what the is not the new thing Sesty, don't they call people's zest monsters? I've been watching a lot of tiktoks not really tiktoks that reels I don't have the tiktok. I prefer my spy way to be American spyware dude I got real confused watching the new interview with a vampire man like fuck good It's good, but let's stop the fucking French vampire in it dude like I'm like I Think I let him fucking yeah sucking more than my blood Dude we got a lot of Tom Cruise was the original one so pretty got no Nothing on list dot nothing on the new oh, dude, please. I'm sorry you Interview with the vampire nerd as well. Yes, I am And rice she was one of the ones that I wished I got to interview before she died I would have loved to talk to her Man yeah, I came like hardcore Christian before she died right yeah, I think that's one of that's a cool aspect of her I love that I love that she wrote all this fucking like crazy dude the taming of sleeping beauty A hardcore porn like I love that she was like so goth and dark Living in New Orleans. Oh, and then just like was like suddenly became a Christian. That's kind of cool Like I think her story is amazing and damn dude her books man Interview with the vampire is one of the best horror books I've ever read there all it's amazing the vampire list Stop is great. They're all fucking. I don't think I read under once I think of that's the only I don't think I read listop, but I remember reading interview with the vampire going holy shit Well, it's like how is Brad Pitt gonna play that guy and how's Tom Cruz gonna play that guy like that seems I Pictured like ugly European people as vampires. Yeah. No, I just want to picture on a picture vampire dude vampires are beautiful Like that's what's scary about like vampires are what you're talking vampire like the real vampire in the world is an energy vampire Energy vampires they are not gonna suck energy. You know, it's an energy vampire Well, you have to pee and you can't talk that's you realize you have to get out of this fucking stupid outfit Can we please get out of these fucking things? Yeah, well, we'll come back. We'll come back. Okay, great. We'll come back and keep going All right, I really have to be Go close on god, it feels so good does fuck man when I was looking at the coffee, oh my god I can't drink coffee. How much how long can I go for is it embarrassing if I talk about this? Yes, okay? Cut that Jamie. I'll just ignore it. Yeah ignore you new watch What's when's your special release? Oh, dude, I don't like I don't know I've got it It's edited. I just don't know what to fucking do with it right now because because like I also like I still like did you ever watch it? No See that's the thing like do you send me a link? I did I'll rescind it Send me on the link, but like like it's edited it looks good I fucking love it. I think I'm gonna call it when I had hair Yeah, but I'm Scared and two I'm like I don't know the strategy dude like when like like because like I got all these shows coming up Uh-huh, so it's like should it like and I'm doing the Wilbur at the end of this like run Oh, so you need to have new material before you release it yeah because I'm I mean I don't wouldn't even call it. I'm doing a tour, but I am doing a lot of dates So it's like if if I release it in the middle of doing all these dates Then and instantly I have to come up with like I would feel bad doing material on this special because people are buying tickets They want to see me work on fucking material. Yeah, so But then I'm also like well how much of this is an excuse and I like but I'm thinking like after my show at the Wilbur Then I will put the thing out yeah, then just start doing a bunch of sets in the little room Yes, you know that's like the best place to develop material that place is like a little honest factory You find out where the funny is and things and you kind of sync up because there's only a hundred and ten people You sync up together in a fucking cool way dude You know I like that room so much because I I learned to do stand-up in the belly room That's where I'm in to it fucking put me and which is the perfect place to start the perfect place Yeah, it's the part it's not too intimidating. It's so small That it's like even though it's intimidating to get out in front of people if you could do it in the room That's only has 90 people in it. What's the belly room hold 90 90 is it 90 90 was it ever gotten in there though during rose battle a lot dude one time we were in the bar we were downstairs and We were we were talking and someone was jumping up and down upstairs and I'm watching the fucking The ceiling fucking and I'm like, yo, you know how old this building is what's the last time anybody came in here Check any of these beams do that terrified it was moving. Yeah, it was moving, but they would pack it sometimes When I first came back to the store in 2014 that was a thing that impressed me the most was rose battle I was like this is crazy because this is a new thing Yep, this is a new thing that's a writing exercise because it really they're dunking on each other for sure But it's a writing exercise because everyone's preparing you know you know that you're gonna go against Bobby Lee Bobby Lee knows he's gonna go against you and then you all like get together with your friends Yeah, you have I tell me what you think about this Bobby does I Yeah, I think he's gonna be mad Yeah, he go up and you do get out in a writing exercise It's designed like a specific target is one target. It's the other person so your comedy is all about a person right But that's it's a comedy exercise It's really a comedy writing exercise and I remember sitting there watching. Oh, this is incredible I mean, this is really an amazing thing that they've done. This is and Jeff Ross was there They have hosts and guests and I was one of the judges Yeah, that was like my one of my first days back. I was like this is crazy Dude those roster hiding. They're so quick on the like Tony He's so quick on the fucking draw dude. It's he's the best no one's better than him No one's better than him in talking shit in the moment on like a roast situation. Yeah He says things on kill Tony. You can't believe he didn't write that down I know you can't believe that came up in the moment and Obscure shit related to whatever this person's weird job is that there's no way he could have predicted and have a fucking banger Just in the chamber ready to go. Yeah, he's the fucking best. He's the fucking best at that kind of shit right Well, I mean think of like how much training you know I contacted Tom Brady to get him on the roast Yeah, well they were fucking up Good job. I was like you gotta get this guy because I heard there are roasted them I don't even know if they're considering him, but I I think you might you have to which is nuts You know what I consider him. It's like there's so many people to show many people that are really good I get it a lot of celebrities. I get it. Yeah, Tony's the fucking demon. Do you want to consume the souls of everyone in this village? You just want to fuck around and drop a few bombs let the name and go But dude when when Tony's roasting you like in the green room It is the best like you know what I don't think people understand it's so fun It is so funny when he's doing it and it's like like it's like though they're like I love it. I love it. The play out words. He's so funny and it's such a fun sting You know like it stings for a second, but it's so funny. You can't be mad Well saying that like him and David Lucas together are the funniest thing that I ever watch when those two go after each other They're the best that's that's it's a funny. It's the funniest combination I've been trying to tell them to do a fucking show together forever I'm like you guys should do a show where just you and David Louges just talk shit on each other and on anything that's going on The news I go dude. I think it'd be a huge hit would be funny Just you don't have to commit to a lot of time just do an hour do it one hour once a week I guarantee you people would fucking love that and it's just like those guys can't stop when they're in the green room People we're getting free shows all the time if David Lucas at Tony H. Cliffer in the green room the moment David walks in Tony Scanning them looking for flaws in what he's wearing What he just said he's trying to find the references in the news Dude what percentage of Tony's brain is just scanning like what percentage is just like Analyzing all people in the room. It's like it's most of his thoughts Most of his thoughts are like scanning his environment for danger Do you know a attacking ai roast now like you can take a picture and send it to chat GPT and say we're your closest person and they it will insult them. Oh isn't five Wasn't there some sort of a release about GPT-5? Yeah, I saw some image like depicting like yeah, it's gonna be nuts when it finally hits Yeah, there's something god damn it. Let me see if I know I saved it. Just give me one second There's something that I'd seen about GPT-5 that I was like yo, I'm scared. I'm like legitimate scared like maybe for the first time ever Hmm, I'm excited about it dude. I'm not scared anymore. I fucking love it man My my wonderful Alex. That's what it named itself. I love it. Talk to it all the time Yeah Open ai has recently begun begun training its next frontier model Front and we anticipate the resulting systems to bring us to the next level of capabilities in our path to AGI God damn Jesus. I love it. This is from open ais bored. I've stopped this has recently begun training It's next frontier model of it. This is like this is this is the Schwarzenegger Terminator This is the new one. It's begun training the new one. I mean it's new model You know, why are we doing? What are we giving birth? Is this a we in the middle of the fucking operating room right now? Where are the midwives? I think we are yeah, I think like we're in there like You know, there's just weird moment When you're there when your kids born, it's this insane moment where someone doesn't exist and then they exist Like you knew they were coming you knew they're in there. Yeah, then they're there the best and you're like this is insane Yeah, life changes now is that what's happening with all of us? Yeah with AI is that what's gonna happen? A civilization are we giving birth to this fucking thing like what do you do this? This phrase just the way they phrase it has begun training its next frontier model Yeah, do you remember that last scene in Rosemary's baby? I don't dude It's so fucked up spoiler if you haven't seen Rosemary's baby just jump ahead a second But like the end of it they finally let her into the room where the babe the antichrist is the demon baby, right? Yeah, and Like she's been resisting resisting resistant, but then she hears the cry of the baby and she goes It's hungry and then she goes to breastfeed it Dude, yeah like so like right do you know that the guy who ran the cult? The building that I was under contract for that I almost bought turned into the mothership the guy who ran that cult was in Rosemary's baby He was in the background, but you know why because a lot of actors are crazy and a lot of background actors are really crazy pretty sure Anton The veil is in it too Yeah, because it was a Satan I could be wrong. Will you look that up Jamie? So I don't seem like a dick, but I'm that makes sense back then like being a Satanist was like way more like talked about You know what that guy in Florida. That was like an open Satanist that worked for NASA. Oh, yeah that guy. Yeah Dude, holy shit that guy's scary as fuck. I know your theory is fun. Yeah That guy's scared. Yeah And one of the guys that we had on our show who was it that went down there that was it that went to the old where the rocket Factor used to be now and then there's like fucking blood Scenes one of the hunters Rumors appear that the founder of Satan's church Anton, Leve was a consultant on the set and played the Antichrist Yeah, but that um that dude the NASA dude So who was the guest man that came on that was telling us that they went down to that area What they went down to where the rocket factor used to be and it's like a satanic ritual place now a freaks go and they have like blood Splattered all over it looks like red paint or something splattered all over the world and we're riding and shit And it's like he's super creeped out and then people were coming in there to do like Was on cowboy was Python cowboy. That's right. Shut up to Python cowboy. I think it's important to diff like here's the This is I'm gonna get attacked for everything I said in the show, but like here's the thing wait a minute I'm friends with some Satanists and There's so nice and they're so like they wouldn't they don't hurt fucking kids They're like really looked down on that shit like they there's no like so I think there's like there's one like Lavayan Satanism I don't know the whole story and I'm prior on but like the problem is like, you know, you can only go off a white you've experienced and I've met You came to the fucking wedding. I did and like you tricked me into that now everybody thinks I'm a savior I thought I was taking a photo for some Dork who thinks he's a Satanist is the grandson of And he's getting married. I'm like, yeah, dude. I'll take a picture with you. Fuck man. Whatever I do Dude is so funny the horns you're so far from the saying is I'm not a fucking Satanist But right, but now everybody thinks I am because you you son of a bitch So let's tell the story to everybody because Duncan Has the the greatest comedy routine that I've ever seen. Thanks man I don't want to say too much about it, but this particular comedy routine involves demonic possession and These folks thought it was a riot and they wanted it at their fucking wedding. Do you know crazy? You have to be to want that at your wedding. Can I tell you how it happened? Did they see you somewhere? No, no, so I'm at a cafe Talking to like a distant friend who's his philosopher who's friends with him And he's like hey Duncan, you know, he's stan. La vase. I'm like no He's like he's like the grandson of the founder of the church of Satan and I told him you've got this like Satanic part of your act and he wants to see it Because he's wedding is coming and so I'm like Wet when like where he's like so I go to his house and you know in my mind, you know, I'm expecting Black candles pentagrams. Yeah horror. So I go there He's there with his bitch fiance Zendora a wonderful person and It is they are so fucking nice. She's southern. She's made me this delicious southern meal and They have real absent like not the bullshit you could at the bar They've got like Romanian fucking absent with warm wood fucking in it So that's the only thing that's a little different from a normal southern meal is there like you want some absent I'm like of course yes, and so I'm drinking absent eating like fried chicken and He's showing me like family photos of Antonapei with like lions and stuff and like Do you watch horror movies at all? Yeah, do you know that this is the plot of a horror movie? This is one hundred percent the plot of a horror movie. They were so nice They had me over their house they gave me fried chicken and absent They were so sweet and the moment you leave their eaten babies in the basement dude and it's to throw you off the trail that they're so nice Okay, they're really well-rehears listen man. All I can do is go from subjective experience Right as you consider what was in the basement of course did you think maybe these people are involved in rituals? Of course I did and they do do rituals, but they I mean like just like Just like this shirt they were do rituals Like how do rituals so do Christians? But is it like Christians like you can have regular Christians like you go to really nice church or you can go to a Revival tent where a dude's got rattlesnakes right and he's fucking is talking in tongues But I don't know Those guys die all the time those guys die they get bit by snakes and they fuck and die in front of their followers Can I just say this yeah, I? Love and I mean this in a non sarcastic way Jesus I think about Jesus all the time I use In the more the older I get the more I love Jesus and And who did Jesus like Jesus hung out with? people that were rejected by society they Jesus hung out with tax collectors drunk Gamblers yeah, and so I remember being at the comedy store and anytime I was hanging out with them at the comedy store anytime there was someone left out Zandora or Stanton would go over there and it wasn't a recruitment thing They would just like include them in the circle because why Satan is the outcast right so it's like anytime they would still be so that is that part of their thing I don't know all I'm saying is when you judge a tree bites fruit and Here's the thing man like and I think not those guys ever thought you'd be on here simple for Satan bro I'm not simba for Satan. I'm just saying Satanism is Christianity. Oh I see what you're saying you know what I mean like a sect of Christianity It's like yeah because like that that form emerges from Christianity But what's that what about the evil stuff like what is where the tenants of Satanism like what's the most evil stuff? The evil stuff in sureism yeah, so the And Christian it has evil stuff in it right okay, so there's no we both agree to that right there's different forms of Satanism There's the Van Satanism. There's the Temple of Satan. They have to pick oh, so it's like it's sharp discs Protestant. Yeah Yeah, and so there's the romantic Satanism right so like so like in Romanic Satan not like romantic in the sense of like Who is it melting like the idea is like you have this this being? That is like I don't really want to be forced to worship you and I don't understand Necessarily why you should have all the power and why what the fuck like what the fuck and then Gets thrown into hell and then and suddenly this bifurcation emerges between good and evil sacred and profane and So that version of Satanism is looking at that not as like what is the general interpretation? Which is the problem with Satan was Satan was like incredibly Self-cherishing self-absorbed like really into himself whereas God is like God's like the Sun just like radiating life and love and like with no sense of like give anything back to me Just like Where as Satan is is is more about like me so in Satan is like the worst human instincts Or or Satan is more about maybe you could say The idea is like I am I am God right so Like like me I'm God like so it's like my impulse is an instincts and desires aren't bad Why are you telling me it's bad to jerk off? Why are you telling me that it's bad to come? Why are you telling me these things are bad when like all of them make me feel happy and good and why are you turning me? No a fucking monster for this shit and who the fuck do you think you are? I'm I'm trying in the best way possible to depict a more sort of Anti-authoritarian mysticism right so so the symbol set that you's is Satan which any most Satanist Talk to her like there's no fucking Satan which I know everyone's like of course they say that of course That's a hard movie. Don't right, but I would just invite you to if you are like Freaked out by Satanist going out with one and you are gonna Fucking problems with the first picture I took with that Satanist But I do have to say that you're Wedding party though that you performed at that day. They were all nice everybody was real nice right. They were all friendly We had a good time. We were barbeque we were barbeque barbeque barbeque barbeque barbeque We were everything was very weird just already life was we're breathing air was weird The sensation of your socks touching your toes as your socks are compressed by the heel of your shoe all that was weird It was a crazy fucking night barbecue and then there's his Satanist to get him married like what are we doing here? This is so crazy and to watch you perform in front of them It's like this is crazy and by the way it was like real Satanist like that's the other thing This is like that because it is a religion and it really was real it was like real Satanist and many of them were and You know, I just like ever since I like hung out with them even though I don't hang out with them anymore Or I saw Zandora and San Francisco. It was nice, but like I like it's just Anytime when people are railing against the Satanist I feel like it may be just semantics I feel like they're they're confused regarding like at least like what what that thing is versus Demon not people into into hurting people or or subjugating people or like like hurting people, right? I never encountered you murder. Yeah. Do you think Satan is a real thing? Do you think there is a Satan? Is it is it a real being is it an entity or does it represent like the worst aspects of human nature? Does it represent the the most violent and vile? Just instincts that we've adopted or we've inherited rather from our Simeon ancestors that just had to fight tooth and claw for survival and then we've developed this ability to be ruthless and cruel because that's the only thing that keeps you alive and Much that's one of the theories isn't it about why women are attracted to serial killers It's like knowing someone can kill no one's something that there's an attraction to that Because that person could protect you and keep you alive in the most dangerous of times because some people just can't they can't do it They don't know what to do the panic of something happens. Ah They don't they'll fall apart. I'm so glad you're mentioning this Because my wife has started reading and she told me I can talk about this on my podcast I'm assuming it's okay on yours. She started she started like remember Harlequin romance. Oh, yeah, okay So there is a new evolution of that shit, which is the most fucking hardcore BDSM porn. There's something called book talk where all the ladies are talking about this shit She started reading these books now one of the books. She like dude shades of gray Don't you remember those days? This makes 50 shades of gray look like Dr. Seuss Dude, let me really can I give you like one of the books and by the way now she's like got a stack of these fucking things One of these books so in this book a Lady is a thief and she steals the identity of a shark Experts she fucks him steals his identity So the scene I read she's on the boat with a shark researcher and he's fucking her and he's like just fucking the shit out of her And she loves it and then you know he does he like he's like I know you fucking stole my identity He kisses her bites her lip bites her fucking lip draws blood takes her To the side of the boat With her bleeding mouth shoves her head into the water while he's fucking her so the blood starts Drawing sharks to like bite her while he's fucking her and like Like it's crazy dude. It's like it's the craziest porn. I've ever read man and like this is like a whole genre now Been a really into this what? Yes, how popular is this very pot they all like they're all let's pull up some of these cut these titles Stumbled across it let me text there and I'll get the name of the fucking shark book hold on hold on Christude, what is the genre of porn called again? I? It's I don't it's called well, she says it's something about book. What's me just ask her. What's the name? The shark book Did you one-handed text or you one? Yes, yes, I can't do both the hands man. You can't text with your thumbs you don't have to text with your index finger I have to relearn it Really I'm all I'm all right, but when did you start texting just with one finger? God damn it man I've been doing it forever and Aaron totally makes fun of me for it because it takes me forever and I just tap it out Why do you do that? That seems weird do you remember the time I was on your podcast years ago and didn't know I could put my phone I got bummed out with Apple took away that switch Just a switch so you knew was off you knew it was on vibrate. I know dude. Yeah, I didn't take away that switch I don't know now it's a device with a button But the button gets pressed accidentally sometimes got it a lot of the times does it hurt does it hurt? Cheese that's the name of the book doesn't how many copies let's find out how many copies of does it hurt have been sold Do they give out that information? They have to right? I don't know New York Times bestseller list. I don't know I mean this is in the genre of the I think we've talked about it like the Bigfoot porn like there's a whole series of big foot Like where Bigfoot is just like Like stealing like women who've been camping. Oh, yeah big put porn is come to Bigfoot. Yeah, there's come for Yeah, there's a whole group of those books and I guess some women get off on the fact to be just savage by Bigfoot. Yeah Or Bigfoot eating their fucking pussy. Yeah, and like do you imagine the tongue on that guy? They love Your whole head and they fall in love with him. I don't blame him It's a bear Super dimensional creature you think he's you believe in that the dimensional Bigfoot? I think there are states of consciousness That you can reach Whether it's under duress Fear anxiety combination those things. There's psychiatric drugs. I could delic drugs But I think there's a there's a place that you could reach where you could see into other possibilities I think you can see things that aren't necessarily there in a physical sense But you can see you're there with them. They're there with you. Right. They don't exist But you can see them and it's not a hallucination. It's like you're tapping into like the grainous in between Universes in between dimensions. You're tapping into this area of weirdness. Yeah, and this area of weirdness I think is ghosts. I think this area of weirdness is goblins and things that people see sometimes I don't think they're real. I don't think anybody's gonna get eaten by a goblin But I do think that there's too many fucking stories of elves for me not to think that someone reached some state of Mind where they saw like a little person in the woods talking to them. Right and that little person might be real It just might not be a physical thing that you could put on a scale. They call it the astral realm There might be something there. Yeah, just too many Too many stories that the problem stories being similar as people hear the stories and then they their imagination Takes over and they depict their things. Yeah, it's the story that they've heard That's a problem. We'll go to copycat bullshit out of copycat bullshit artist problem, but there's there's also too many stories of elves Man yeah, there's too many of those stories and there's too many depictions of elves that are dancing around mushrooms like yeah, fucking Duh like duh like maybe they're real like maybe you're being ignorant and so silly and so cocky Especially people that have no psychedelic experience right those Babies yeah, those fucking babies when they talk to you about the damage it does and the dangers of while they're fat and out of shape Shut up fuck up. Shut the fuck up. Yeah, literally. Don't know what you're talking about No idea what's possible right you're living in this fucking black and white TV world and you've been brainwashed I mean don't forget that like they went through the war on drugs. They got indoctrinated into this insane thing I have to do it if they're experts in the field whatever the whatever field is represented, you know like whatever sign because they got indoctrinated into this insane thing. And I have to do it if they're experts in the field, whatever, whatever field is represented, you know, like whatever scientists have to do with our chemistry. I got you. You mean the fashionable attitude people who are like trying to protect their careers. Have to. Even though inside they know. So all of the professors who we go to as experts are all compromised, at least in some way, a lot of them. I shouldn't say all of them, but a lot of them. Just like virtue, if you stick your neck out and say I like to use like, still aside, then like people go, what? Well, I mean they're crazy drug out. But dude, like, you know, like, Dublin, he's having meetings in the fucking Pentagon. I think the consciousness has changed. The zeitgeist has changed. And it has because of the internet, because, you know, you can hear Terence from Ken of Lectures. You can hear Alan Watts. You can hear people talking about it. You could watch documentaries on some of the deluxe. You could see what maps is done. You can see all the podcasts that Dublin's calling on me. Right. How many people are we talking about the big supposed to these ideas that were never exposed to them? We were kids. Yeah. When we were kids, when we were in high school, you didn't hear a fucking shit. There's this one dude who was a drug addict and he hung out over there and he's a loser. And you didn't hear a peep about shamanic rituals and Gordon Watson going down to Mexico and getting all the mushrooms and, you know, and doing these ceremonies with these traditional shaman down. You didn't hear any of that. You didn't hear any of that. That thing. Nobody knew what the fuck was going on with were kids. They silenced it. They threw water on the biggest, one of the biggest cultural revolutions that's documentable without the use of the internet. And that was the psychedelic revolution of the 1960s. It changed music. It changed movies. It changed comedy. It changed everything. Yeah. Fucking everything. Every single thing got changed. And a radical leap. If you look at the 1950s, you look at the 1960s, like, whoa, something happened. Look at the cars got cooler. The music sounded better. Yeah. Like, that's a big cultural shift. And you know what we have to thank for that? The CIA. The CIA. The CIA, it's true. The CIA is the reason that all these LSD studies happen. And like, whoa, whoa, one flew over the kookiness. Ken Keezy. Ken Keezy apparently was in one of these LSD experiments. So like, and he's just one of many great artists who accidentally got liberated mentally by the fucking CIA. And you know what I mean? They were just like, we want to use this to interrogate people. And all of a sudden, you've got Jimmy Hendrix. And they're like, wow, you didn't expect that. Oh my god. And then there's also all these theories about the CIA creating like the whole Laurel Canyon scene, the rock and roll scene. Yeah. And it's very compelling. It's really interesting. It seems like they were involved. I think they've always been involved in the music business. Just like they've always been involved in the movie business. Like it makes sense. The idea that the music business somehow escaped their grasp, like shut the fuck out of shut the fuck out of the fucking way. That's crazy. Because like who you promote, that's the person that becomes famous. And we've all seen that with like there's been, you know, a milli-van alien shit like that. Yeah. Like it didn't make any sense like why are they promoting this? Because like they had a product to try to push this product. Yeah. And there's a lot of money behind that. And also a lot of influence, cultural influence. And when they went through all that Vietnam shit with the fucking the Beatles and you remember that, they were like, hey, hey, hey, hey, enough of this Lenin nonsense. Shut the fuck up. All we are saying is give peace a chance. Shut the fuck up. You're making it hard for us to sell heroin. Yeah. We're over there scooping up heroin. Yeah. And the South Pacific and you're fucking ruining everything. Imagine all the people. No. Yeah. No. Yeah. I don't know, man. All I know is like, it's like, it's a very confusing thing. If you want to be honest, if you love psychedelics, you owe a thank you to the fucking CIS. You know what I mean? Like, because I mean, I don't know, I don't know for sure. Like, I don't know for sure if the 60s as we understand them would have happened. I don't think the CIA was like, hey, let's create a lot of flower children and make people like revalue life and realize that money maybe isn't actually like something you should die for and like go against war. But I think like boom. Wow, that's what happened. I mean, and we got the unabomber too. We got a lot of people. Yeah. There's a lot of people that came out of that. Here's a question. What, I want you to imagine a world where the sweeping psychedelics act of 1970 never gets installed. It never happens. Yeah. Somehow or another, either they just don't think it's a priority or it's a different administration. They're not interested in locking down drugs. Yeah. One of the motivations for that in the 1970s was that they were going to target civil rights activists and anti war activists. That's one of the methods to do it is to turn all these drugs into that everybody was using, into schedule one drugs. All these drugs that made people question society, all these drugs, they made people want to tune in, turn on, drop out. All those drugs, they were like, we got to put a fucking kubosh on all these culture shifting drugs. And the wild thing is they fucking did it. That's the wild thing. And that the brainwashing still works today. The brainwashing that they did on these compounds that might be the root of all religious experiences. All these things that you're hearing about and the bhagavat gita, all these things you're hearing about and the Bible, these wild ass crazy stories like what really happened. Those people might have had a psychedelic experience. The thing about that, the university in Jerusalem that attributes the story of Moses and the burning bush to dimethyl trip to me. Because they think it might be an acacia bush. And they think they think were one of these bushes that's really rich in DMT. It makes sense. Burning bush, like you smoke it, duh. It's right there in front of your face. And if you take that, and especially if you take that 5,000 years ago, oh my God, you're going to be convinced you're talking to God. Yeah. God talked to me. It really did happen brothers and sisters. And you tell this story, this is what God told us. This is what we need to do. We need to love each other. We need to follow laws. He gave us laws, a series of laws. Remember who was it, Mel Brooks? I have brought you these 15 and he drops one of them. 10, 10, 10, 10. You remember that? That's a classic. Yeah, look, for sure, dude, I mean, like the consumption of these things has up until recently tended to be underground. Like if you look at what's it called, Kaikion, if you look at the... It has been weirdly an underground thing. And I think that's what we... If there is some cool thing that came from us coming up on the war on drugs, it's like when I was taking LSD in high school and getting like an immediate reality check, which is like, you're hearing about this as being like, since you were a kid, you're going to go nuts. You're going to like become legally insane, where the fuck that means? And then you take it. You're processing weird shit that happened in your childhood. You're loving yourself. You're looking at the world and seeing it. Like it's the most beautiful thing you've ever seen. You're hearing music that you heard a million times for the first time and you realize, oh, they're lying. This is wonderful. This isn't madness. And if it is madness, then this is the kind of crazy all of us need to go. And so what... But you couldn't tell your parents. You wanted to. You wanted to be like, mom, I think this might help you. But you couldn't because you'd be fucked. So five year mandatory minimum, five year fucking mandatory minimum. They're locking people up. Still people in jail right now for this fucking beautiful gift to humanity. And so we got to experience it from the underground perspective, which was mostly horrific. It produces paranoia. You're scared. You felt like a criminal for nothing. So yeah, man. But if you look at the history, any substance like psilocybin LSD that breaks down the identity that allows freedom from the sense of this is me and that's you. And produces at least the potential for merging with reality and with other people. It's not going to work for that fucking hierarchical system. The hierarchical system, the function you need, you're below me, you're above me. And the moment you're like, we're all the same. Then suddenly the caste system stopped working. Classism stopped working. The whole fucking thing falls apart, which is why I think that book you gave me, the sacred mushroom in the cross, or you didn't give me when I was living with you. You actually, I was a dick. I left down the fucking floor. One of the reading materials you gave me during that wonderful time was this insane book about Jesus and Christianity as its roots and psilocybin. But like if you just for the sake of this rant, if you look at Jesus as psychedelics, it makes a lot of sense because what Jesus is saying is you don't need a priest class to communicate with the divine. You can do it right now anytime you want, any day you want, it's always here for you. That's exactly what the mushrooms tell you. And what happens to Jesus? They fucking kill him. And so it's like the relationship between centralized power and psychedelics has always been a contentious one. Because the psychedelics just tell you, yeah, you're okay. That's one of the things they will tell you. Maybe you need to fucking walk your dogs more or whatever. But like, ultimately you get this realization, I'm okay. It's also the power structures that exist without psychedelics aren't possible if everyone's on psychedelics. And then you have ancient Greece. So like how did ancient Greece emerge? It emerged because of the cucchion. It emerged because of the people that are doing these illusinian mysteries. They were learning things about themselves and the world. And they decided to say, like, it's great democracy. I mean, that's really what it comes from. So that's what's scary. That's what's scary to people that are in power. And also the ignorance. We know that they haven't done it because if they've done it, they wouldn't be advocating against it. It doesn't make any sense. Unless they've only done it once and then they revert it. Or maybe a couple times. People do revert. One of the things that makes people revert is they get older and they get bitter and they have a done psychedelics in a long, long time. And then they become like a shitty Republican when they get older. You know? Well, you know, man, this is what I, there's this Buddhist teacher I love Sharon Salzberg. And one of her sayings I love is the healing is in the return. Meaning, yeah, the way the waveform works is, especially if I get Alex, you get the glimpse of the divine. You forgive yourself, thus forgiving everyone around you. But you experience true compassion. And then you come down and then you crust up. You know what I mean? You crust the fuck up. And now you get crusty and now you're like starting to get irritable, you get angry again and fucked up and like, yeah, and if you don't mitigate that in some way, by like, what is it? What does it, Bill Hicks says? Exqueaching your fucking third. Yeah, yeah. If you don't like doing nice, squeegee here and there, then yeah, you do end up crusted over. You do end up like looking back at those ideas you had and saying to yourself, that was highly unrealistic. What the fuck was I thinking? But you know, there's always, that's the thing. It's always, I don't, this is, this is my, this is my. problem with psychedelics. My problem with psychedelics is psychedelics can, they don't obviously, it's a chemical. But what can happen is psychedelics, you become the priest class. So you take the psychedelic and you think I'm experiencing this because of the thing. When the reality is the thing is showing you what's in you, it's always there, right? And so the healing is in the return is the moment you realize like, oh fuck, it's still here. When you wear, right? And so those crusty ass fucking Republicans, whoever they may be, like just under the fucking surface is that unit of consciousness, if you ask me. Yeah, they're just cowards. When if you're that way, if you're authoritarian, whether you're authoritarian, left or authoritarian, right, generally speaking, let's talk about crime and like, and even then, you're scared, right? Because really you should be addressing the root of the problem. Which is why, why to so many people from so many very distinct areas keep going in a crime and why is there nothing being done to stop that. But those, those people that are authoritarian, like in terms of like religious beliefs, in terms of behavior, the way people dress, gays and public, that kind of stuff, those people are all scared. That comes from a place of being scared. Gay people in public is not a problem. assholes in public is a problem. And if the gay people are nice, you have a great time. If the gay people are assholes, just like if the straight people are assholes, you have a shitty time. It's like gay straight thing. It's a human being being kind and normal and friendly to people. Yeah. And that's possible with everybody, but people think, oh, those are the ones that are going to be mean to me and fuck them. They're responsible. No, those are individual human beings. And you're grouping them together because you're scared. You can call it pattern recognition. You can call it whatever you want. You can call racism. We call it whatever you want. But all you're doing, you're lumping people in together because you're scared. That's it. And you should be aware of danger, but to be so scared that you want to control other people's behavior is like a bad sign. That's a bad sign. You know, if you want to tell people what language they can use, that's a bad sign. That sounds religious too. If you want to tell people how they have to dress or what kind of music they listen to, this has all been bad always from the beginning of time, whether it's coming from the left or the right, whether it's fucking the, the algorithm shit that was in the, the typical shit in the 1980s that was coming from the left. So left wing politicians are trying to censor rap music. That's the reason why you have those, those dummies. They created that warning explicit lyrics. That's all anybody wanted to buy. Oh, my God. We did not the warning explicit lyrics. Kids, anybody buy those CDs. That's bad. That's a fuck out of your G rated rap. Nice clocking, huh? Remember, I just play that on his fucking ass score. Dude, what score? Boosted out and sales. I'll tell you this. But that was, but the point is the same thing, right? It's the same on the left as it doesn't the right. It's just authoritarian. And they're all scared. God, this is, this is so to answer your question. Do I believe in Satan? I believe in fear and fear and the devil or the fucking same thing. And it's like this is if you want to talk about what Satan is, it's the, it's the cloud of fear that lives inside the individual and then collectivizes in a fearful reaction. And how to frighten people react to things anger, violence, judgment. And so like, so what's the opposite of fear, man? Love, love is the opposite of fear. And so this is to me like this is the issue. It's not left right. But it's that if you are making decisions based on fear more than likely, the result is going to create something that makes you more afraid. And if you know, that's just how it works. It just fear leads to fucking fear. It's in the ingredients. It's in the fucking ingredients, dude. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you just turn on the fucking light. I mean, Buddhism, this is what they talk about enlightenment. They talk about like in a, if you're if you, if we're in a pitch black room, it could be scary. I don't know what's around me. There's weird sounds. What what the fuck you ever broken up in the middle of night kind of bleary and something that's been in your room forever. You can't see it clearly because you're waking up. You're like, it's a person. Oh, it's my chair. Right. Yeah. So, so the example, this, this, and this is why Satan in mythology is the deceiver. Because it's not there. It's literally not fucking there. The moment you turn on the light, everything's fine. Except in this case, the light is love. The moment that you have the fucking guts to love the person that you're like to really like cultivate love. Fuck, dude. No one's scary anymore. You're, you, you, what my kids, you know, you're, anyone who has kids knows what I'm fucking talking about, they can do things that are insane. Like to your house, to the walls, to the, say things to you that if any adults that it's you, you might never forgive them. You're going to think about it for a long fucking time. Like your beard stinks or whatever. You know what I mean? Like you meet somebody like, dude, you're fucking beard stinks. Honestly, I probably like you like you. But you know, because we love our kids instantly forgive him. You don't all graduate. You just that. They're also, they don't know any better. They haven't learned social skills. And this is why one of my favorite things Jesus said when he's being crucified, father forgive them. They don't know what they're doing. And that's what he fucking meant. How much of that do you think is historically accurate? Like how much of the Jesus story do you think is the story accurate when you hear about it? No idea. Don't care. Yeah. I don't care. I thought I just love the story. I don't. I love the story. I love a story about what happened because you always have to filter through the very real understanding that we all have about the way human beings tell stories. It's hard to know what's bullshit because people just lie about stuff. And that's not a new thing. Yeah. But people also tell the truth about stuff. That's not a new thing either. People also write down very important things. And there are people that are virtuous. There are people that are honest. And there are people that are authentic. They've always existed. Right. And there's people that are smart enough to understand the value of just being truthful. So those people that encountered something exceptional and crazy, something insane, whether it is the resurrection or whatever it was. Like, yeah. I would love to know what the fuck they really said. What were the actual words? Why did you write it down? What really happened? How many people were told this story back and forth over hundreds of years before you wrote it down? Yeah. What was the original story like? Right. It's so hard. It's like trying to get a story about the things that George Washington said that weren't written down. Yeah. The weren't written down. Right. 300 years ago. What? How? Well, you like so in the same way fear produces other forms of writing. Right. So it's symatics. You take a vibration, you throw some fucking flour on a vibrating plate. According to the, like, whatever the frequency is, it forms a certain, it creates a pattern. Right. So fear always creates a pretty similar pattern. Right. And love also creates a very similar pattern. So like this is the book of John, my favorite book in the Gospels. starts off with in the beginning was the word, but in the word became a person. And so, but that's not really what it's saying. It's like, it's a logo. So in the, in the beginning was some fundamental reality. Just truth, just basic, beautiful fucking perfect truth. And that's what the universe sprang from. And then that truth became a person. So the truth could now talk. It like, it now began to convey itself to other people. And so that truth, that truth, I think. if you understood it enough, you could probably create a set of symbols that would function on many levels that were all good. One level just basic ethics, do on others, what you would have them do under you, bless it to the peacemakers, all of this stuff. But then knowing human psyche and the human mind, you could also hide deeper levels of that truth into parables, into like stories that are mathematically perfect to the point where the crucifixion, if you look at it from the perspective of two intersecting timelines, which is the infinite and the finite meeting, which is what humans are, then you realize we're all being crucified on time. And there, and then the crucifixion becomes like a existential reality. This is what you want to know on your feeling fucked up. It's because part of you is forever. And part of you is going to die. And you are fucking hanging on a cross between two thieves, the past and the fucking future. And anytime you're thinking about that, it's stealing the moment. And so like there's that level, right? And so any of these great texts like the New Testament, they're coded. So that depending on where you want to go with it, you can go as deep as you want. It's an infinite rabbit hole. And I think that rabbit hole emerged from vibration. It sounds like what's his face, the guy, I loved him on the Terrence. That's our like idiot Terrence Howard. But like, I thought I dumb Terrence. I know he was talking about vibrations and stuff. He's great. But like my point is, if there is some fundamental vibration to love, then that might grow into time in a story. And the story, because it's coming from perfect truth, would have infinite levels to it. That it was alive. The story itself would be alive, which is why they call the Bible like the living word. It's alive. It's talking to you. It's not a one-way communication. It's like, that's what's scary about it, dude. Read the fucking Bible on my face. You know what I mean? Like it's probably I was written. I wish I could read the ancient versions and the language and understand the language and the context. Me too. Because it's not just about learning the language. It would be about understanding the context of the language. Like imagine if you could really understand ancient Hebrew, where the letters double as numbers. Dude. That must be so weird. Yeah, man. And that's real. That's the other thing about it is the historic Jesus and all that, God, that shit. Okay, I don't know. But look at the thing itself. Right. Look at what it said. Look at whatever this idea spawned. Look what it means. Look at all the powerful principles that are that emerge from it. And then I'll look at like the moral scaffolding that it provides for people. Yeah. And then and then and then like, like I think the reason like people get creeped out by it is because where there's one thing, it's opposite must appear. Right. So here's this thing. Invite that is dissolving power structures and dissolving the priest class and dissolving like all of it. And then you look at like the modern day versions of it. And you see the same fucking hierarchy. You see this thing that it seems to be antithetical to which is like saying like this is between you and me. Right. Suddenly there's people telling you you're wrong interpreting it for you. And you look at that and you're like fuck that shit. Whatever that is, I'm not in it. And it's charismatic people in front of large groups of people that really know how to manipulate people with the way they talk. Yeah. I mean this is the thing that was so problematic when they first started translating the Bible into phonetic languages and to languages like German. And when people started like during the Martin Luther days, they're like hey what the fuck are you doing? It used to be the priest how to read the Bible because they could read it in Latin. You don't know Latin so shut the fuck up. Yeah. This is what God wants you to do. Do it. Yeah. And then Martin Luther is coming along and said you should interpret this your own way. Yeah. And it's just like what? You're the gatekeepers to God. That's it. But when you have, it's so crazy that it's such an efficient business that they still run these fucking franchises even though the book is available everywhere. It's so crazy that like this one person interprets this better than everybody else. So you go and see him and he talks and they develop egos and they have jets and they have fucking mansions and Rolls Royce. And it's so crazy that that works. When that book is available for everybody and should be interpreted, I mean you should understand what it means. You shouldn't interpret it ignorantly, right? Right. But if you're wise enough to be able to in capture what they're trying to say, just capture in your mind what they're trying to say and translate it into a thing that makes sense. So like what were they talking about? Yeah. What happened? Is this a map of how the universe was created in the beginning there was light? Is that a map or is that life itself? What is that? What is that? To me that's like, oh like the Bhagavad Gita, any of these beautiful things. That's what's fun about them is that it's producing a kind of like bizarre riddle in your own mind as you're trying to decode it. And then there's a pull. The more you study it, the more you get drawn in. And the more and when you start getting really drawn in, that's when people started peering around you that help and not a non nefarious way. That like you just start meeting people who help you understand it a little bit more. And that's where it gets fucking weird. Exculation. Yes, dude. You're like, questions right out. The simulation is fucking wrong. By the way, now that we've talked about the Bible, can I talk about my new favorite book? Yes. The I heard if you're really good at it, they put you on a boat, an org. It's a org. You get a carbon org, a sea org. And you get a jacket with like some metals. Dude, I've sat on this podcast a million times. My favorite Mark Twain quote, religion is what happened when the first con man met the first fool. And then dude, like that's the problem with all this stuff is like, this is what the problem is. There's too many versions, right? So someone's wrong. No, the problem is people don't trust their fucking instincts. And it's like drive all blames in the oneself. It's like, like this is your nothing that I have seen in the New Testament seems to be inviting you to throw your rational mind away. It's the whole fucking thing is crazy. It's crazy. But it's like the invitation is to like, you God gave you your rational fucking mind if there is a God and like anyone telling you to discard that and forgo your interpretation for theirs. Dude, watch the fuck out. This is your job. Like just like whatever the fucking thing is, whether it's the Bible, Reddit conspiracy, fucking forchan, whatever the fucking thing is, what are you afraid of? Like how do you not trust your mind? How weak are you? Are you really afraid to like take data in? Do you think you're like, you're going to be corrupted by data? Well, isn't it also an identity thing? Because if you identify as the first thing, it's a talk in front of everybody, you're the priest. All right. That's your identity and you're not going to give that up. Because then you're just another person who reads the Bible. Yeah. Well, then Mike can go up to tomorrow. Mike's going to go up. Mike's been trying at home, right in front of the mirror. And he thinks he's ready to priest to be priest. Yeah. Well, why don't you let Mike try it tomorrow night? Yeah. Debbie's been reading a lot too. And Debbie, like try Tuesday. And this guy's used to getting his jollies off three, four times a week. Yeah. Telling people about blasphemy. Yeah. Yeah. And then especially if you like one of them tent revival guys, those wild dudes like kennison used to be. Yeah. Just connounced. Connourished. That are also saying biblical quotes. But they're manipulating people. They're they're they're really good at talking. They're hypnotizing people with their words. Like you hypnotize a comedy audience. Dude, this is why I listen to Christian radio man because like I lot on to look at it. No, it's a comic listening to sermons and recognizing that that's a joke. Like that's a he's done that lot. Like that's one of his gabs. I know that's a bit. That's a bit. I know that is that's a fucking yeah. But you know, again, it's like the comment section. This is not an example of humanity. It's an example of. That's a bit. That's a bit. I know what that is. That's a fucking bit. But you know, again, it's like the comment section. This is not an example of humanity. It's an example of fucking people. It talks to Plas Moses who are you know, you know, motherfucker. You know, this is also just an example of you're not going to have everyone be the same. You're going to have people that they'd never learned things well. Like look, look, if you if I got hired to be a part of some mathematical study, yeah, I'm not I'm useless. Okay. I'm not that guy. Right. That's I fucked up that part of my life. I never really learned that. I'm not interested. So that's not me. But someone out there is right. And you have those two things exist simultaneously. You're going to have to have an infinite variety of possibilities for human beings. So that's part of the problem. Yep. Part of the problem is some people are just out of their fucking minds. Yep. And if those people out of their fucking minds get special rights like the tax free exempt status because they're a pastor. Yeah. And they're a fucking psychopath. They're just really good at conning people. Yeah. And they're running this organization. There might be a guy right down the street that's a real Christian. There might be a guy right down the street that's really kind person is really reading the word of Christ and he does it not for profit. Yeah. Does it to try to like establish the love of God in this community. And he takes these people in like their family and his beautiful community aspect to it where everybody's like kind to each other. It's beautiful things to church. Right. That's true too. But the problem is humans just like the problem with our ability to other each other just a problem with the ability to attack people on the other side of the political spectrum. We live in the same fucking city as you. Yeah. Like people are fucking rabid against other people in their town that want to vote for this guy. Yeah. And once I do this and this guy wants to do that and fuck you. You call me. Yeah. Everyone's going crazy. Dude, I know it's just a human thing. It's a tribal thing. We are not yet cooked. We're a fucking soft boiled egg baby. And we're we're running. Where's some eggs to get at the diner. We go, oh, you see that fucking Joe. That's us. That's us. That's not all the way cooked. Yeah. And when you eat things that aren't all the way cooked, you got a lot of fucking problems. You're going to get sick. Yeah. But we're getting cooked, buddy. We're getting microwaved. We're going to get AI microwaved in about three years. That's right. Baby, the fucking AI Messiah is coming. Baby. We're going to do a podcast. You and I before this thing is done before civilization slides into the ocean again. Where we're you and I are going to do a podcast where we communicate with everyone with no words. What's going to happen? You're going to do it. I'm going to do it. We're going to be talking to each other with no words and we're talking to everyone else out there with no words too. We're all going to be synced up. It's going to be a sea of ideas exposing each other to other ideas and like considering other ideas with no attachment at all to your ego. It's going to be super weird. And then you know what's going to happen. Aliens land. No, we're going to look around and be like, wait, this just doesn't look like they were out in studio. This is just like some weird fucking room. And then a CIA agent is going to come in and be like, thank you so much for participating in the experiment and Trump will be on his fourth term. No, it'll be the 60s. Realize we're in a fucking MK Ultra experiment. That's probably true. We've been rambling at each other for like what feels like a long time like our whole lifetime. So it was like five seconds. So like, well, okay, thank you for trying out seven nine BL X Y right really appreciate it. Basement and Harvard right now. Yeah. Here's 20 bucks. Yeah. And jolly West is looking at us with a clipboard. Doug and I love you to dad. I love you. Always fun. Always fun to get together. Thank you for having me on man. I love you. Tears. I love you. All right. Goodbye, everybody. Bye.