[Music] that that documentary on Jonathan Wagan I like I'd heard of him but I had never heard any of the backstory that you described of what was going on in what was it Peru that happened? >> Yeah. 1997 Operation Laser Strike. >> Operation Laser Strike. Never heard of it. So this was a classified US Southcom, US Southern Command operation to track narot traffic, drug traffic in Peru, Colombia, Bolivia, all sorts of uh South American countries. And the MAC G, the Marine Air Control Group uh 28 was sent down >> uh alongside some elements of the Air Force and a pretty large joint program including the CIA to set up TPS 43 and other radar systems to track some of these narco planes. And so Jonathan Wayant, there's still debate on whether his station was in Pukulpa, Peru, which is kind of central Peru, uh, Aikitos, Peru, which is northern Peru, because he wasn't privy to where he was taken for for this radar detachment to track the narco traffic. I personally think this is northern Peru because he just gave a lot of details about the flight time down to Peru, details about time spent on planes. So one morning late March, early April, he is doing nighttime guard duty and a sergeant comes up to him. I think this is Sergeant Montil and says, "Hey, there's been a crashed craft. We need to go out and see if it's friendly." Nothing about UFOs, just a craft crash. This could be a plane. >> So Wayant, Sergeant Allen, Sergeant Atkins, and about seven other Marines all drive in a direction to go find this downed aircraft. By the time they reach the LZ, after a combination of of driving and trekking, the Marines come across a ravine where a about a 20 m in length egg-shaped craft is just stuck in a granite cliff face, probably granite. Want doesn't fully know for sure what the material is, but wedged in there. There's fluid leaking out of the craft. There's what looks to be three hatches, one of them open with possibly a nonhuman arm hanging out of the craft. And this liquid is like clear, but it's viscous like syrup. And the craft itself looks somewhat metallic, but it's changing colors like purple and green. The best I can describe that is the mother of pearl effect, similar to oil on water. >> Mhm. >> So, Wayant gets pretty close to the craft. It's It's way above him, but he gets pretty close under it. He gets the fluid all over himself. And it's to this day like removed hair from his legs. It discolored his camies or his battle dress uniform. And so after about 10 to 15 minutes at the site and some interesting details about the craft is there was a a light going around its circumference that seemed to power down. Almost seemed like the craft shut off including a a sound like a guitar amp that eventually died down. >> Uh way eventually kind of came too hearing Monte or sorry hearing sergeants Allen and Atkins yelling at him to hey step away from the craft. >> And during this time he felt like I know you and Jesse talked about Jake Barber and some of the psionics and stuff. He felt like there was something in the craft reaching out to him, trying to communicate with him, trying to tell him that it was okay. Don't worry, help us, but it's all going to be okay. Which is really bizarre, really strange. And to this day, he has seen like these creatures, what he calls them, in his dreams that were in the craft. He he doesn't know how to explain how he felt like these things were contacting him. But it's really strange. But here's where >> when did he say this for the first time publicly? 20 thou the year 2000 on Steven Greer's uh disclosure project archive. >> Wow. >> So he was part of the 2000 disclosure briefing project where Greer was doing some really good work getting whistleblowers together and we gant's testimony was in there and has really stood out forever. He reached out to Greer because he was facing a lot of reprisals and he thought he was going to die. >> Wow. So, there's some stuff he doesn't like talking about um and he didn't really talk about live with me, but stuff like being surveiled, having his money messed with, having, you know, his cars tampered with, and he was just really afraid for his life, so he decided to speak out. >> But so, how long ago did you talk to him? >> Uh, I talked to him almost daily, but I >> You talked to him daily? >> Yeah, he's one of my good friends. I love Jonathan. >> He's a standup guy. He's hilarious. He's great. >> Uh, so I I talk to him all the time. But getting back to his story, so Sergeant Allen and Sergeant Atkins holler at him to move away from the craft. As soon as these Marines start heading up the ravine, and this is the most interesting part to me because, you know, my channel's pretty focused around crash retrieval and reverse engineering. >> A couple of US Army CH47 helicopters fly over them. As these helicopters are getting to land in a nearby clearing, the Marines, including Wagant, including Allen, including Atkins, are intercepted by a team of men in black camouflage. That's right. And stop me if this sounds familiar. When you hear cases like Michael Herrera, a team of men in black camouflage that apprehend the Marines, strip them of their gear. Wayant being feisty, being like 23 years old, tries to swing at one of them, clocks him in the head, and these guys at that point make an example out of Want, push his face in the ground to get more of the liquid on him, beat the crap out of him, and then out of the helicopters come a team of people ranging from rain jackets to large hazmat gear, mop gear, missionoriented protection posture, marked and stamped with DOE, Department of Energy. >> No [ __ ] And so a couple of these DOE guys in protective gear seeant. They strip him of his clothes. WGant is handcuffed to a stretcher. His feet are gagged and he is put on a CH47 out of there. Doesn't know what happened to Atkin or Allen's. But here's what's what's really interesting about the DOE. The Department of Energy has its own team. It's called the nuclear emergency support team. And this is basically a rapid reaction team that can be sent anywhere in the continental United States or around the world to react to nuclear or radiological signatures. >> And one of the governing bodies of Nest, the DOE NES, nuclear emergency support team, is the 1954 atomic energy agreement. 1954, if this sounds familiar to you, are you familiar with the 2023 and 2024 National Defense Authorization Act uh UAP disclosure disclosure amendment? I know I'm throw familiar with it, but I don't I don't know a lot of the details. >> Okay. So, like a a quick side note to that, the UAPDA, which is probably going to be pushed again in in the upcoming Senate conference. I hope that gets pushed through. But the whole point of this amendment was to bring forth disclosure of UFO legacy programs, programs hidden within the US Department of Defense and intelligence communities that are housing, exploiting or reverse engineering technologies of unknown origin, TUOs. M >> and one of the governing bodies listed in this legislation that hides some of these materials is the 1954 atomic energy act that considers UFO materials as transclassified foreign nuclear materials. >> So inherently that that means like anything that could be considered nuclear radiological is pretty much born restricted born classified and can be pigeonholed to avoid standard declassification processes. What's interesting about the DOE nest is their founding authority was also the 1954 atomic energy agreement. So you have legislation like the UAPDA talking about 54 being how the classification system for UFO materials is born and then you have stories like Jonathan Wagan encountering DOE teams whose given authority is that same 54 agreement. So it's very interesting. Also there's provable instances that DOE NEST was actually looking to operate in South America, Colombia, Bolivia, Peru at that time in 1997. >> There was a Russian probe that went errant. Um it was going to crash. US Southcom thought this Russian probe was going to crash uh either in the Pacific or somewhere near Peru and Bolivia. >> So DOE was actively using Defense Support Program satellites to monitor the region later that year. So DOE Nest was already interested in in South America. >> Wow. And there was a lot of spooky [ __ ] going on in South America in the '90s. Like there's a lot of there was a lot of uh UFO crash incidents. Yeah. And there was uh a lot of I think that Jacqu Filelet book was earlier than the '90s though. Jacle wrote a book about like some crazy massacre that happened in South America. Um where like basically all these people were slaughtered. Have you heard of this? >> It sounds somewhat familiar, but I'm not fully. I think Jesse was the one who told me about it. But um but yeah, no, South America and Mexico that that period of time was like very active with this this kind of stuff. >> Well, cuz same year we have uh Vargia Brazil, James Fox's big case, right? >> Y >> and I guess he's doing a lot more work on that. He just talked to I think it was Chris Ramsay or somebody that he's got more information coming out about that. So that'll be pretty darn interesting. In 1978 in Bolivia, there was a case of a u almost like a tic tac, like a cylindrical shaped object crashing into the mountains of Bolivia. >> A US Air Force team called Moondust, Project Moondust, was dispatched to kind of investigate that region. And I'm trying to think what else in Mexico kind of like what you're talking about in 1974 in Mexico there's a pretty famous kind of underrepresented crash retrieval case called Coyame Mexico northern Mexico of a crash saucer that a Mexican retrieval team went to go get but there was some sort of toxic or or biological hazard in the craft that killed the entire Mexican recovery team and then of course the Americans and their CH53 Chinuk sw uh swooped in and took the craft. However, there's of course an argument you can make that probably maybe our guys, >> the Americans took him out. But there's a South America and Central America, ton of crash retrieval stories, >> right? >> And a lot of marine crash retrieval stories. You have Jonathan Wagant, you have like the testimony of Michael Herrera, and there are some other whistleblowers who aren't public who have talked about seeing such >> teams in the continental United States, these black teams, >> uh, with craft. So, it's it's really interesting. And then uh kind of rounding out the WGant story, he was then on the on the 47 taken to an unknown base into an underground section of a base where he was held for 2 days. >> And why was he the only one that was taken out of there? >> That's a great question. My guess is because he was contaminated with the liquid. >> Oh, >> Atkins and Allen did not get covered in the liquid. But the weird thing is Wayant didn't have any like medical tests, right? because I've hypothesized he was taken to the NAMU Navy Medical Research Unit 6 in Iikitos, Peru. But it's not like he was subjected to blood drawn all that stuff. The one weird thing is he was forced to give in like an forced to take an anthrax booster right after that >> which Michael Herrera also had to take an anthrax booster after that anthrax and another marine also had to take an anthrax booster in 97 which is weird that there's a lot of anthrax boosters right after crash retrieval encounters >> but I I think that's why he's separated. So, he doesn't know what happened to Atkins or Allen at this point. >> But in in >> He still isn't talking to them since. >> No, he doesn't like him. They don't like him. >> Oh, wow. >> Part of what's a little weird about this case is one of those two, Atkins or Allen. I reached out to both. One of them got back to me and I emailed them uh just cordially saying like, "Hey, I'd like to talk to you about your time in laser strike, specifically 1997 and possibly anomalous crashed aircraft." >> And I send emails out from my UAP Gerb email. It doesn't have my information, none of that. >> So, I email one of them and they respond, "Hello, my full name," which is of course like a bully intimidation tactic. And the guy just tried to call Jonathan crazy, tried to downplay him, but you know, he he did say my full name when I had never given out my information before to him, nor since, nor on my channel. >> Has Jonathan did he tell you about like ever being like contacted by anyone from the government or intimidated and then tried to like shut them up? shut people trying to shut him up. >> Yeah. And that's part of the reason he um went to Greer >> at True Classic. It's not just about fit and fabric. It's about helping everyday guys show up with purpose and confidence every single day. Their gear fits right. It feels amazing and it's priced for the everyday person. What sets them apart is the message behind it all. From uplifting men in their daily lives to giving back to underserved communities. And it shows in their ads how they understand the average dude. I've been wearing True Classic for a while now, and it still impresses me every time I put on their clothes. Their clothes just fit so well, feel so comfortable, and look so good. I want to replace every single shirt in my closet with True Classic. Forget the overpriced designer nonsense and skip the generic cookie cutter potato sacks. True Classic delivers premium essentials built for real life. Whether you're out in the town or working up a sweat, level up your style with clothes that fit any scenario. Grab yours at Target or Costco. But for the best deals, head on over to trueclassic.com/danny. That's true lsic.comdany to get hooked up today. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. >> He said that the FBI would show up at his house and show up at his grandma's house, like looking to talk to him. He never talked to him, but >> so he was pretty spooked. >> Sort of like the the men in black, right? If you want to call them the men in black, telling people not to talk about their encounters, >> right? And these uh these these Nest teams, so these Nest teams are part of the Department of Energy and it's basically like they they comp they they bring in all of the like top tier special operators. >> Not quite. And I'm sorry, I should have specified that more. It's more of a science and technology team. >> Okay. >> They just deal with the science. They deal with setting up a site, neutralizing signatures, debriefing, containment, all that stuff. But the interesting thing about Nest is of course it it is a DOE department but it operates out of contractors. Contractors including Rathon uh Lawrence Liverour National Labs, Sandia National Labs and EGNG. EG&G of course is the infamous company Bob Lazar said hired him to work at Area 51 S4 to reverse engineer propulsion devices on the sports model. Yeah, I know you cover it deeply in your video, but like after they extracted him out, does he or does anyone else have any idea what happened to that craft or what they could have done with it? >> No. And that Jonathan and I talked about that. I mean, that thing was pretty large. And if it was stuck in granite, how the heck was that thing taken out, right? Like there were CH47s on the ground. The team would have had to extract this thing from a granite cliff face almost. >> And and how does a does something get lodged in granite? You would think that like it would have that would mean it's harder than granite, right? >> If it went through the granite, >> what kind of material is harder than granite? >> I don't some sort of meta meta material. Maybe like a shield around it. Maybe that translucent mother of pearl effect was some sort of shieldlike material. And why did it crash? I know you and Jesse talked a little bit about why UFOs crash. Jonathan hypothesizes that this was shot down >> from a Hawk Mim 23 or similar missile system. Mhm. >> And I know, you know, how our highly advanced non-human craft shot down, right? It seems a little bit silly. A ballistic missile could take down a a spacecraft like that. Well, you know, maybe maybe there's some some truth to that. There's some other cases we can talk about about shootowns as well as the strategic defense initiative under Reagan, which there's a lot of really interesting ties that there were some backdoor programs for some space-based shootown weapons of UFOs. But what Wayan thinks here is this was a Hawk Mim 23 air burst system that just exploded near the target >> and some of the fragging just took it out. Oh, like a shotgun blast missile kind >> but that's what he thinks, right? He doesn't have any sort of uh confirming evidence for that. It's just speculation on his part. >> Yeah. And then when he So he claimed in 2000 that he they were like telepathically communicating with him. >> That's wild. >> But what's interesting too, he talks about he talked about like a three four-fingered arm hanging out the craft. >> Greer edited that out of of his of ways interview. >> Why do you think that is? I have no idea because Greer likes to speak about uh kind of love and light communication and these beings were very friendly to Jonathan asking for help saying everything's going to be okay. So, I don't know. In that same interview, Greer also cut out um James Fox asking Jonathan questions. >> Now, why was that? I I don't know. I don't know why Gre would cut it out, but you know, >> maybe he didn't want to. Maybe he thought like the descriptions of fingers and like some weird alien arm hanging out would make it more unbelievable and he wanted to kind of like leave the stuff in there that was more plausible. >> Yeah. But with the stories of crash retrieval, there's always the baggage of biologics, right? Some there's in so many cases with crash retrievals, there's stories of biologics. And I think that for a lot of people is a big um big stretch to kind of wrap their head around cuz it's one thing to think that non-human spacecraft may be from another planet, maybe from a different existence, maybe future humans like Dr. Mike Masters likes to kind of hypothesize on is crashing here. Whole another subject to think that there are beings in here and what those could be. They're possible morphologies and so forth. >> Yeah, I'm sure you've heard I'm sure you've heard the story of Annie Jacobson's description of Area 51, the guy she talked to from from EG&G. What do you make of that? So, George Knap, uh, I'm trying to think about that guy's name. It's slipping me right now. >> She only released it like last year, I think, after she dropped her book. She She kept it secret in the book, right? >> But she released his name cuz I think he's dead now. >> Yes. So, I'm trying to think and uh I'm trying to think what the name is, but this was a source of George Knaps 10, 20 years before that. >> The guy who worked at EG&G at Area 51, head of special projects. Okay. This guy told George Nap told George Knap, and you can look at it in a weaponized interview with him and Jeremy Corbell, I'll send you the link because >> I remember seeing this. >> He said that that director of special programs at EGNG told George Knap that there were beans and craft held at Area 51 and told Annie Jacobson something completely different. >> Why would he do that? >> That's strange. >> Isn't that interesting? Because Annie's description is very it's so detailed because she's with the family and him and apparently he told his family this for the first time and they were like really upset about it. >> Mhm. >> Like how do you make that I mean Yeah. I don't know. I don't know what to think about that. >> Especially cuz in that weaponized interview, George Knap was a little bit hot under the collar because he said like, "Hey, I I'm I gosh, I'm trying to remember this guy's name. >> Steve, maybe you could find it." He he says that this EGNG >> Annie just type in Annie Jacobson EGNG source. >> Yeah. Basically what what basically what this guy told Annie and this was way after he talked to George Knapp obviously. Or was it cuz >> Yeah, it was like 10 years after. >> It was 10 years after. Okay. Basically what what he told Annie is that it was a a Russian drone that was flown here uh for >> by disfigured people, right? by disfigured people by Mangallay the the Nazi guy disfigured children basically to make them look like aliens and they crashed it crashed whether on purpose or not and uh and he was like well why wouldn't you expose >> Alfred Alfred O'Donnell >> so she asked him she goes well that'sed up why wouldn't why would the US government keep this secret because this makes the Soviets or Russia look terrible and he said the reason they didn't expose it is because EG&G started doing the same exact thing with children See, that's that's interesting that that's said because >> and she said his whole family was there listening to this and they were like, "Why why did you keep this from us? That's just terrible." >> That's also something that was pared by Rick Dodie >> uh Air Force. >> He said the same thing. >> OSI officer. Yeah. And Greer's I think it was his 2017 documentary Unagnowledged. >> That was the first time I ever heard of Roswell specifically being like disfigured people sent from Russia. Which I don't know. It's interesting that Alfred O'Donnell on one hand told George Knap that there are non-human beings and craft under Area 51 and told Annie Jacobson that this was a a Russian experiment. Regardless of outside Annie Jacobson and George Knap, there's plenty about Area 51 specifically and of course EGNG that's well worth investigation. And as well as that kind of dives into the subject of of contractors with UFO technology, UFO materials, UFO bodies. M >> it's a it's a pretty deep rabbit hole that there's a lot to outside of just Albert O'Donnell cuz that's so weird he tells Nap one thing and and Jacobson another. >> Yeah, it is weird and it makes me it makes me wonder if if what he told Annie was more closer to the truth because he was older, a lot older closer to his death and his family was there and he told his family and they were visibly upset according to Annie unless Annie is making it up which I doubt is >> I doubt she is either. Annie seems pretty respectful. I know she ag disagrees a lot with some of the more UFO stuff, but doesn't she also she also is a proprietor that Area 51 S4 is cor is real, right? >> Yes. >> Like I think she's put forward a badge of somebody who worked at site 4. >> Oh, I don't know about that. I don't know about that. >> And of course, site 4 is what Bob Lazar said he worked at the sports model for. S4 is S4 is really interesting. It's like the auxiliary site below Groom Lake. It's just south of Groom Lake, Area 51. And then you have Tonapa just northwest. >> Yeah. Yeah. The S4 stuff is crazy, man. I I don't know. Uh I don't think I don't remember if she talked about S4 in the uh in the Area 51 book or not. But it's really interesting some of the stuff that were they were doing at Area 51 right after World War II. And you know, she explains how the money was stolen. And I think it was Dulles stole a bunch of money from the reconstruction in Europe fund to build Area 51. And they were doing all kinds of crazy CIA test flights and building, you know, building the um >> those uh those those Blackbirds Yeah. those and the and the U2 and all that stuff there. Um but I don't know. I don't know. Like do you think that Area 51 is still being utilized for this kind of stuff? >> Probably. And I also think that there's probably underground facilities beneath Area 51. um specifically maybe a facility built into the pre-existing boron mine there. Uh and that could be considered a deep underground military base. So I made a video on there was this um whistleblower who went really quiet. He was a lieutenant colonel at Edwards Air Force Base out of the 412 test wing. >> Uh the Edwards 412 test wing is what's called a major range test facility base and MRTFBs. An MRTFB. There's just over 20 in the continental United States. Uh these include things like Dougway proving ground, the Utah test and training range, um Fort Wuka, Edwards 412, China Lake, Pax River, and your favorite that you talked about with Dolan Altech, the Atlantic Undersea Test and Evaluation Command. >> These operate between >> Navy, Air Force, Army, and Defense Organization, right? So Edwards 412 is a MRTFB and this individual I call him Ed just cuz I don't want to burn his real name. Ed claimed that he worked as an electronics warfare test director at Edwards Air Force Base at the 412th testing reverse engineered vehicles, reverse engineered ARV, alien reproduction vehicles, whatever you want to call him. and that he was initially stationed at Nellis Air Force Base where he operated under Nellis between Edwards at Area 51 and S4. And the thing is this I hope this guy goes public sometime because I've tried to track him down with every avenue. I have his name. I have his number. I have called him. He's blocked me. I've emailed him. He's blocked me. I've texted him. He's blocked me. Heck, I've even added him on Snapchat. And funny enough, that's the one place where he's ever like read my message and not blocked me. Snapchat. This is a grown man. And his his his official records do of course say he was at Area 51, that he was at Nellis Air Force Base, that he was at Edwards. And so this guy claims that he worked on rever serving as the test director on reverse engineered vehicles, kind of operating as the middleman between scientists and ARV pilots. M >> and so I think that that existing program which he said existed between Area 51 S4 and Edwards is likely still going on today. But of course that's a that's a pretty that's a topic that requires a lot of kind of I guess credibility in UFO crash retrievals to think about ARV alien reproduction vehicles and kind of reverse engineering vehicles. Where what do you think about that? I know you've talked to to Jesse a little bit kind of on your stance about UFO. Where do you where do you stand specifically on copycat vehicles if so to speak? >> I don't know. I have no idea. Like you're saying you're saying like what do I think about us being able to recreate a UFO? >> Yeah. >> Like the tic tac type stuff. >> Tic tac. Uh triangles, saucers. >> I don't know. I think I I think it's a mix of [ __ ] probably, right? I think like the tic tac was likely something that we have that we created, you know, maybe some black aerosp or like locked or something like that. some sort of like black technology that nobody knows about. Maybe that's part of the $21 trillion that's missing that Katherine was talking about >> that could have created the tic tacs or something like that. Um I don't think it was like foreign military. I think it was probably us testing our own stuff on those jets that had just gotten their radar upgraded. Um, now you know what Dolan was explaining to me is that there's documented uh accounts of these underwater UFOs coming out of the ocean in like 1717, >> which is crazy. And and since talking to him, it's, you know, it's apparent that there's just a mixed bag of [ __ ] here. Like, is it something that's been here for for millions of years that lives under the water? Um, is it it's probably also us that we've probably recreated [ __ ] that we found. >> Um, you know, then additionally what me and Jesse were talking about is like he was explaining how all this anti-gravity research went dark in the 50s and just and just went nowhere and then string theory came about. So like >> that probably has something to do with it. The Towns and Brown stuff, you know, there's there's a so many pieces to this puzzle. It's crazy. Well, I know you and uh Dolan were talking about the subject of USO, and I know you guys brought up the underwater NRO, >> but you didn't dive too much into it. So, that's that's something we I'd love to talk about cuz it's so intriguing and also involves a pretty interesting two really interesting crash retrieval stories. >> So, how come I've never heard of the underwater? Is it classified or is it Oh, yeah. Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video. Back to the show. So it's not there's no website for the underwater NRO because you would think they could make an excuse for it. They could say, "Oh yeah, we're just trying to monitor nuclear submarines, you know, adversary submarines." >> So there is a Wikipedia page that's crap that calls it the hidden younger brother of the NRO. So in US intelligence, you have the big five agencies, the CIA, NSA, DIA, NRO, and NGA. >> And then there's the hidden neuro, the National Underwater Reconnaissance Office, whose activities are seemingly more sensitive than even the NRO's. There are admirals in the Navy that I have spoken to who did not know that neuro was a thing >> really. >> And so I sent them a little bit of stuff on neuro and they went, "Oh." So there's a couple there's a couple books uh such as the uh the intelligence community by Jeffrey T. Richson, great book. I really recommend everybody read that. And some other sources that can really dive in to learn a bit more about Neuro. as well as former admiral, director of naval intelligence, CIA deputy director, NSA director, uh, Bobby Rayenman. >> Bobby Rayenman in a I think it was 2018 finally admitted in a speech at some university in 2018 that he directed Nuro, but he still couldn't talk about it to this day, which is interesting. He said I when he became director of naval intelligence, he wore another hat that was neuro, but they still didn't want him to talk about it. And in another interview for a university, I think this was some California university, he said that he had got in trouble before for talking about Nuro. So Nuro was started in 1969 and it was started to kind of coordinate the Navy's and the CIA's reconnaissance activities, similar to the how the NRO was started to coordinate the air forces and the CIA's activities, right? And so part of the the founding programs for Nuro were to kind of coordinate operations, keep track of and uh commence missions with some of our sensitive nuclear submarines. >> Uh kind of tap undersea cables. >> I think this was called the IV bells program and as well as just underwater reconnaissance underwater monitoring. The neuro was supposed to exist between the Navy and CIA's director of science and technology. Now, that director of science and technology, we can talk a lot more about that because that has some tremendous connections to UFO crash retrievalss. But really early on, the CIA just kind of took command of Nuro. And it wasn't until 1972, 3 years after its creation, that John Warner, Secretary of the Navy, was finally put as uh Nuro's director. But then it changed hands back a little bit because in ' 74, Bobby Ray Enman became director of Nuro. And of course, he went on to be a a CIA spook. So Nuro's kind of claim to fame is using vessels like the USS Halibet, USS Seawolf, um >> the USS Jimmy Carter, the NR1, the United States smallest nuclear submarine, and the Glowar Explorer. Have you heard of the Glomar Explorer? >> Yeah. So, so >> K129 Soviet sub crashes near Hawaii, a little bit northwest. The CIA and Neuro create the Glowar Explorer to go retrieve the vessel and I think it embarks in uh 1972, right? And conventional wisdom, only a third of the K129 is retrieved. Uh maybe more, probably more, and it might be buried up in the Pacific Northwest. But um then the Glowar went on to be used by Loheed Martin and its subsidiaries for 20 years for quote unquote deep sea mining operations and such. So the the really really really interesting kind of connections with neuro come with uh chief scientist of special projects for the Navy John P. Craraven. And so in 1964 John P. Craraven was set to start the deep systems or deep submergent systems project the DSSP. And I'm sorry there's a ton of acronyms. I'll try to spell them all out. That's something I get flack for a lot. And this was to drastically increase the Navy's u deep ocean engineering capabilities. And so the DSSP gave Craraven the task, we need you to be able to commence engineering and Navy operations at way bigger depths. >> So 1964, Craraven starts the DSSP. In 1965, Craraven receives a classified briefing of something called Project Sand Dollar. Sand dollar is the earliest probably SAP within SAP within SAP we can kind of make sense of. It was a program that was hidden within a program hidden within another program hidden within the Polaris submar Polaris submarine missile program which was oddly enough spearheaded by Admiral Rayborn who went on to go work at SIC but we can talk about that later. But this program was highly classified and an itemized inventory of a collection of objects on the seafloor for national security importance uh ranging from the Atlantic just all around the world and it wasn't just aircraft or or nuclear stuff. >> Mhm. So commencing after that briefing in 1965 on sand dollar craraven under the DSSP the deep system submergence projects creates the DSRV D submergence rescue vehicle and DSSV deep submergence search vehicle and these are supposed to be uh vehicles that kind of can satisfy the DSSP. So the DSRV the deep submergence rescue vehicle is supposed to be basically a submarine rescue vehicle. Uh this was out of response to the loss of the USS Thresher. And this would be something that a submarine team can get in a small little submarine that can be transported anywhere around the world in 72 hours. It's that rapid reaction. It can be piggybacked on on a vessel. Specifically, Craraven says in the silent war, his memoirs, the USS Halibet and the USS Seawolf, two neuro vessels that he directly names to rescue any submarine crew anywhere in the world, la. and the DSSV which is used for ocean surveying uh ocean engineering retrieval operations and so forth. Uh there were supposed to be six DSRV and six DSSV the two submersible units built but only two DSRVS were ever built the Mystic and Avalon out of Loheed Martin. So there were only two of those ever built. >> However, that brings me to a um a really interesting crash retrieval story. So in you know art the art bell show right? >> Yes. >> So in 2002 I think it was about summer of 2002 a a caller came on air and said hello my name is Mark. I was a former marine diver that went on to go work on a DSRV crew. And so this guy tells the story of in 1991 or 1992. I'm getting the dates a little bit wrong. there was a survey ship in the North Atlantic about 250 mi outside of Aberdine, Scotland that picked up radiological signatures on the seafloor and that the DSRV was dispatched to go check this thing out. And so the the group is steamed out to the North Atlantic. I think this is in the Rockwell Rockall trough in the North Atlantic just northwest of Aberdine, Scotland, cuz I looked at like depths and this guy said this was about a mile and a half deep. Mark did >> and so the team dives. So, so where specifically would it be again? >> The Rockall trough. >> The Rockall trough. >> Yes. Rockall. >> Pull up a map of that if you can, Steve. >> So, the team dives in the DSRV, which could also be a DSSV, a deep system search vehicle, one of the two, because Craraven said that John P. Craven, remember, chief scientist of special projects out of the Navy, that although there were never official missions uh for DSRV or DSSV because no submarines ever sunk after the Thresher, these were sent on numerous clandestine operations. >> Wow. >> If it might be a Google Earth search might be a little bit better. >> Well, you had it, but then you lost it. There you go. Rock. Rockall. >> Yeah. >> Hit layers on the bottom left. Zoom in on that. Oh [ __ ] Look at that. >> Yeah. So, this was about a mile and a half deep. So, we need over 8,000 ft uh sea sea floor. Wow. And so Mark and his group are steamed out from Virginia. My guess is this is a really clandestine DSSV cuz the DSSV have operational depth of 20,000 ft, but were apparently never built, but used according to Craven for clandestine purposes to this region. >> The team dives. By the time they get to the seafloor, they see a large triangle wedged in the seafloor. The triangle has no cockpit, no visible means of propulsion. It's wedged in the seafloor and around its circumference has glyphic writing. Same thing as the 1965 Kexsburg uh Pennsylvania crash. Same thing as the Roswell I-beam. Same thing as what Danny Sheihan has said he found in the classified blue book files. And so there's a a really anomalous triangle down here that there's no visible means of propulsion, nothing they can see. >> So the team goes back up, informs the the steam ship what they saw. >> Uh a marine archaeologist is brought down. They go take photos, videos, and survey the vessel. The marine archaeologist estimates that that triangle had been buried within the the the kind of the seafloor for 30 or 40 years. And so eventually the team is tasked with rigging uh materials to the craft to try to bring it up. And because the size is about 70 ft in height, the team estimates this is about the weight of an F-14, right? And an F-14 is interesting because the NR1 had previously recovered a lost uh F-14 off a US aircraft carrier. But so the the object is rigged up uh you know, the crew makes estimates based off the the size, what metal might be, you know, involved, brushed aluminum and so forth. But this object rises about three or four times faster once buoyancy is attached to it and it's kind of brought up to the ocean surface. The craft is eventually rigged up. Mark once the DSRV crew is back on board gets to see the craft again this time in person about 70 ft long. Little bit rounded of a back like a perfect triangle glyphic writing along the side like gunmetal color. No visible means propulsion. No lights. And eventually he and his crew are steamed off ship never given another word about this. Not sold to sign any NDAs or anything which is kind of interesting. But apparently the work they did was inherently classified because the DSRV and the DSSV was used for classified operations under Nuro. >> That's [ __ ] wild, bro. Yeah, it's a really interesting story and it just went on ArtBell once and I'm trying to track this down because Mark uh drew sketches of this for Art Bell and he also provided Art Bell the names of the other Navy guys he was with. >> So I want to track these guys down and find out more about this story. >> Have you tried reaching out? Yeah, I know a guy who used to work for Artbell and I'm I'm trying. No luck because ArtBell has passed. >> But gosh, would that be would that be something to >> to get after? >> Yeah. I wonder how many more stories there are like that of retrieving stuff under the oceans, you know, because you don't really hear about that kind of stuff. >> No, there's 1967 Shag Harbor, of course, which occurred in Canada. But here's a real treat. In uh 1972, there was an encounter of a man who worked as a gunnery instructor at Great Lakes Naval Station near Chicago. This guy, I think he went by the pseudonym RK, related his story to Leonard Stringfield. Uh Leonard Stringfield is one of the greatest UFO crash retrieval investigators of all time. Wrote um status reports 1 through 7 on UFO crash retrievalss. RK claimed that in 72 at the uh Great Lakes Naval Station in Chicago, he was tasked to kind of deliver orders, deliver a message to, you know, a commanding officer. So, as he goes to deliver to the commanding office officer, he passes into a Quanet style hunt hut on the premises and in there is a large metallic teardropshaped craft. No visible means of propulsion. Looks like a teardrop. Looks like a perfect mix between a teardrop and an egg. Very smooth, one color and so forth. But here's what's interesting. He he then meets a guy that was stationed in San Diego in the Navy. And this Navy guy said that he knew about that craft that was brought down and that it was brought down by a naval destroyer and recovered by the Glomar Explorer north of Hawaii in 1972. >> Wow. I think we've explored more of the moon than we have of our own ocean floors. It's crazy. And if you look at, we were talking about this with Richard Dolan, too. Like you can literally turn the globe. If you look at the Pacific Ocean, you can see there's there's a no [ __ ] land. >> Yeah. the it covers up more huge it's like a massive amount of this earth is ocean. >> So what what's interesting about the the creation of neuro the deep submergent systems project and all this in 1964 it seems like sand dollar had existed previously with an itemized inventory of everything that existed on the seafloor of national security interest but until Craraven created the the DSSP following sand dollar and then Nuro was created there was no way the Navy could retrieve these items. So it seems like the US Navy had a large itemized inventory of all of these objects on the seafloor, but until Craraven drastically increased the depths at which the Navy could conduct engineering operations and retrieval operations, those just sat there. >> Now, what do you know about the that base in the Bahamas that me that Jesse was talking about? >> Oh, Altech. >> Altech. Yeah. Is that still is that thing still operational? Are they still doing work there? >> I I'm not sure actually. But that brings up the the point of like underwater bases, right? >> Yeah. >> There's a u there's a great author, his name is Richard Solder. He has a book called Underground Ground and Undersea Bases where he talks about possible undersea bases worldwide, >> which is really interesting. And of course there's it's it's very likely that there are like undersea nurases for submarine refueling and such. But >> I mean the concept of undersea bases is interesting because already underground bases is is incredibly interesting. The question about undersea bases is how do you power them? >> The logistics sound like a nightmare. >> Yeah. >> At least for >> It seems like optimal though, right? >> Yeah. For cooling, especially if you have some sort of uh high temperature reactor. I mean, in the 1960s, the US Army Corps of Engineer published a bunch of deep basing studies on where to place deep underground military bases throughout the continental United States, but also published a ton of papers such as like uh self-contained nuclear reactors to power stiffs, subterranean facilities, and so forth. >> Wow. >> Yeah, that's one of the things that Katherine was saying that a lot of the missing money she thinks has been going to funding these constructions of these underground bases. Yeah, that's I think one of the most interesting topics in this subject because you know I've done a project on directly relating those to UFO programs >> and craft and materials being stored underground >> and I have a friend who was former army public affairs this was about 2010 to 2013 area >> and he relayed to me that he traveled between a stiff a subtrading facility as they call them under Fort Bliss Texas and White Sands new missile range >> and he traveled between these locations via train. >> Wow. >> And he said that the train went so fast it reminded him of his fear of flying. >> Oh my god. >> Because a lot of people will look at the kind of underground bases systems and uh connective tunnels and and scoff it at a little bit cuz it's a logistic and engineering nightmare, right? >> But you know I I digress. Back in the 1970s, the Rand Corporation, which is known as a fedally funded research and development center, FFRDC, uh, one of the employees, high-up scientists of the Rand Corporation, published something called the VHST, the very high-speed transit system, which was a massive underground train system that would connect New York to Los Angeles and basically be a massive underground tunnel system. And of course, if these tunnel systems exist, I I think it's highly likely we got some of that technology and ideas from the Nazis. >> Yeah. Um, you know, before before the end of World War II, there was uh there was a system called the Roarbon by some German scientists, which was a pneumatic train system to exist under Germany and to connect Berlin to France or Paris and a network of underground train systems to go at incredible speeds. >> This was a concept. >> Yeah. But here's what's not a concept that's really interesting. So Xavier Dorsch was head of the uh Todd organization in Nazi Germany. The Todd organization had created the Autobond. You know that famous German highway with endless speeds. And at this time, uh, Hans Comler and various, uh, really nasty Nazi scientists were using underground locations for aircraft manufacturing and so forth for contractors, but as well as continuity of government sites such as the Rean Worm Logger in Poland and Ordruff, which are these really, really crazy advanced underground locations that I think it was Ordruff even had like its own underground rail system connecting it. It was self-contained. And so Xavier Dorsch was one of these whiz kid engineers for the tot organization which is similar to the US Army Corps of Engineers. In 1947 uh with Operation Paperclip where the US brought over a bunch of Nazi scientists, there was one report from air material command that requested Xavier door specifically as well as three other German Nazi technicians for underground plant construction. So I think immediately after post World War II is when underground or facilities or stiffs immediately be began construction because we plucked some of the Nazis best and brightest who had created such intricate structures under Germany to to come work for us. >> Yeah. And if that stuff does exist, if they are spending money on all this crazy stuff and you know they have all these secret programs to recover crafts and to build underground highways and and >> and bunkers. That would explain where a lot of that money is going that Katherine Fitz was talking about those trillions of dollars. >> It's not cheap, right? >> No, it's definitely not cheap. And you know, the other question is who who's in charge of it? >> Yeah. >> Who has control over all of it? >> You know, analyzing the structure of the supposed UFO legacy programs is so difficult to track, right? You know, if there are programs, which of course I I believe very strongly there are, that there are DoD, contractor, FFRDC, UR University affiliated research center programs that deal with the exploitation, recovery, and reverse engineering of non-human technologies. How are these programs structured? Uh what sort of communication is done across the programs? How are the intelligence communities involved? And at the top of this, who is who is pulling the strings? Because it's not like this is a a above board air force project, above board navy project, not like a CIA project. All of this is inherently born within SAPS and USAPS unacknowledged special oper special access program. Sorry. Which Congress and even the executive branch to a certain degree doesn't need to be read in. You have to have a need to know to access these things, >> right? Yeah. That's what Steven Greer was explaining to me. He was like he was explaining to me how like these tops top joint chiefs of staff people can't even get access to some of this stuff. And that's and the way he was describing it to me is like imagine if Lockheed or one of these companies like this got so much technology that advanced so much after getting all this black budget that they've basically gone off the rails so far to where they have more power than like every foreign and domestic military combined to where they're kind of like a like a a breakaway military superpower that like doesn't have to answer to anybody. >> If like Katherine Austin Fitz says, if there is a some sort of segment existing within US military intelligence that has a secret space program, they are have the asymmetric advantage in every single war fighter capability. If somebody has ARV, alien reproduction vehicles, which I believe they do, of course, they have an tremendous amount of advantages over any traditional human military. I mean, this is something David Grush has talked about as well in his news nation. >> Sorry to interrupt. Oh, Elon's tweet today. >> No, what did he tweet? >> It might have been today or yesterday, but it was Stephen. You can probably pull it up to I got it. I might get it wrong, but he said something to the effect of like when [ __ ] hits the fan, at least we have spaceships or something like this. >> Yeah, but what's Elon on about? Right. He was on Joe Rogan and he's told Joe Rogan he knows there's no aliens because he has an all access pass to DoD programs. That's nonsense. An all access pass to special access program. Unagnowledged special access program. excluded program material, no foreign classification, special access required classification, absolute nonsense. You have to have a need to know to read into these programs. What you're talking about with Greer and some of these joint chiefs not being accessed. He's talking about Thomas Wilson from the Wilson Davis memo who was deputy director of the DIA at the time, I believe. Um, and he tried to gain access to the some of these programs and was stonewalled by the special access program oversight committee senior review group. >> So, Elon would definitely not have access. Oh, unless he has a specific need to know for specific programs. Like let's say that some of his uh Starling satellites are interfering with the NRO's AI sentient program, right? That you know there's some FOYA documents in 2023 show that the NRO sentient program had monitored tic tacs over redacted locations. Then Elon might be tangentially briefed on some aspects of that program. But no, unless he has a need to know, um there will be no no read into those programs. That's just that's just nonsense. >> Yeah. I mean, he's launching all those freaking rockets and satellites into space. You would imagine that he's got some sort of peripheral knowledge of something. Even if he does, even if he hasn't been read in, like he's surrounded by these people and he's surrounded by that guy Tim who was in the book who, you know, who's like super esoteric and all this stuff and super into all this stuff, visited Chris Bledsoe and all these people. And if that guy's working for him and talking to him, like how how is it possible that he's not had serious conversations about it, whether it be like a a full uh readin or not? You know, >> I'd wager it's probably high probability he's read in on the UFO reality, right? I mean, um >> it seems like like here's the thing, >> it's very suspicious that he just writes it off and dismisses it like that >> or jokes about it saying, "Oh, I'm an alien." Something like that. Uh our good mutual friend Jesse Michaels was just on Joe Rogan and they they Joe and Jesse both said no I I think Elon's BSing a little bit about that because it's the world of special access program controlled access program special access required use apps and that stuff gets into some real real real strict access. >> I mean the the Wilson Davis memo is a perfect example. This talks, this recounts a conversation between um Admiral Thomas Wilson and Eric Davis in 2002 in the parking lot of EG&G in Nevada. >> And this hearkens back to 1997 where uh Steven Greer uh Brigadier General Steven Lovekin, Commander Will Miller of the US Navy, and astronaut Edgar Mitchell engaged in briefings with Admiral Thomas Wilson, which actually did happen. like this. Even Wilson agrees that this happened even though he disputes the memo >> that they briefed Wilson into the reality of of UFO special access programs. And Wilson went according to the documents, according to the Wilson Davis memo, Wilson went on a big hunt to try to find these special access programs that were working on UFOs. >> And what he found was that these programs were gatekept by the special access program oversight committee senior review group. And this was set up in 1993, 1994 after a near audit almost exposed um some of these programs. But what's really interesting about that is one of the contractors that I I think are up to their eyeballs in UFO legacy program operations is North of Grumman, >> uh creator of the B2, creator of the B21 Spirit Bomber. >> They in 2003 absorbed a company called TRW. Mhm. >> Um TRW are the great Richard Dolan theorizes TRW as the contractor behind Zodiac which was possibly a Romana Clay, a fictional story posted by pseudonym Sedge Masters about a UFO crash retrieval team. >> Uh TRW also bought up um BDM. BDM is of course a company that US Army general of INSCOM Albert Stubble who's really interesting as well went on >> to go work for uh in 1985 but TRW in 1993 or 1994 right around the time SAP was reorganized to structure the senior review group to gatekeep legacy programs was sued for owed the US government $111 million for or overcharging on space programs. And so one can't help but to think that this there might be connections here because Northrup Grman purchases uh TRW in 2002 2003 and immediately pays off that lawsuit for them >> which is really interesting. And also there's some General Accounting Office um documents in 1993 that talk about the Navy and the Air Force specifically not complying with SAP regulations. They talk about the Army complying with SAP regulations. And that's really interesting because uh as as far as I know from just people I've talked to and and conversations I've had, the the army participates in a lot of research, development, test, and evaluation of non-human technology, but does it in a very streamlined fashion with contracts with generals overseeing it and so forth? >> H and it's not super classified, you're saying? No, it's very classified, but it has probably more oversight than something like Neuro, something like Air Force, something like Ed if he's really testing reverse engineer triangles. So, out there at u at Edwards Air Force Base. >> Right. Right. >> Yeah. Another thing we we I think we glossed over in the beginning, which I I just remembered was during Jonathan when Jonathan was uh sent out to go see that crash, that craft in Peru. Wasn't there reports of something flying in and out of the atmosphere like at super high speeds? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's really interesting because Jonathan said he heard uh Air Force personnel talking about craft entry and and exiting Earth's atmosphere at like Mach 10 plus. >> Yeah. But that's also there's really intriguing connections there because we also talked about the DSP, the Defense Support Program, working with Nest later in 1997 to monitor Russian space debris over South America and Peru. >> Well, you know, you remember Wikileaks, right? >> Yeah. >> So, in Wikileaks, there was Hillary Clinton campaign manager Bob or John Podesta. >> Oh, yeah. >> And John Podesta had email exchanges with former DoD contractor Bob Fish. And in these contractors, Bob Fish is talking about how the DSP was one of the high-profile programs that track UFOs. And there's old old stories, I think this is in the 80s, of DSP satellites monitoring UFOs that pass within a mile and a half at 22,000 mph of the satellite. >> So, were these USF personnel working with the DSP and were they specifically tracking UFOs? Was there some part of laser strike that knew there was UFO activity and tracking this stuff? I mean, 22,000 mph is absolutely bananas. >> Yeah. Especially in the in like the '9s. >> Yeah. And especially making in what seems to be intelligent maneuvers >> cuz this who knows if that's the case, but all Want knows is that he was he and the other grunts were just kind of set off set out to uncover what seemed to be a crashed friendly or foreign aircraft, right? >> And it wasn't a secret mission. And it was just, hey, go secure this L LZ. Something on our radar crashed. Go see what it was. It wasn't a UFO mission. It wasn't a secret thing. The the I think the biggest question of that whole operation is, who were these guys in in black camies and black fatigues that held Jonathan at gunpoint? Are these crash retrieval operators? Are they like a rapid reaction unit? Because if you look at a couple years from a couple years from Jonathan's encounter in 1997, the CIA Director of Science and Technology Deputy Director Carl Wolf began what's called the CIA's Office of Global Access. The Office of Global Access has been accused by myself, by great reporters like Chris Sharp, Christopher Sharp at the Liberation Times, who's incredibly brilliant, >> of running foreign crash retrieval programs and working with uh JOC, Joint Special Operations Command. M so one must ask was this an element of of J-C retrieval teams of course uh before he went public Jake Barber under a pseudonym wrote the Sentinels of Ether little manuscript where he talked about kind of blue-onblue retrieval team action and a JCO unit firing upon US forces that were interested in you know craft retrieval and working in UFO programs. So what are these special operators? It's it's it's a really interesting question because there's tons of testimony of dedicated rapid reaction units or are these local special forces guy like I hypothesized in the Jonathan video of local seven US Army seven special forces green brace just plugged in said hey you got to go recover this these guys are are pretty severe you know pretty highly trained guys are they just pulled in on happen stance or are these dedicated teams brought in >> the what's the guy's name again um >> Jonathan no the other guy this guy who went on Jesse talked about the psionic stuff >> oh Jake Barber Jake Barber. Yeah, the Jake Barber stuff was apparently corroborated with the Michael Herrera stuff because he like he was Is it true that like he was going in to try to like uh >> red team? >> Red whatever [ __ ] red team. I hate that word. Um he was basically trying to like catch these whistleblowers and like prosecute him for like leaking classified information. And then he saw Michael Herrera talk and then he was basically like, "Oh my god, I was a part of this." Yeah. >> And that's when he allegedly decided to like join the other side and like blow the whistle himself. >> Yeah. I I'm so glad that happened. I remember when Jake Barber did the extended video with Ross and mentioned Michael because for over a year at that point I had been sworn to secrecy from Michael not talking about his quote unquote insider. >> Uhhuh. >> Because Michael put a Michael had you know kept me give given me the skinny about what had been going on for a long time including where he was taken by Jake Barber. >> So he was telling you stuff like personally >> range. Yeah. And I knew I knew Jake Barber by a different name at this point. But yes, it is true that Jake Barber was tasked to infiltrate Greer's camp um and kind of try and maybe set up whistleblowers. I don't know. I think the question needs to be asked, did Greer know this? >> Was Jake sent in to promise him highle information? And did Greer know about this and willingly let uh Barber in knowing that he was an agent for possibly an agency? Because around the same time, 2023, there are multiple Greer Wit uh whistleblowers who I have found in Greer's DPI archive, his disclosure project initiative archive, and I formed friendship and relationships with that contacted Greer and always in 2023. They started facing reprisals. >> They started getting threats to their pension. There's one guy in Greer's archive under the number uh 10892. This guy talks about being on an alien reproduction vehicle retrieval team at Nellis Air Force Base and uh kind of witnessing a touchdown of a sunflower extraterrestrial craft that he cut off contact with Greer cuz he was threatened with uh inappropriate you know explicit underage content. >> Oh my god. >> Yeah. And so this stuff all happened around started really ramping up around 2023. And so did you know is is there a connection there? One must ask. It's it's it's quite perplexing. It really is, man. >> But also, who knows? Greer's operational security is absolutely abhorrent. So, I there there's no excuse that I should be able to go into his archives and f and be able to track down some of the whistleblowers. No excuse, >> right? >> I the operational security is so bad. I I should not be able to do that. >> But I I'm just glad that it was me who was able to do that with some people and not, you know, somebody else. unless agency folks have done that and kind of tracked down whistleblowers and threatened them with their pension because some of some of these high level whistleblowers have uh spoken to Greer in the past because he's really was the only guy to turn to for a long time, right? >> He ran the disclosure project. >> That's the crazy thing about him. I mean, a lot of pe everybody [ __ ] hates Greer for the most part. I've never heard anyone say anything nice about him except for Jesse Michaels. Jesse Michaels is the one person who's like, "Bro, you got to give him credit. He's been doing this forever. He's he's brought forward the most amount of whistleblowers that have divulged the most amount of information. So like, you know, take it for what it's worth. He's he's done more harm than good or I'm sorry, more good than harm. >> I I don't have a I've never spoken to Greer. I don't plan to. He and I don't have a good relationship. He called me an intelligence asset, so I'm not I'm not I'm not too And he's also hurt many of my friends, so I'm not too high up on Greer. I I think that he kind of has his own vested interest in a lot of uh the testimonies he receives. I think he treats whistleblowers that come to him like his whistleblowers and so their own autonomous people that should be directed to, you know, people like David Grush to disclose to or Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. And so I think it's very complicated, but I personally I I'm not a a huge fan. I don't really like being called an intelligence asset or him or my friends. >> Yeah. Yeah. No, there's definitely um some some personality quirks there, >> but what I would like to see is, you know, how he always calls out Lou Alisando. >> Yes. He's got this crazy there's this crazy dynamic between him him and Lou Alzando and I' I'd love to hear what you think about that. >> Uh I don't I I don't I would rather heir on the side of like pushing for disclosure instead of like trying to get into like interpersonal problems and so forth, especially a character like Lou who is surrounded by a lot of controversy. >> Yeah. >> I I I do think and all I'll say is I I think more questions need to be asked in documents Foy about his time at SIFA in the early 2000s, the counter intelligence field activity. Oh yeah. Yeah. >> Uh I on a on a pedestal of of like high level whistleblowers, I put uh David Grush and then um and then you know others, but I don't like to engage in the drama. But I would like to see a debate between those two. Uh Greer and Alzando. That would be really fantastic and interesting to see cuz Greer always calls um >> Alzando a a asset basically a disinformation asset. >> Well, don't they have the same lawyer? Isn't Danny Shehan represent both of them? Yeah, Shihan used to work for the Disclosure Project. I don't know if he still does. A lot of people used to work for the Disclosure Project. Leslie Kaine, >> uh, you know, the article, the 2017 New York Times article. She used to work for >> Steven Greer >> back in the early 2000s. And I talked to her at the I snuck my way in back in November by the UFO hearings into the um, disclosure fund event. And I talked to her a long time. She's she's brilliant. She Yeah, she knows quite a bit. But, you know, she even used to work with Greer. I I think back in the day, Greer had a little bit of a different mindset. Uh I I think maybe some of the problems with him arose more in the future, but that that that drama between the two is is pretty interesting. >> Yeah, man. The when you start to paying too much attention to like the the personalities and like the the UFO celebrities and the drama, you start to get like lost in this whole thing. And I think it's probably intentional. the combination the combination of like >> Twitter people on Twitter, >> you know, arguing about who's right and who's wrong and then you mix in the fact that everyone's trying to sell a book or a documentary or a movie and they're building their careers on this stuff. >> Um, you know, I'm not innocent of it. I do podcasts. I make money on podcasts about UFOs. So, I I try not to make it my whole personality and my whole identity as much as I possibly can. But um you know there's just so much [ __ ] [ __ ] to go through, bro. >> I know. And especially uh official nonsense like Dr. Sean Kirkpatrick, the head of Arrow, >> who is fraught with a lot of uh really weird past. So you're familiar with Dr. Sean Kirkpatrick of Arrow, right? >> Well, Sean Kirkpatrick has a very checkered past before Arrow and pretty interesting future after Arrow. So Sean Kirkpatrick gets a hold of Arrow in like 2022. error reports to the under secretary for defense for intelligence and security. This at the time is Ronald Moltry who was both on the board for Battel Memorial Institute. >> Oh yeah. I want to talk about them. >> Oh absolutely. The MITER Corporation and like a group called the Better Angels which is funded by the Carile Group which is a huge big money group. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So Kirkpatrick and Moltry famously in in 2022 kind of debunk the subject of UFOs and so forth. Kirk Patrick used to be a senior research scientist for SIC, Science Applications International Corporation, even published with them quite a few times. In 2022, Arrow engaged in contracts under the DoD for Aerero support services with a company called Sanorp. Sanorp one directive is to stop whistleblower leaks. >> Oh wow. >> And I I recently tweeted about this. I have the exact contract number, but Arrow is tweeting is getting in getting in contracts with companies that specialize in whistleblower leaks, but I I I want to focus on what Sean Kirkpatre did after Arrow. You know, he leaves Arrow in a tirade. Oh, nobody likes me all that. Uh really whiny. And then he goes on to work at Oakidge, which is a Department of Energy uh FFRDC, federally funded research and development center. >> That's where he works now. >> No, not now. Okay. But we can talk more about FFRDC's because when people talk about UFO legacy programs like joint United States government contractor like Air Force and Northrup Grumman UFO programs, the missing link there is the FFRDC's. This is stuff like the MITER Corporation, the Aerospace Corporation, Triad National Security run by Battel, the Oak Ridge, Sandia National Labs, Lawrence Livermore. But >> yeah, so Kirk Patrick goes to work at Oakidge. He also uh joins Georgia Tech's uh let me see what it's called because I I wrote this down. >> I can't remember. He went on as a join as Georgia Tech uh research institute UARC a university affiliated research center as basically a senior consultant a senior research consultant a UARC a university affiliated research center is the it is the university counterpart to the FFRDC's the fedally funded research and development centers what these two institutions are are corporate and university systems that are semi-private but mostly kind of DoD and governmentowned That's why you one of my big theories is that a lot of these programs operate with these subject matter experts and R&D wizards being these FFRDC's because they're not fully it's not like a contractor fully removed from United States government or United States DoD. The FFRDC is a corporation still attached inherently to US government. >> Wow. Interesting. >> We can talk a little bit more about that because there's a lot of interesting ties such as like this gets can hearken all the way back to Kexsburg and Dr. Eric A. Walker and a lot of that good stuff. But uh additionally since 2025, Sean Kirkpatrick, he had formed his own LLC called Nonlinear Solutions. And as of 2025, Nonlinear Solutions is contracting for the MITER Corporation for US Spacecom, US Space Command. And what's interesting there is in some foy documents by a Twitter user named Teo M in 2023, Kirkpatrick met with senior officials at US Spacecom to brief them on UFO response and recovery and material transfer. So you know what what are the very strange connections there? Arrow stinks to high heaven. Uh they also are AROW is also a line organization. You know they published the Arrow historical report volume one. Nonsensical report. I hope somebody who's read the cleared report, the classified report, can tell us why there's no better explanations than that than the public report because the cleared report, I've heard, is just as nonsensical. But there's testimonies that are lied about in there. A very specific example is Michael Herrera. We got Michael Herrera's memorandum for record with Arrow because in the Arrow historical report, volume 1, it talks about Michael's testimony. It says like a US Marine encountered an extraterrestrial vehicle in US special forces. First of all, Michael never said extraterrestrial vehicle. He always thought this was a man-made vehicle and never said US special forces. He just said unidentified special forces. And in the memorandum for record that proves that he never said extraterrestrial or US special forces. So if Arrow's lying about details that small to make a whistleblower seem a little bit less credible, what else are they lying about in that? And why are they working with whistleblower protection? And why is Sean Kurpatre going on to work at under MITER and so forth? It's these are all questions that must be asked. Is Arrow honeypot? Why is Tim Phillips the deputy director of Arrow badmouthing David Grush on LinkedIn? These are all strange. I talk about the FFRDC's and Uarks. Remember when we had the November House hearings, the Senate also had a some UFO hearings with um with Arrow at the end of 2024. Dr. John Kazowski, now Arrow director, said Arrow is now working with FFRDC's and UARs. What are they doing with them? It's these are all interesting questions. >> Yeah, it's interesting to see who doesn't like who and who's saying what about, you know, these other whistleblowers, you know? I mean, it it definitely looks good for David Grush that this guy's, you know, saying bad things about him. >> You know, he's not involved with any like obviously that guy is not, you know, if he's making up and and they're manipulating Michael Herrera's testimonies to make him seem more discreditable. There's definitely something there. You know, the more the more of this stuff I hear, it's just like it seems like it seems like all of this stuff just is all the stuff from from sci-fi movies are becoming reality. >> You know, like the like the Jake Barber stuff sounds exactly like Stranger Things. >> Yeah. Yeah. Well, speaking of of Star Wars, have you heard of the Mark Mandalas story? >> No. >> And Brad Sorenson. Okay. This is, in my opinion, one of the greatest alien reproduction vehicle stories of all time. And we can also I'm sure you've heard the term alien reproduction vehicle. >> Yes. >> And I've I'm sure you've heard it associated with Greer. >> Yes. >> But we can dispel that rumor as well in in the story. >> So this is about November 12th, 1988. This is takes place at the Norton Air Force Base show at Norton Air Force Base in California. This is near Edwards Air Force Base. This is near Palm Springs. This is near the Lockheed Skunk Works. This is near USAF plant 42. you know all where a lot of the clandestine aircraft R&D of our nation takes place also a region in which I think is a huge network of underground subterranean facilities but you know we'll talk about that later but so aerospace illustrator Mark Mandal who had done a lot of work for popular mechanics uh various defense contractors was scheduled to go to the air force show with his good friend Brad Sorenson who was an industrial designer at the time Brad Sorenson had been invited to the show from a high-profile client It doesn't really name this person, but connected with DoD somehow, possibly former under secretary for defense. Real high up guy. A couple days before the air show, Mark McCandish has to drop out. He needs to do some work for Popular Mechanics. And so Brad goes with, you know, the underse if that's what it is. >> A week later, Mark finally hears from Brad. Brad sounds really like beaten up and shaken. Um Brad sounds really, really, really upset. And Mark finally prize what Brad saw at the air show. And we we'll pause there because historically this story has been relayed secondhand for Mark McCandish, right? Mark McCandish talks about what Brad sees at the air show. It wasn't until this year I found a a 1990 interview taken two took place two years after this uh experience with Brad Sorenson and Aviation Week and Space Technology writer Bill Scott. So, this is no longer a secondhand testimony relayed by Mark McCandish, right? This is something that from Brad Sornson's own words because I'm directly referencing that interview >> because that's that's some of the things people have said about this story in particular, the Flux Liner, is that no, Mark Mcandlish just said it. No, well, Brad Sorenson talked about it in this interview and some of the details around that are really interesting. So, Brad Sorenson went to the Norton Air Show, tons of interesting aircraft, pretty cool. Mh. But at at at some point during the show, the unsect or whoever he was with took him to a classified exhibit. This is either a short flight down to USF plant 42 or it's in a completely different hanger. And the only reason he gets in is because he's attached to this very highle former DoD guy. The two enter the hanger and remember this is all according to Brad Sorenson. And in there there's a lot of really interesting vehicles. There's like a V12 vertical takeoff and landing little Marines vehicle. There's the losing prototype to the B2 or yeah B2 stealth bomber. >> There's something called the Locky Pulsar, which is a craft that looks like a pumpkin seed. A craft that is, I think, powered by, if I'm remembering correctly, scramjet technology, super fast, remotely controlled. It contains 121 nuclear warheads. >> Wow. >> Yeah. That some of the military brass were were kind of boasting that they could destroy every major city in Russia in under an hour and so forth. Yeah, that that's it. Yeah, that's the pulsar and that's drawn by Mark Mccandalish. That's drawn by Mark. >> That's wild, bro. Have you seen the uh the corrant? The Lockheed Cormerant. >> Uhuh. What is that? >> I think uh Jeremy Riss told me about this. >> Oh, alien scientist. Yeah, smart cookie. >> Yeah, man. He knows his stuff. He uh type in Lockheed Corant. That one's crazy looking. >> Whoa, >> that thing. >> Whoa. >> I think the I mean these are all obvious or that one's actually a real photo. >> Is this a undersea UAV? >> Yeah, bro. Look at that. Look at that thing. >> It looks like a bird. Of course, the Loheed Martin stamp on it. Iconic. >> Yeah, right. That thing's crazy. There's just so much bizarre stuff I know these people are making. >> But apparently this thing can go in the water and in the air. >> There's a Northrup. Oh, it's transmedium. >> Yeah, bro. It flies and it goes under the water allegedly. Who knows? >> That is a creepy looking vehicle. It looks like a looks like a almost like a bird but also a little sci-fi highty. >> Yeah. Like like the more I see this stuff, bro, it see it just seems like there there's a a a human explanation for so many of this UF so much of this UFO stuff. >> I think so. >> I had this guy uh David Mohouse on a couple times and he he worked in the Stargate program. >> Oh, cool. >> Yeah. and he uh he was exp he came in here with like a whole uh presentation of classified military aircraft and reconnaissance balloons and all kinds of things that explained he basically explained away most of like the most famous UFO sightings ever, including the Phoenix lights. He showed uh us like images of these giant balloons that have lights built in them and they're they're like reconnaissance balloons or something like this and it was the exact shape of the Phoenix lights flying the same exact size just giant black like tube balloons. >> Whoa. Yeah, >> I you know I agree with you that a lot of what's seen is pretty mundane prosaic explanation or classified military tech that a lot of it regarding on the how anomalous it is how anomalous the sighting is is probably some some reverse engineered stuff >> because so Brad Sorenson sees the locked pulsar which is seems like the same crazy technology as that locked corrant and then he's brought to the the final section of the exhibit where there are three flying saucers stationed hovering off the ground. >> Right. These look like a jello- mold with half a dome on top. Steve, would you look up flux liner? Uh, two words. >> These things are called little bear, mama bear, and papa bear because they're the same craft scaled. One's about 60 ft in length to the largest about 120 ft in length. >> This >> Yeah. Yeah. You've probably seen that image before, right? >> I've seen this. I've seen the drawing before. I haven't seen that. >> That is the flux liner. So, there's a like a three star general and contracting personnel there that are showing a videotape of I think it's the smallest flux liner um kind of bouncing jaggedly over like a desert surface before taking off at rapid speeds uh just straight up. >> So, this thing to Brad Sorenson and Brad Sorenson hated this this design because he talks non-stop in his interview that it looks like it was made by scientists not by engineers. It looked slobbled together. You know, there was chipped paint on it. Those little bubbles on the outside were synthetic vision systems. >> They're little they're camera arrays that to kind of create a 3D picture of where the craft going. Those seats are F4 Phantom jump seats. >> Uh so this craft was like jerryrigged that little ball handle right there. It's really interesting in um >> Tom Dong's uh book. I can't I names escaping me right now. >> Secret machines. He talks about that same control system right there is used to control like the TR3B like reverse engineered triangle. M >> but so these these craft are powered I don't really understand the physics but by like some anti-gravity capacitor array and so forth and >> and and the the skinny that Brad Sorenson is given is that these craft were created from technology copied found at Roswell >> and that I think the the brass were saying that you know we were never supposed to have these craft uh we took it from the beans we've tried to recreate how it works this is the best we can get it. It's a basically a poor man's representation. >> This craft has cameras slapped on the outside and like acrylic bubbles you'd find at a Walmart. It has jump seats from a jet. It has a Navy submarine door on the outside. But we have tried to reverse engineer the propulsion systems of these craft as as well as possible. >> And these according to Brad Sorenson, according to what he saw, these these were copy vehicles taken from non-human intelligence at at Roswell. >> What year was this again? >> 1988. 1988. >> But what's interesting here is that this craft right here, Steve, can you look up a 1967 Harvey Harvey Williams in 1967? you you captain, Air Force Captain Harvey Williams about 20 12,000 to 20,000 feet over Provo, Utah, uh captured an image of a flying saucer that looks exactly like one of these, but it looks like an evolution of the Flux Liner because because it has larger acrylic bubbles and as time passes, you'd think camera technology size would would decrease and you can kind of re rethink the acrylic bubbles. But um this is the this is the story of the flux liner and Mark McCandish would draw what Brad told him cuz Brad didn't want anything to do with this story. So Mark Mandelish would draw this. He would take this around. He would present it at Greer's Disclosure Project. He would talk uh Yes, that's the first image right there. 1966 Provo, Utah. >> Okay. >> Right there. That's taken by Yousef Captain. If it's not Harvey Williams, I'm butchering this badly. There's a much higher definition. Uh >> yeah, that looks like it same shape. >> Yeah. So Mark McCandalish would would you know create a a line art drawing of this and he he would take it all around talk to people and apparently he met other people like USA veteran Kent Selin who saw the same craft at Edwards Air Force Base and I think >> 1972 I want to say I'm trying to remember correctly but Mark Mcandish would eventually in 2014 create a documentary with a filmmaker named James Allen >> about you know zero point energy systems the flux liner alien reproduction vehicles about less than 3 months before the interview is to before the documentary is to be released. James Allen gets struck with a very rare and aggressive form of cancer and dies within three months and Mark McCandish ordered an autopsy report on him. So did the editor of the documentary that I've talked to and James Allen was found to have heavy metal poisoning in his autopsy report. So it it's it's weird because in this documentary the two James Allen and Mark Mandelich talk all about you know various energy systems various zero point energy systems where the inventors have mysteriously died gone missing like throw themselves out of a window and so James Allen right before that documentary is released goes you know he dies as well in 2020 Mark Mandelish was found with a self-inflicted uh gunshot wound to the head. What? >> And he said in maybe it was 2022, but he said that uh interview shortly before in 2020 that he slept with a pillow under his his pillow because he was also afraid of what was going to happen to him. Uh >> a pillow under his pillow. >> I'm sorry. A pistol under his pillow. >> Yeah. I'm sorry. And you know there's some rumors according to some close sources of uh Mark McCandish that he was going to testify to Senator Rubio shortly before his death. So, but this also gets really interesting because this was relayed by Mark Mccandalish for the better part of 30 years, right? I found the original interview with Brad Sorenson and Bill Scott from Aviation Week and Space Technology. Once I find that and put up a video of the Flux Liner, I get a call from a UFO researcher, very well-known guy, very respected, great on crash retrieval, but he's also really close with uh Greer, like really good buddies with Greer. And he calls me and said, "Where did you find that interview? Like, that's not supposed to be public. You should take that down." Why isn't that supposed to be public? Because this story was always secondhand with Mark McCandish and not Brad Sorenson. And what's weirder is I >> One of Greer's close friends is a researcher. And why did he tell you it should be taken down? >> He said it's internal. >> Internal for who? >> Exactly. Why? Because I messaged Brad Sorenson. I emailed. >> Right. >> And the amount of death threats that man gave me is unlimited. >> What man? >> Brad Sorenson. >> Oh, really? >> Yeah. say goodbye to you and your family. You'll never see it coming. Uh Mark was a stupid dramatic uh fool. You're going to end up the same way he did. And then I kept pushing. I because there was some little inkling that I thought maybe Brad there's more than meets the eye to Brad here. And so Brad kind of gave me a little bit of the implication he may have actually like worked on such a craft saying stuff like I create I helped create what I saw and stuff like that. It's an incredibly intriguing case. The flux liner >> incredibly intriguing. And that's just one instance of a alien reproduction vehicle. >> There's another really interesting thing like everybody thinks about the TR3B triangle, right? >> Like the the famous triangle from Edgar Fuche. It's got the three four lights on the bottom, the big red light, and then three lights on the kind of the exterior of the triangle. >> I think I know what you're talking about. >> Well, see if you can find a picture of it, Steve, just to make sure. >> There's a a forensic artist named Bill McDonald. He worked with uh >> Yeah. Just like the classic triangle, the Salai patents. Yeah, >> there Bill McDonald worked with Ryan and Dr. Robert Wood of McDonald Douglas who are some some great investigators into the Majestic 12 documents. And so he created all sorts of art and all sorts of UFO art. Worked with various films to create craft and so forth. In 1992 in Antselope Valley, California, kind of the aerospace hub of of the United States, he met with two Loheed and two Northrup engineers. And these guys worked at the Loheed Martin Helenale radar cross-section facility and the Northrup Tahhon radar cross-section facilities. Now these two places are very infamous in UFO lore. And these engineers came together, two from Locky, two from Northrup to illustrate the a reverse engineered craft they had been working on that they are uh so tired of the secrecy around. So uh Bill McDonald of course drew that craft. It's really interesting. Steve, can you look up uh Tahachapi triangle? P E H A THA C H A P I triangle and that you know I've pressed Bill McDonald for the the sources on this subject as well for this uh triangular craft and he won't give them that's it. Yeah. First first one right there. >> But what's interesting here is are you a fan of the XFiles? >> Yes. >> Okay. So is season one episode one of the X-Files? Not the pilot but it's the episode called Deep Throat. It's about Moulder. He goes to a air force base and uh to investigate a test pilot that's gone missing and encounters this craft. Uh Chris Carter and John Duza, the FBI agent on which the first season of the XFiles was based, went up to Bill McDonald and contracted him to use to use that design for the the XFiles uh episode, which I found really interesting. Really interesting. So, I'd like to press more into that because that's another possible example of a alien reproduction vehicle. You know, there's the triangles, there's the saucers, uh possibly what Michael Herrera saw. Just a ton ton of >> There's so much overlap in movie and televisions in real life, bro. It's crazy. >> It's like in a in Close Encounters of the Third Time, third kind, there's large crates and boxes of materials from TRW and Loheed Martin that Steven Spielber put in there. How interesting is that? >> Didn't he also use the same hand scanner that Bob Lazar about? >> Yeah, it's it's really really intriguing. And I think uh oh gosh, who was it? Who was it recently? Steven Spielberg even said that he showed like ET to some high mil up military officials who kind of commented how ET and like the subject of extraterrestrials was really closely related to his film and so forth. Really intriguing. Steven Spielberg seems to be pretty tapped in. He's working on another kind of UFO film uh lately. >> Yeah, I heard about that. I I don't I don't know exactly what what it was about though. It's been a while since I heard about it. Um, yeah, bro. So, the Jake Barber stuff, like the psionic stuff, um, what do you make of all that? >> It's it's so it's so interesting. But I was kind of the mind that before you introduce subjects like psionics which requires a lot of of understanding and faith into like remote viewing um sigh research which you know the Stargate program and sic did a heck of a lot into. But I think before that was introduced there needed to be a more firm understanding of crash retrieval and reverse engineering. >> Okay. Because the Jake Barber psionics at the range, the whole MMO was to use psionics to bring in these craft and either force them to land or use some directed energy weapons to blast them out of the sky. >> Right. Totally ridiculous. >> Yes. Before you ask an uninitiated viewer to believe that, you got to first say, "Hey, there are UFOs here. They're not piloted by humans. Sometimes they crash. Sometimes they're shot down and we retrieve them." >> Mhm. >> But the the subject of I would still be pretty keen to see a demonstration of psionics. I've I've never seen it, so it's still it's still a little bit tough for me to wrap my head around. What What do you think? >> No, I don't know. I I had never heard about it before, the Jake Barber stuff, but it does like the the fact like what Michael Herrera and Jake Barber were talking about with allegedly going to this earthquake disaster zone. Yeah. And trying to capture like kids >> with like left-handed kids and uh first of all, they're from like this remote part of the world. they're not really connected to technology. >> Um, and they're young. So, like there's definitely something to be said. Like we were talking about the phone yesterday. I think I was telling you like like children seem to be more tapped into this in like a extra invisible sense. Yeah. >> That that we lose as we grow up, you know, similar to like cats and dogs can like can sense different energies, you know, in the room. It's uh it's similar to like Joe Rogan's fart hypothesis. Have you heard that? >> No. basically like if somebody if somebody farts and you didn't have the sense of smell or a nose, you'd just be sitting in their fart and you would have absolutely no idea. So how many other things exist all around us that we don't have the senses to detect, >> right? >> You know, right and you know the subject of psionics is nothing new. U you can look back to the claims of of Lieutenant Colonel Philip J. Corso who of course he's infamous for the book The Day After Roswell which has a bunch of added nonsense from W coowriter Bill Burns. If you want to actually understand Corso's story, you should read his manuscript the day after Roswell. But he even talks about some of the technologies leveraged and utilized from the Roswell crash specifically was systems to try and control ICBM missiles with brain waves. So all the way back with Corso in 1960 to 1962 he you know if if what he's talking about under the foreign technology division is legit there there were already plans to try and adapt you know mind control mind machine interfaces. Really interesting. It's it's perplexing that he says that because of course psionics did he expand on that at all? >> No, it's a short section and I'll I'll send it to you. I'm I think I told you and I I forgot to do it. He he just talked about uh trying to use brain waves. >> Brain waves. brain waves to control ICBM. And if you look at the old uh old files of Leonard Stringfield, he talks multiple times about headband transceivers being found in crashed UFOs that control the craft. So, it's it's it's nothing new. I I just think that a lot of the time with like uh you really got to slow down and demonstrate the capabilities of this of this first cuz I know with Sky Watchers, there's still gray area about what they're summoning, right? Like each YouTube video creates a lot of discourse of of you know the the pin pricks of light. Are they birds? Are they balloons or are they extraterrestrial or non-human craft? >> I think a very firm demonstration needs to be made and then you can kind of bring in some of the baggage with that because psionics is a really interesting and topic with a lot of baggage cuz I know I think it was Greer that talked about like left-handed and gay people. >> Yeah, left-handed and gay people, right? Young >> Yeah, young young as well. Kids from the gate programs, the gifted and talented education programs. And I I would like to. >> And allegedly they were kept at the spot and like they were held there and fed a specific diet. >> Yeah. >> And like given certain medications, something like this. >> Yeah. One of the Skywatchers top psionic guys is a guy named uh I can't remember his name. It's escaped me right now. But he's told me he was in the the gate program as a child and now he's a Skywatcher psionic. What's interesting about his cases, he said while he was in the gate program, one time as a young kid, a bunch of eggheheads and uh lab coats, brought in a briefcase and opened it up and it was a like a metallic swirling sphere in there almost like a palunteer and told to just kind of look into it and react to it. Uh the description of that sphere is almost identical to a a witness that Jesse and I both covered uh Randy Anderson who was a former US Army Green Beret who 2013 to 2015 was at the Naval Surface Warfare Center Crane in Indiana. Really austere weapons facility and he was taken underground by a contractor because he was one of uh two guys in the Green Beret unit with um you know high clearance levels for a weapon. >> I remember this interview. >> Yeah. and he was uh shown something called the off-world technologies division and a piece of technology that was by all intents and purposes a identical sphere to what this skywatcher asset described that reacted to human consciousness. There's there's so much crazy stuff, dude. It's almost impossible to track it all. Like again when it goes when when you have people like that Jake guy coming out and like talking about this ionic stuff and like it always is fishy to me when people talk in these absolutisms and terms as if like they know exactly what's happening you know. >> Yeah. >> And uh and I don't know it's it's almost like it's just so difficult to navigate this stuff that it's like you know I like to check out every once in a while and just be like >> zoom out on all this stuff. Take a breath. take a breather and then, you know, see where it goes. See where it goes because it's it's uh it's overbearing, man. It's so much to to to handle and digest. >> I don't blame you cuz there's there's so much discourse. There's so much infighting. There's so much interfactionality. Like >> there's probably disclosure advocates with varying interests and how disclosure plays out. >> Uh you know, maybe there's a difference in what like Alzando wants versus what Eric Davis wants at the end of the day for disclosure and how these things are brought about. What does the Navy do? What does the Air Force do? What does the Army do in terms of UFO crash retrieval reverse engineering? How siloed are the programs? Is the Navy working on an ARV and the Army working on an ARV? Both the same program but have no cross communication. Uh what role does the do the intelligence agencies play? How does the neuro hop in? How does the NSA hop in? You know, how do these programs work? How are they funded? That's a big that's a really interesting question as well that I think there's a lot of funding mechanisms for such programs. Like back in the 80s, uh the Navy was being overcharged by the Grumman Corporation and some other corporations. They were being charged like 600 $400 to $600 for ashtrays and like F-14s. >> And so there's just a F14. Yeah, ashtrays and F-14s. And that brings me back to that guy I told you about Ed at Ed at Edwards Air Force Base. After he was done at Edwards, he went on to work at the Pentagon for the Air Force Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation Panel chain. M uh he said in in two separate years 34 billion and then $40 billion went missing from the air force in non-transfer of authority funds just completely wiped off the books. You know I I've also been privy to conversations with individuals who have seen cash transactions huge pallets of cash trans transacted for UFO legacy programs. And then of course you have uh Katherine Austin Fitz who talks about really creative funding uh from the DoD and housing and urban development. And you got a great story from um SIC, Science Applications International Corporation. And I' I'd love to tell you a really really intriguing story about SIC's kind of contract work if you don't mind. >> Oh yeah. >> So SIC first of all has been in some hot water for overcharging uh like the NSA seven like 5 to7 billion for the Trailblazer program >> which was supposed to be like a a large scale spying software uh right after 911 that was complete that completely didn't work. But the NSA kind of was fraud was fraudulently charged by SIC for all of this money. SIC has enormous contracts, many of which don't make any sense, like a recent $280 million contract with Sandia National Labs, which is a Department of Energy FFRDC for IT consolidation work. >> Now, how does it work, you know, take $280 million? Of course, with SIC, we've talked about Kirk Patrick. SIC has insane ties to the Wilson Davis memo. SIC has ties to director of neuro Bobby Ray Enman, but in 1992 there there so there's a whistleblower from SIC. Her name is Denise McKenzie and she actually uh disclosed in I think 2000. And so her story goes in 1992 she was working at a fabric store at a mall in La Hoya, San Diego. Uh a new part-time girl named Sophia starts working with her. Sophia says, "Hey, come work for this contractor. You know, it better work. >> Yeah. >> And so she shows up expecting an interview at a large contractor. She's hired on the spot at a massive campus that is SIC, Science Applications International Corporation, La Hoya. >> She's not even really told what to do besides administrative work on a computer. And that girl who recruited her, Sophia, didn't show up for like another 3 or 4 weeks. So, she's just sitting there having no idea what to do on the job. And eventually a bunch of letters come in while she's working at SIC that are basically asking for contract updates on DoD and other contractor contracts. These are massive contracts, some in hundreds of millions, some millions of dollars, some tens of millions of dollars. And she's working in the building where SIC does all sorts of classified chemical and biological research. Really interesting biochem facility there that probably connects with Battel Memorial Institute in Dougway proving ground. Mhm. >> And so she goes to her superiors cuz she wants to kind of impress them and says, "What, you know, what do I what do I do with these contracts?" The superior says, "I think this superior right here is named Stanley Stewart that I've actually tried to track down." Said, "Oh, just say we're working on it." So she being a new employee doesn't really want to just say we're working on it on massive DoD contracts. So she goes in the file room >> to find these contract numbers, to find the contracts, to find the programs. And in each file for every single program, all that's in there is just a paper that says we're working on it. The same file updates. So the SIC is undergoing enormous contracts for DoD and other contractors with no movement on them. Nothing's being done, no progress reports, no technical reports, nothing like that. So they're just empty contracts. So that money can be funneled like Katherine Austin Fitz says specifically mentioning SIC into the black budget. So, she uh she goes and tells Sophia, the woman that recruited her eventually, and Sophia freaks out. She gets reprimanded by her superiors. All the files are taken away. Uh she's harassed by one of the the bosses, and she eventually quits when she almost chokes on some food and like nobody helps her. But so later on down the line, she's interested to search for Sophia because she never saw Sophia again. In the early days of the internet, she finds Sophia's picture, same first name, different last name, on a CIA operatives database. But the weird thing is that this Sophia girl that recruited her to work at SIC, remember this took place in 1992, apparently died in 1998. All sorts of weird things going on there with SIC. In 1992 is also when SIC took off took over the Stargate program from SRRI and the CIA. >> SIC took over that. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. SIC huge huge into uh like telepathy telekinesis. They have lots of reports on it using human subjects for such things. And I guess their research was carried on and taken seriously because as as recently as 2013, the Office of Naval Research published a study like a revolutionary study on human six sense using like pre-cognition in humans almost to to kind of get a jump on things. So really really weird discussion of contracts and and like human remote viewing at SIC. >> Yeah, they're involved in so much weird [ __ ] man. told you the first time I heard about it when I was reading that article all about the creation of Google how that basically Google was incubated by like DARPA NSA and the CIA and all this stuff basically going and visiting Sergey Brin at Stanford and you know while doing like uh status updates every month on what they were doing and how they're doing I think they got the page rank system directly from DARPA. >> Yeah. which is strange, but you know, you know, if if you just understand that history of of how it was, how Google was created and who they were working with and look at where we're at now >> with all the stuff that's going on, you know, how they're basically trying to like influence the narrative of the public and censor certain speech and and boost other speech and using, you know, now, you know, Google basically creates everything from phones to security systems to every application and appliance soon. They're going to be making your [ __ ] washer and dryer, you know, that and it's going to [ __ ] talk to you, have cameras in it. So, it's just like, >> okay, this company that was created by like the deep state essentially is now creating all these appliances and software that are integrated into virtually every aspect of your life. And you know, you rely and and most people a lot of people rely on this company to make a living because they basically own the internet. Yeah. You know, that's just I don't know where that goes, man. But I can't imagine it's anywhere good. >> It's a it's a terrifying reality, especially when companies like Google when companies like SIC that basically helped create the internet can >> work hand in hand. >> Yeah. Can influence such extreme thought narratives. I mean, SIC themselves, they were they chaired the the panel that testified to the uh Senate Select Committee on Intelligence that said Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction and thus the United States needed to invade Iraq. And when no weapons of mass destruction were found, they chaired the same panel that said we investigated ourselves and we did nothing wrong. Absolving the government, the intelligence agencies and sic of any involvement. So they can really influence public perception in a massive way. even like DoD high level perception and and kind of government perception. >> Yeah, man. It's crazy. But like going back to what we were we were disc we were discussing like um you know some of these private contractors. We talked a lot about like the DOE which is interesting because you know Annie Jacobson lays it out really well in her first book uh Area 51 and her most recent book about nuclear war. talks a lot about the Department of Energy, which from what I understand is >> you might know more more about this than I do, but the DOE, the Department of Energy essentially is like the fourth, fifth, or sixth name change from the Manhattan Project. >> Yeah. >> It was the Manhattan Project and they changed the name to something else. Atomic Energy Commission, something else. And now the Manhattan Project is basically it's the same thing as the DOE. It's the same [ __ ] organization. >> Yeah. >> Which is crazy to think about. And that that's the same company that put out puts out regulations of like what types of light bulbs we're allowed to use or sell. >> The I mean the DOE is truly an enormous and amorphous blob. They even have their own like like they even have their own armed teams called SRT, special response team that transfer like nuclear radiological materials across the continental United States. The DOE has their hand in almost every pie. I mean, the DOE is born from the granddaddy, the Atomic Energy Commission, that has just tremendous ties to to possible UFO programs, just like we talked about the 1954 Atomic Energy Act that is literally name dropped in the UAPDA and literally said, "Hey, UFO materials information, etc. are hidden within restricted data within transclassified foreign nuclear information under the Atomic Energy Commission." So the the DOE just has their hand in so many pies and the DOE also sponsors so many fedally funded research and development centers like Lawrence Livermore National Labs, Sandia National Labs, Oakidge, etc. where you know I I have some degree of of confidence that there are reverse engineering and retrieval operations you know being conducted at at such locations and and even the DOE what they were doing in um I think it was the like the 60s or 70s when they were like detonating subterranean nukes and [ __ ] like working with these oil companies trying to like basically uh frack oil using nuclear weapons. >> It's just insane like like you said all the all the uh all the pies they have their hands in, bro. When whenever you investigate a crash retrieval story or like a a craft being housed, any testimony, you can always do a couple extra steps of research and find out some connection to the DOE. >> Mhm. >> It's a it's a very >> very scary organization. And you know, even in some high-profile whistleblower testimony like Edgar Fuche, who talked about the TR3B reverse engineered alien reproduction vehicle, he directly said stuff like the Lawrence Livermore National Labs and Sandy National Labs, two DOE, FFRDC's reverse engineered the propulsion devices for the TR3B. >> And what about Battel? Where does Battel fit into stuff? >> Battel Battel is pretty interesting. So Battel Memorial Institute, I think you and Jesse talked about it. Not only do they have ties to Ronald Moltry who was uh under secretary of defense for intelligence and security who error reported to but so I I think you guys talked about this too nitnol that you know shape memory alloys was >> kind of doing some some secret projects on that wasn't really declassified until the early 60s when nitnol was like accidentally discovered. Uh, Battel Memorial Institute also ran something called Project Stor, which was actually a hidden UFO program parallel to Blue Book. You know, Project Blue Book 1952 to 1969. Why does Battel have their own really secretive UFO program back in the same time as Blue Book? There's also a I know of an individual that I I did a video on this. This took place at Dougway Proving Grounds at the West Desert Test Center, which is Dougway Proving Grounds major range test facility base where in the Avery area of Dougway, which is, you know, an Air Force pretty pretty extensive contractor location. He went into a building while doing contracting work there and saw a craft and this craft was hovering off the ground and it was being worked on by by various individuals. Well, the West Desert Test Center, which specializes in chemical and biological work. If you look at the history of people who have run the West Desert Test Center, it's always former Battel guys. Always. Battel also runs multiple FFRDC's like the out near Fort Dietrich, Maryland, and and that kind of region, which has really high-profile biological and chemical work that there's some rumors that that's where some of the bodies of uh extraterrestrials or non-human intelligence are stored. Battel also really smartly Patel kind of set the playbook by forming something called Triad National Security. It was Battel a university and another organization that formed like their own uh company to manage some DOE labs for FFRDC's. I'm trying to think which exactly here but once Battel did that then companies like SIC started doing that with EG&G. SIC started doing that with Northrup. sic started doing that with a momentum which recently whistleblower Matthew Brown has said operates hangers that hold reverse engineer technology at Pax River in Virginia. >> So Battel has always at least to me seemed like a almost almost like a chemical and biological subject matter expert. >> There's there's one of those nickel titanium alloy studies from Battel that was you know I can't remember the date declassified but it was by a man named I >> is this the night and all stuff? >> Yeah. Yeah. I is it Edward? It's not Howard Cross. It's Edward something, but it's a name. It's a name that worked on one of the, you know, investigating these alloys. And this same individual, I I don't know why his name is slipping for me. I just talked about it with Jesse, but on late in his life in 1992 to MUON to MUON researcher Irene Scott, uh, this guy disclosed to her that he worked on metals that were leveraged from non-human intelligence craft that had crashed. It's like you have your own Battel guy who worked on those reports saying that stuff came from flying saucers essentially. >> Yeah. I remember Jeremy Riss he he went to one of the big hearings I think it was last year and he like you know he he's crazy. He goes there in like live streams like talking to people pulling people aside and he was interviewing I forget who it was. It was one it was some big wig. It was a woman and she was like uh I think she was like a a congresswoman and he was asking her about uh Battel and she goes excuse me what he goes Battel Memorial Institute. She's like uh how do you what's I've never heard of that and he was like he was like okay it's spelled this go to this website I really need to look into that. Thank you for for I'm going to look into them. Thank you. >> It's just like you know I don't know it seems like nobody knows what's going on with all this stuff. Yeah. And and how how projects and expertise may be delegated to different contractors. I mean I I think Battel has their hands all over this stuff as as we've seen with the night and all nickel titanium alloy studies and and project stork. It Battel is just is just strange. I think >> so if I if I had to wager like if I had to say the biggest corporations that have their hand in this stuff it would be Battel. It would be SIC. It'd be Northrup Grumin. It would be LOS, which sic kind of spun off from in 2013 because SIC got too big and had too many contracts. It would be Rathon, uh, Boeing, Booze Allen, Hamilton, >> maybe L3, L3. Yeah, L3 Harris >> and yeah, probably some of the biggest. Then FFRDC, I'd say the MITER Corporation. I I have quite a bit of of knowledge on the MITER Corporation. The Rand Corporation, uh, the Aerospace Corporation. Here's what's pretty interesting. The Aerospace Corporation. So [ __ ] miss >> so many all the DOE labs too tri national security oakridge the center for naval analyses institute for defense analyses and then you got the UARC Georgia Tech Pennsylvania State University which is really really interesting uh which we'll talk about in a second but >> the so the Rand corporation was built out of USAF project Rand which was kind of involved with underground constructions but the aerospace corporation as well as the MITER corporation as well as BDM which is a contractor not an FFRDC were all started between 1959 and 1960. The exact date that you know Philip Jay Corso says that you know alien technology was starting to be seated into the military and public >> when that began. So it's just a really interesting lineup of dates and including Eric Davis said to me he didn't name drop it specifically but the aerospace corporation is the onef FFRDC he knew of that engages with this stuff. Hm. >> And on the on the UARC level, the university affiliated research center, you have stuff like the applied uh physics laboratory or applied research laboratory names escaping me from Penn State University. This was started by Dr. Eric A. Walker. Dr. Eric A. Walker is one of the most underrepresentative figures in all of UFO in my opinion. Um, back in 1950 I consultant to the defense research science board or the R&D board, Robert Sarbacher. I'm forgetting his official title, but brilliant physicist, brilliant guy. Jesse talks about him all the time. >> He met with a Canadian radio engineer, Wilbert B. Smith, >> and said some pretty outstanding statements such as flying saucers exist, their modus operandi is unknown, um, but efforts to kind of understand them, reverse engineer them are headed by Dr. Vanavar Bush and the matter isn't >> top secret to the point it's classified two points higher than the Hbomb. >> And so this made its way into an official Canadian Department of Transport memo that Wilbert Smith then created uh two UFO projects for Canada, Project Magnet and Project Second Story. But UFO researchers like Henry Aza Deel and William Steinman would interview Robert Sarbacher and he would name one person that was really intimately involved with UFO crash retrieval operations, Dr. Eric A. Walker. >> And so eventually Dr. Eric A. Walker was contacted by these same researchers, William Steman and so forth. Dr. Eric A. Walker not only admitted he was at the 1965 Kexsburg, Pennsylvania crash. Mhm. >> Um not only admitted that he knew about the Majestic 12, but also said one of the most interesting quotes in all this subject. When asked about how to gain access into these programs, he said something along the lines of what do you know about ESP, extra sensory perception. Unless you know about ESP, you would never be involved in these programs. And this was 1982. He said that. >> So Eric A. Walker, who started the Applied Research Laboratory, the Pennsylvania's UAR, is is one of the most underrepresented and entwined guys in in kind of UFO lore of all time. This guy said he was at the 65 Kexsburg crash, which is a great case, too. >> Yeah, it seem the ES the ESP remote viewing uh stuff seems to be like the at the foundation of of all of this stuff, man. And it's also like the the convenient thing about it is it's the most ridiculous sounding thing of all. Like people can people can like comprehend or like swallow the idea of anti-gravity or like aircraft that aerospace companies are making. >> But as soon as you start saying like reading minds or like a six sense and controlling [ __ ] with your mind, people are just like [ __ ] Like there's no [ __ ] way. Which is super if it is legit, which it makes it super convenient. >> Yeah. And I you know I I think that I do think because I've never seen demonstrations of remote viewing or sigh or psionics this stuff work. I I am I am of the mind also like many of the skeptics I I think there should be demonstrations of such a thing. >> I'd like to see demonstrations of remote viewing of psionics and stuff because just like you and just like a lot of the public that is the hardest part for me to wrap my head around. >> Yeah. >> Technological craft being shot down by the strategic defense initiative. Sure. That's there's a lot there to digest and research. stuff like psionics and and consciousness studies. I I I need to see to see more to to understand. It's so foreign to me. >> Yeah. Have you seen that that movie um Mirage men? >> Yeah. About Dodie. >> Yeah. It's a really good movie. Um and it's just like that that that movie really made me like more skeptical than ever about everything, >> you know? I don't I don't know how accurate that movie is, but it was uh you know, it shows you just how much effort that all these companies and agencies are willing to go for go through to [ __ ] with people and scramble people's brains and manipulate information and like paint a false narrative. >> Um and you know that that is when I started to look at some of these whistleblowers, you know, like hm is this guy legit? Who do you look at? How do I know if I want to trust this guy? >> Right? Uh, I mean, a lot of them, man. I I don't know. I don't know if I >> I mean, Grush seems pretty legit. >> Oh, yeah. >> But, um, you know, there's just there's so many of them. And, you know, some of the guys like I think like the guy that that Jesse interviewed, the um the I think it was a marine. You mentioned him earlier. Michael, he was the guy who went down into the base and they were like brought through all these uh these like compartments and they finally got to this area where there was this like crazy thing. He he explains this crapy. >> I think people like them, you know, it's it's uh people that like aren't selling anything and that seem to be disconnected from it. They seem to be the most credible and they're like kind of like oneoff interesting things, but you know, when you have like I I don't know about the Jake Barber stuff. I don't know if I can if I buy that. You know, it's uh it's just like if there if they were going to the extent to literally put NSA people in a guy's house and beam fake information into his house and try to confuse him and tell him that some alien civilization is on their way to Earth because their planet ran out of water and they're coming here to take over in about 15 years. if they're willing to go to that extent and send some guy into a mental hospital just to uh just to make sure nobody believes anything he says about seeing these aircrafts flying over the mountains. >> Imagine what the hell they're doing 60 years later. >> Absolutely. >> It's almost incomprehensible, especially when you add the internet and social media into it. It's like Jesus Christ, man. Like, how are we ever going to get to the bottom of any of this stuff? >> Well, specifically Dodie has been rearing his head recently. He was on some live stream where he said that >> Yeah. And that's he's all over Twitter like like that's weird. >> He said that he was recruited in 2019 or something to work alongside Lou Alzando to spread disinfo for Space Force but then he came out and said that that was AI and then he said no it wasn't AI was talking about something else. So Dod's always still kind of flirting around. And then there's of course just the other day that new Wall Street Journal um article. Did did you see that? >> It's a Sean Kirkpatrick love letter that says we solved all the UFO program. All everything was just an Air Force hazing ritual that new new signes to various Air Force programs when developing stealth technology would be shown pictures of flying saucers made to sign an NDA and told, "Oh, we have secret alien technology and blahy blahy blah." >> Is this the Wall Street Journal thing that like talks [ __ ] about Lou Alzando? Cuz I saw something on Twitter this morning about like some sort of Wall Street Journal article. >> Oh, yeah. No, Lou responded to that. >> That Oh, okay. That same article you're talking about. >> Yeah. article talks about how like uh the 1967 Malmstrom Air Force Base incident was just like a large EMP device that was brought up to the front gate of Malmstrom AFB 60 ft in the air and >> basically took a bunch of Minutemen missile operators by surprise turning off the ICBMs just uh so there's there's >> unfortunately with this subject there's disinformation and and nonsense and difficult gates to check and difficult probabilities to assess at every single corner. It's it's such a hard field to navigate because there has been sophisticated disinformation campaigns since the 1950s. I mean 1953, right after the sightings of UFOs over Washington DC, there was something called the Robertson panel. The Robertson panel was supposed to investigate UFOs, but had already had a pre-written conclusion to disel public worry about UFOs and say everything was okay. It's just there's no problem here. There's nothing to see here. Same with the 1969 Condan Committee. M >> and then in the 1960s you have things like air force regulation 200-2 which restricted civilian and military pilots from reporting UFOs. And on the similar side you had OPNAF 3820 which restricted Navy guys from reporting UFOs with a $10,000 fine and possible imprisonment. >> So all along the way you have all of these SCOPs and you have all these interesting things. Then of course we have OAP and then ATIP. recently those um Bigalow Aerospace slides and documents were leaked that talked about ATIP as a white world cover program for OAP. >> It's just there's there's so much nonsense to to look through everywhere. >> And another interesting thing bringing up Bigalow Aerospace is the fact that John or is John Bigalow? No, it's not John Bigalow. What's his first name? >> Robert Bigalow. >> Um Robert Bigalow is so obsessed with the remote viewing pre-cognitive dream near-death experience stuff. He does these contests with people like to to do studies on near-death experiences and like he's just spending a ton of money trying to understand this crazy stuff that's like it's like almost stuff that's impossible to like measure and it's like sci-fi >> woo woo stuff that he's interested in. He's like one of the biggest investors in this UFO aerospace stuff. >> Yeah. And then according to some of the the BAS documents that released from the OAP program, like Bass was seriously studying the the tic tac scene by David Fraver as like a humanmade creation and so forth. You see some of those this all started with like a a pretty recent Reddit whistleblower, a guy who came forward on Reddit talking about how the tic tac is ours, that Louzzando and Jay Stratton specifically are legacy program gatekeepers that essentially kind of keep emerging technologies from surfacing and then provided a bunch of the BAS documents. really really interesting if you saw that. >> I haven't seen that. That's interesting. >> Which of course on Reddit you got to be a little careful with any whistleblowers. Same thing with Reddit and 4chain. >> Healthy people on Reddit. >> Yeah, I Reddit I I don't know why you'd ever post there. But it's still >> I love Reddit. >> Me too. Always browsing. But it's still pretty pretty interesting. But you never know how to assess that especially kind of You're right. The Big Low is really interesting how he's so into more the medical metaphysical side. >> Paranormal stuff like he's like >> Skinwalker Ranch and werewolves and stuff, >> man. So crazy. >> See, that stuff's tough for me cuz I like to just stick to military agencies, intelligence agencies, DOE laboratories, contractors, all that. I like to look at stuff you can really kind of itemize and list out and and draw chains of of custody and and so forth. So, some of that esoteric stuff, I'll leave that and the consciousness studies to Jesse because he's got a way better way to talk about that and way better hold on it than me. >> Yeah. No, it's it's it's a lot, man. And that's what I like about your stuff is that you you like are going to the crazy extent to like get as much corroboration for this military stuff and this technology stuff. Uh which is rare to see >> and uh you know like it's hard it's hard to find this stuff, bro. >> Yeah. the stuff that you're like that you're hour and 45 minutes into the history of this case that happened in Peru freaking decades ago and you're you're there's not many people that are spending that much time and doing that much homework to connect all these dots that you're connecting. >> Well, I always worry I sometimes I worry that the stuff will be too boring, but I need to say it because specifically for Jonathan like to arrive at the conclusion that it was Nest that picked him up. DOE Nest. I drew out flight routes from the DOE Cessna jets they owned in 1989 from uh Sandia National Labs down to Panama Air Force Base and different places around there to see if it was even technically feasible that that could have been NEST. So, a lot of these crash retrieval cases, whistleblowers, corporations involved, they, you know, I I I'm not solving anything. I'm trying to I'm doing the best to to get to the bottom of it. But they really need to be scrutinized intensely because just re just reading the testimony and not really arriving at any conclusion or not having any supporting evidence is just not enough in my opinion. Just regurgitating the stories isn't isn't enough. >> Right. And that's a that's a trap that you can get into and you know people these people that are like posting every day on every social media platform and and trying to just talk about like the news of the day. You kind of get bogged down. you kind of like lose your footing in what you're really trying to in like the real investigations that you're doing. You're obviously spending obviously these videos aren't quick for you to make. Might take you like months to make. >> Yeah. That's why somebody uh recently called me like a a podcaster and I'd say no. Like I I I fancy myself as like an old school UFO investigator. Like I I want to do the research. I I want to publish on YouTube. you if YouTube didn't exist, maybe I'd write books about stuff, but I all I want to do is investigate these cases because I do it so I can arrive to my own conclusions. Like it's I make these projects very selfishly for myself sometimes because a lot of the time when I'm researching or doing the investigation, I can kind of click with various things. And >> I also jam-pack as much fact or as close to fact as humanly possible because when I create more work, I want to be able to reference my previous work that's incredibly detailed. So if I if I want to reference a contract I covered when talking about Loheed Martin, I'm going to make darn sure that I talk everything about the contract and the agencies at play and so forth. >> Right. You were mentioning uh earlier when we talked about Corso in the day after Roswell, you said there was some writer that was a Hollywood writer that like made up a bunch of >> Oh yeah, Bill Burns. Because the reason I'm curious about that is is there was um >> a bunch of stuff in that book about like Velcro and Kevlar and all these like human technologies that were found in that crash. Do you think that was added by this Hollywood guy? You think that was real? >> Some of them were added and some of them weren't. But the distinguishing difference Corso makes in his work is like um integrated circuitry and transistors and stuff. He makes the claim that a lot of these stuff weren't copied like the technology wasn't basically seated from craft but we as humans had our own evolution of these technologies and an understanding of a different variation of something like the transistor integrated circuit allowed for further advancements of our technology because I know Jesse talked about it with you or I I can't remember where Jesse talked about it but he was skeptical that stuff like transistors were taken from the Roswell craft when transistors and various concepts for transistors had existed existed previously I tend to think if anything that technology was likely used to bolster existing technology and not just copied. >> So you think that that thing was a reproduction vehicle? >> No, no, no. So like I I think that humans let's say let's take the transistor for example. If a transistor was pulled from the Roswell craft. >> Yeah. I think that humans were already working on concepts similar to transistors, technology similar to transistors, and pulling like a more advanced transistor type piece of technology off the Roswell crash may have allowed us to make quicker advancements in our current human prosaic technology because we can analyze non-human technology. Not inventing technology out of the ether because we just pull it from a non-human source, >> right? >> So, more so just like um copying and not copying somebody else's homework, but taking influence from other technology on existing technologies, right? There's still a lot of questions with Corsa, right? Like we can't there's a lot of rebuttals for most of that technology created. I I mean even passive night vision systems, Colonel John Alexander, who I have my problems with. >> Yeah, night vision was another was another technology they found in the crash. >> Well, Corso Corso said that there was an ifilm on the beans and that's where passive night vision systems were were pulled from. That's a that's a very big big claim. What's interesting to me about this is in in the in the manuscript, it was just made for his grandchildren, right? It wasn't made for public consumption. it was made for his family. So, >> it's not like he's trying to sell this story to a huge world because there's massive differences in the uh manuscript versus the book. The book talks the first chapter about Corso sitting like Isaac Newton under a tree like thinking about the Roswell crash, basically placing himself there. No, the manuscript is super dry. It repeats itself dozens if not hundreds of times, but it just is is is basically Corso's words actually from Corso and not with added fluff. Like in the book, in the book there's one like senior intelligence or DoD official that Corso basically convinces to, you know, perform a self-inflicted gunshot wound with. >> Like Corso acts so tough to do that. That's not in the manuscript. That's fluff nonsense to make something sell to Hollywood. So there's a lot of added information that I I really understand why people take Corso so skeptically if all they've read is The Day After Roswell. >> Right. Right. What What is What is your take on John Alexander? >> Uh I John Alexander I don't know he what I what I think the most interesting example of where John Alexander was present present was 1985 at the advanced theoretical physics working group that was held at BDM's facility in Mlean Virginia right so this was an event that Okei Shannon if you've heard of Okei Shannon he was director of like special projects at Los Alamos National Labs and he is mentioned multiple times in the Wilson Davis interview in 1985 he went to attend this event at BDM mlean Uh this event was classified using DOE controls, right? Which is really interesting. A lot of it was ran by John Alexander and at that time new BDM board member Albert Stubblebind who had just left US Army Instcom for BDM in 1984. At this conference, there was so much talk about UFO reverse engineering programs, you know, conducted through speeches and organization by Alexander, including a massive mention of a I think it says like huge engineering project under Bobby Ray Enman. And of course, that's somebody we talked about, right? >> No, Bobby Ray Enman is the neuro guy. He's the CIA guy. He's the NSA guy. He's the SIC guy. He's the Wacken Hut guy. >> Oh, wow. Okay. >> He's he's one of the main villains of this of this entire story. I'd say something I forgot to tell you about is in 1989 he talked to NASA mission specialist Bob Echler. Bob Echler called him uh somehow they worked they got in a relationship and were talking to each other and Bob Echler basically asked if recovered UFOs would ever become available for technological research. And what's interesting is this phone call is recorded so you can actually listen to it. And Bobby Raymond does the whole I know nothing about that, but directs Echler to current CIA DS&T director of science and technology deputy director Everett Heinman >> says if you want to know about it, go talk to Heman. So Echler talks about Heinman. Heman freaks out, says no, don't talk to me. Nothing there. Heinman was also director of the NRO program B and was actually the first one of the first heads of uh Pine Gap when it opened up in the 70s. In 2023, a UFO researcher RGH UFOs met emailed Heinman and I wish he would get back to me, but he's never responded to me. And Heinman alluded that he did in fact work in UFO programs because he said, "I'm no longer in that area of research." But back to Inman, Inman also appointed Bob Echler, NASA mission specialist to former uh director of naval intelligence Sumar Shapiro. Snar Shapiro was also a BDM board member, but Snar Shapiro met with Bob Echler and Snar Shapiro told Bob Echeler that not only had he studied craft up close, but they were shipped between different DOE laboratories and some of them featured interlocking components that had to be assembled and disassembled in certain ways if you're going to gain access to the craft. So, Bobby Rayman, you know, points Bob Echler to all sorts of these guys. Bobby Rayman is former director of neuro CIA, all this. But then in 2020, and this echoes the present very well, Bobby Rayanman appeared on Project Unity, Jay Anderson's podcast, and said he had found uh con explanations, conventional explanations for every single UFO sighting, which is nonsense to to to take that stance at every single UFO sighting you've ever cracked. Sounds like Sean Kirkpatrick. So this guy in 1989 is pointing Bob Echler to firstirhand UFO retrieval knowledge, people, and then he is walking those statements back. And Bobby Rayanman has a very illustrious history. He was also on the board for Wacken Hut, which is a private security agency mentioned by so many whistleblowers and including performing security at Area 51 S4. >> Yeah, I learned all about Wacken Hut when I had the dudes in here that made the Danny Castileo documentary. Really? Have you seen that documentary? >> Holy [ __ ] bro. You got to watch that. It is. They talk all about like it's it's called The Octopus Murders. >> You know what? I can't believe I haven't watched the Octopus murders yet. So many people have told me to watch it. >> It's amazing. >> It they talk they it basically explains how like all of these things are connected with Wacken Hut, the CIA, and all of these different scandals that have ever happened from like Watergate to like Iran Contra and all this stuff. >> It's all a part of this big [ __ ] crazy deep state blob octopus. Uh and all these tentacles are attached to one another. And Danny Castileo got to the bottom of this thing and uh he was found uh he was found with his wrists slashed in a bathtub in a hotel room. >> Yeah. And uh it's it's an amazing documentary and they they go deep into the Wacken Hut stuff. >> What you know Wacken Hut Wacken Hut even has ties in in the subject we're talking about now with the Department of Energy. Uh I I mentioned the Department of Energy special response teams that are like really highly armed guys at at DOE national labs that you know maybe they transport nuclear materials, maybe they transport radiological materials, maybe sometimes they transport UFOs, but these guys were trained by Wacken Hut. >> So they get Wacken Hut training. uh Wacken Hut worked closely alongside INDUSE or industrial security personnel which I think industrial security personnel are the actual armed guards and so forth that will be inside of a UFO facility guarding the USAP program locations and so forth. So I think Wacken Hut is intimately entwined and Bobby Ray Enman >> he was a board member of Wacken Hut. >> It's interesting he said that uh he was the guy who said that a bunch of the stuff can be explained away with a conventional explanation. >> I think some of them definitely can. Yeah, agree. I think uh I think even the uh the the stuff that was leaked by the the 2017 uh New York Times stuff like the footage of the >> the I forget if it's the go fast. >> There's one of them where the basically it shows the thing flying across the water with the water in the background. >> Yeah. Go fast. >> Yeah. And he's like whoa you seeing that or whatever. You can easily explain that with because the what people don't understand is that object is moving in one direction and the plane is moving in the other direction and you have the parallax of the water underneath it to make it looks like it's it looks like it's going 10 times faster than it could be a [ __ ] bird >> flying across the surface of the water. >> I I agree with you. I I don't think those videos are the cream of the crop definitive anything. I I I in fact I think that video and picture evidence is some of the the least compelling stuff we can get. I'm I'm with you. The debate still rages on about those videos. It's 2025. Those videos were released in 2017 and there's still been no progress made on a single one of them, >> right? >> Besides maybe just the go fast and it kind of downgrading it to possible parallax effect, >> right? >> What would be a treat is if you're familiar with the whistleblower Matt Brown getting Okay, so Matt Brown wrote the uh Immaculate Constellation report. >> Oh yes. Okay. >> Some of those in the Immaculate Constellation report are >> for people that don't know what the immaculate constellation report is, can you like summarize it? >> Okay. So, Immaculate Constellation, according to Matt Brown, who you know I put a lot of faith in, was a reactionary special access program formed, I think 2017, 2018 to kind of catalog various morphologies, sightings, databases of of UFO sightings. >> And there's been a lot of discussion that everything Matt Brown found was in a Shrivever War Games file. I I highly doubt that. But within the Immaculate Constellation report, there's detailing of, you know, videos and imagery from satellites of morphologies of craft from everything to triangles hovering over the Indopacific captured by Indopaccom to saucer giant saucers resting in clouds almost like camouflaging itself. The interesting thing about this report is it talks specifically about reproduction vehicles. It once said alien reproduction vehicles, but I think that was taken out. So yeah, Matt Brown stumbled upon this database and created the Immaculate Constellation report which was presented to uh the House in November of 2024. Uh Jeremy Corbel, I think it was his report, but Shelonburg, Michael Shelonburgger presented it and Nancy Mace entered it without, you know, Jeremy's page. A lot of drama there, but it's a really interesting report and uh >> of course Matt Brown just did a three-part interview series with Jeremy Corbel. And recently I started making some scathing tweets directly accusing Pax River out there near Virginia of having hangers owned by Amentum, I think it is, uh that house some recovered craft. >> Really? >> Mhm. Wow. >> Let's let's see that dang satellite footage of that saucer resting in the clouds because that's the type of of of footage that's that's going to be compelling. You know, recently there was the Lou Alzando kurfuffle of presenting the irrigation circles. Did you see that? >> No. >> Oh my goodness. So, at the UAP >> Oh, yes, I did see it. This was at South by Southwest. >> No, no, no. This was um this was early May. >> Oh, okay. >> Um there was a UAP disclosure fund uh meeting and I think it was Admiral Tim Galedet, Lou Alzando, Chris Melon, and Eric Davis speaking. And there were some really interesting things set such as Eric Davis talking about four types of non-human species and as well as most retrievals being maritime retrievalss which would then create a whole new world of investigation for us in neuro. And then uh Alzando gets on stage says hey I was given a picture by a pilot this morning taken at this elevation and it's just two uh elevation circles that has a a small illusion of of being like a saucer hanging over a flat land. That that's the kind of stuff that actively hurts the topic very badly. Yeah, that's not a good look. What did people call him out on it? >> Yeah, and there's a Yeah, it was Well, it was debunked within like an hour and, you know, props to props to the people who who debunked that. But I just I don't think that if that image wasn't properly vetted, that ever should have been posted, you know. >> Yeah. >> Because he he said he was given the photograph that morning or the night before, hadn't had time to vet it. But if he can't vet it, and Eric Davis has just talked about four species of nonhumans and maritime retrievalss, please Let's not let's not show that because that's just crap evidence to to begin with. >> Uh videos and stuff really don't don't push the push the envelope. There there's endless debate over pictures and sightings and it's a huge problem because there had been previous uh pictures posted by Lou of a chandelier in Hungary. Do you remember that photo? No. >> It was a reflection of a chandelier he initially called a mother ship. So we got to stop with those photos because it's not helping anyone. >> Have you seen the video? So, I'm sure you've seen this video of the uh what what do they call it? The the the one the one that was in Iraq. >> Oh, the Mosul orb or the jellyfish? >> The jellyfish. >> Yeah, the jellyfish. >> Yeah, the jellyfish looks like a cluster of balloons. >> Gosh. Yeah. I It's It's so hard to tell with because Jeremy Corbel posted the or said the full video shows the thing rising out of the water. >> Oh, yeah. >> And if that exists, that dispels the whole balloon narrative. But until we're presented with that, a a cluster of balloons or other prosaic explanations are are perfectly reasonable. >> Yeah, we had what's his name? The NASA engineer Kevin New or he was Kevin. He wasn't an engineer. He was >> He's a New York University physicist. >> Physicist. Great guy. And he worked he worked for NASA for a while, I think. >> And he was telling me the whole story about the uh the Japanese airliner that >> six 1826. >> Yes, exactly. And that whole story of that guy, that guy's testimony of that giant freaking ship the size of like 15 football fields pulling up right next to him. >> That's bizarre. And there was also a radar guy apparently that like corroborated all of it >> cuz you remember the the pilot of the Japan Airlines flight, I think this was in 1986, said that huge craft basically orbited around his plane at insane speeds as well. >> Yeah. And he tried to take a picture of it and the thing just disappeared in an instant. >> Yeah. And you're right, it was tracked on radar as well. I can't remember the I I'm sure the debunker explanation is that it was Venus or something that the the >> it was Venus. >> Well, you know, the the joke here is that so many debunkers when when trained pilots say they see strange lights, um the debunker explanation is just Venus or something. But I that's such a compelling case. There's also a Spanish airliner case in the 70s of an actual plane, a commercial airliner that was grounded due to UFO sightings in the plane's pathway. I can't remember what the flight is. It's like TK something. But that's another really intriguing story that was also captured on radar. That sort of multi-ensor detection is is is really what what can help push the envelope. And Kevin Kuth is brilliant. He talks about that case in his paper estimating flight characteristics for anomalous unidentified phenomena or something like that. It came out in 2022 2021 2022. But he also talks about some of like the physics and experience geforces by craft in in that sighting in the Graham Boothane encounter I think it was and then the the tic tac in 2004 which he estimated when the tic tac um >> changed from a high elevation to just above sea water it could have uh experienced up to 5,500 gs of accelerative force which is crazy. >> Yeah, there's a lot I mean there's a lot of sightings from pilots and and airplane sightings from from all around the world. It's uh and then you know another thing I wonder about is like how how many like going to this underwater neuro thing like you never hear about submarines witnessing anything >> that >> well submarines also don't have windows which is convenient. >> Yeah, but what about the radar that >> like they have all kinds of I'm sure they have all kinds of of sensors that can detect anything around them and sonar and and all this stuff. And they spend so much time underwater and there's so many submarines. Annie Jacobson when she was on here last she was showing us a map of all the submarine highways around the world for all the countries >> and between the US, Russia and China it is just like the oceans are littered with submarine high nuclear submarines patrolling everywhere. So, um, there's got to be tons of reports from these nuclear subs, but which obviously would never probably leak into the public, >> right? And what's interesting is, you know, I think you and Jesse talked about it, Robert Hastings and UFOs and nukes >> and how UFOs swarm nuclear sites. It stands to reason that UFOs would swarm nuclear subs. >> They're loaded with warheads. >> And there's a lot of of of So, in Project Blue Book, there's a great document. It's like the unexplained of Blue Book and it's just all the really unexplained sightings that had no real conclusion. And some of them are, of course, maritime and uh USO sightings. And some of these are like tic tacs hovering above the water in 1950. >> And I think Kevin Kuth talked about a New Zealand destroyer case just off of New Zealand. I think it was a I think it was actually a Kiwi ship and not an American ship that encountered like a huge saucer type craft that passed very fast under the destroyer and knocked out the power. >> Oh yeah, I think I remember him saying that. Yeah. And then there I've talked to some um for this >> has got to know something. Sorry. Continue. >> Oh, no. I've talked to some former Navy guys who have talked about like uh >> they've mentioned aircraft carrier sized USOs. >> And this is a guy I plan I'm not going to spoil it because I plan to talk to him uh kind of soon on one of my programs. But that I really hope he talks about that because that is intriguing. Aircraft carrier size USO. But you're talking about NASA. Yeah, I was going to say I was going to say na you know NASA has got to have there's got to be some you know I know NASA is a very public facing uh organization but like you would imagine that if NASA's been involved in so much since the moon landing and all that stuff that there there's got to be some sort of interest or investigations into this stuff from people at NASA. >> Well, plenty of NASA astronauts have had a interest. Gordon Cooper and Edgar Mitchell. I mean, Gordon Cooper himself discussed even before he was uh on NASA flights kind of chasing UFOs in a in a jet while in service. >> And there's there I can't recall them off the top of my head, but there are stories of like lunar or Apollo astronauts on the way or returning from the moon seeing >> strange craft or strange craft following them. There's allegedly a tape taken by one of the Apollo astronauts. There's the testimony of of this is a famous Greer testimony of Donna Hair. She was a former NASA employee who claimed that NASA would airbrush UFOs out of various satellite imagery or space imagery. >> But I I I agree, but it already is somehow it seems like NASA's almost disconnect. NASA feels a little bit to me like it's a little bit left out of the club. NASA's pretty underfunded. NASA doesn't have some of the most cutting edge technology. I I think at least to me it seems like a lot of the cutting edge technology and actual craft materials are not relegated to space exploration and seeing Mars. It's relegated to tactical reconnaissance. It's relegated to asymmetrical uh warfare advantages. And that stuff's going to be kept in the deep black of the military and intelligence community. >> Yeah. I think who was it that was telling me I think it was Jason Georgiani was telling me a story of a guy who >> I think he worked at NASA but was like shown something um and then he got like hit on his bike. He got killed like like riding his bike like after that. >> Oh, I'm trying to God who was that? I think we talked about this with Kevin Can as well. There was some guy or no, maybe Jesse talked about it with Rogan, too. There was some guy who basically was like shown photo. Oh, this was this has something to do with the moon. He was shown something on the moon. Oh, Carl Wolf. That's Yes. And he was killed. >> Yeah. And I think Joe made a joke like doesn't look like he biked enough cuz he was a little >> Yeah. Carl Wolf talked about anomalies on the moon and how uh I think what they spoke about is Carl Wolf was privy to some of these images and was like gobsmacked and so excited for the upcoming news to show structures. >> He saw it. He's like, "Oh my god, this is going to be released and it never got released." >> Yeah, that's that you know that's another Greer whistleblower. I maybe there is some interesting stuff on the moon. I know Jesse and Joe were talking about the dark side of the moon. How uh you know the moon's tightly locked. So a lot of the time the dark side faces away from us. But also there was a recent there was a guy on Shawn Ryan. It was a recent general I can't remember what branch of service but was talking about how the Chinese are mining helium 3 on the moon. >> Oh really? >> For power sources. That's crazy cuz we haven't had a we haven't the US hasn't had a person out of low earth or orbit since like 1972. That's on that unless we have ARV that are traversing our solar system >> which is possible cuz you know like Gary McKinnon right? He's the NASA He's the NASA hacker in 2002, I think it was. >> He's the guy who lives outside the states now. >> Yes. He hacked into various DoD databases and found like a non-aterrestrial officer's list. And uh I I can't remember the ship, but he he saw an image of like a huge saucer shaped I'm sorry, cigar- shaped craft in front of one of our Jovian planets. M >> so who know you know there's there's the whole secret space program stuff the SSP with like Cory good and the 23 and back that's all really out there stuff that I don't really subscribe to but you know maybe there is maybe there have been ARVs that have been taken for a spin outside of uh outside of Earth. >> Yeah, the moon stuff is odd. The moon stuff is odd. The the the moon landing stuff is really odd, too. Because uh I know it's uh it's frowned upon to to question the moon landings. Um, but like there's a lot of really big questions that like need answers about the moon landing. Like like how did they >> how did they lose all of the data on the moon landing stuff? They they claim that if you ask chat GPT, chat GPT will tell you that the response or the the answer to why they lost all of that information and that data is because they accidentally overwrote their hard drives. like they used those hard drives and they to rewrite stuff and they accidentally like erased it or whatever. So, so now we have none of that technology. >> That seems like a I forgot my homework type statement as a kid. >> Yeah, it is. And it's like it's also the only it's also the only technological feat in any sort of uh industry or any sort of technology that hasn't advance advanced or like exponentially grown since it was first implemented. >> Right. Right. Yeah, cuz we were talking about the DSRVS, right? The Deeps Emer rescue vehicles. Those had when they were created in 19 when they were operational in 1972, they had better computing systems than even the latest Apollo lunar modules. So, there wasn't the best and brightest technology and innovation in these Apollo systems. It was pretty mundane technology that never seemed to to innovate. Yeah. And I've never heard I even asked Kevin about this when I was on when we were on here. asked about that Van Allen radiation belt stuff and like you know is it is it really that toxic or you know have we not been able to send anyone through that Van Allen radiation belt and I haven't heard anyone >> give me a reasonable explanation as to why how we can get through that and and like why cuz apparently like the Russians sent like a dog >> through the Van Allen radiation belt and it died like a day after. The claim there is that the Van Allen radiation belt like destroy it either keeps either destroyed the footage that we had at the moon laning >> or or it kind of keeps us close to home basically it's toxic for a human to pass through which it's this the lad it's toxic like alle according to um this guy we had in here Bart Cyrell who has all these documentaries about how the moon landing was >> he claims that no human can survive passing through that Van Allen radiation belt >> unless we have shielded ARV materials Right. Right. Unless we have shielded RV materials. But then you was like we we we would have been going to the moon, you know, ever since then. But we but we haven't. And we keep saying every single president every single president has said since Bush or since that happened. I think Jimmy Carter was the first one said we're going to go we're going to go back to the moon. And then you know even Trump has said multiple times we're going to go back to the moon. But the moon landing that the moon missions keep getting pushed back pushed back. And it just recently got pushed back again from it was supposed to happen September this year and now they're saying it's going to happen like June of next year. Remember we were supposed to go to Mars in 2025. >> Mhm. >> And even back in the the 60s and 70s out of the Rand Corporation and stuff, there were all sorts of plans for lunar bases and like lunar tunnel systems for trains. Huge plants. What? >> None of these. There were supposed to be mag lev systems underground on the moon. Like mag lev trains and none of this ever transpired. It it is curious. I the the whole the whole moon is the Apollo missions. There's a lot to chew on there. And I I've never really taken the time to sit through and sift through it, but it's so interesting. >> And that period of time in the middle of the Cold War was when the United States was there was so much deception and so much [ __ ] happening around that. I mean, the Kennedy assassination cover up, you know, Watergate, >> you know, MK Ultra, that was that was all happening at the same exact time the moon missions happened. So, and you know, it's just there's so many questions and you know, the fact that anyone who questions it is is automatically painted as a fool. >> Yeah. Yeah. I anything should be questioned. One of the speaking about exploring our our own solar system on our own moon. What what we talked about the the flux liner alien reproduction vehicle. I forgot to mention one of the the interesting things Brad Sorenson said is that some of these suit and ties showing off the flux liner claimed that the flux liner had been taken to various places in our solar system cuz this thing flew at basically this the speed of light using 0 point energy systems and that our own solar system was devoid of of other intelligent life which of probably but so that's interesting. And so there's always a world there's always a possible world in which either Gary McKinnon's uh non-aterrestrial officers or the flux liner alien reproduction vehicles out zipping by Jupiter or Saturn >> which gosh that would be intriguing. Yeah. Katherine Fitz is so she she uh sent me this book called uh I think it's called the rings of Saturn. Have you heard of this? >> I think so. who were allegedly like back in the I forget which year it was, but I get there's a photo of the first probe that got like really close to Saturn took a photo of the uh the ring around Saturn and the I haven't read the book yet, but but apparently the claim of the book is that they found like some sort of weird looking vehicle that was like parked inside of the ring of Saturn. >> I I think I've I've heard this I I think I've heard this in passing, but I don't really know anything about it. >> Wow. >> Yeah. It's just interesting. somebody like her who's so smart, right? and she's uh you know she's a math wizard you know she she she looks at this stuff and she's been in the government and she's >> she's a very reasonable rational rational uh smart human being also like >> believes in all this stuff like you know >> taking all this stuff from the Nazis and and uh creating a breakaway civilization of bankers trying to get off the the freaking earth in case something happens and um you know all this UFO stuff. It's like a It's a weird thing for someone like her to be interested in, but like, you know, she's a very credible person. >> Yeah. And she's really hip to kind of UFO lore and the UFO subject. She had like a series of >> 20 like 25 interviews over the years on dark journalist. >> And I watched every Yeah. Oh, she has over 20 >> everything from like the UFO economy 1.0 to 3.0 to so many things. And she's really dialed in with a lot of these subjects. She blew my mind when she was explaining uh like Elon's Doge uh when she was explaining like like Elon created Doge to find all this waste, fraud, and abuse, right? But he's getting he's taking uh auditing like the IRS, Social Security, the HHS, and not looking at the black hole of the trillions of dollars missing from the Pentagon, but like and and her what she was saying was that Elon's deliberately trying to like get all of this data from the IRS and the HHS because it's, you know, you could have all the data on all the human beings inside of the United States >> and integrate that with X AI. I and Palunteer AI and Elon's been, you know, on record talking about how he loves China's WeChat. You know, the WeChat is the >> Oh, yeah. It's everything. It's basically payment, social media, texting, like it's all it all is all funneled through this centralized WeChat >> and and um the fact that he's, you know, talked so highly of the WeChat thing and how he wants to create turn Twitter into his own WeChat and simultaneously working with Palunteer and integrating all this stuff and using all of the HHS, social security, and uh IRS data to integrate it with the AI is and working with Palunteer who just got like a like a $800 million contract fact two weeks ago. Uh I don't think there's any uh optimistic outcome no >> of doing something like that. >> No. >> And he was also uh this recent uh falling out with him and Trump. >> Oh my goodness. >> Part of it had something to do with uh Elon really wanted this specific person to be the head of NASA and Trump said, "No, I don't want that guy to be the head of NASA." Cuz he said something was fishy about him or something. >> What? That that Twitter beef came out of nowhere. That was really shocking to see because then of course uh Elon implicated Trump in the Epstein files and he said that's why they're not released the tweet too. >> Yeah. Things got ugly really fast. >> And so you're saying you're not optimistic about u this kind of Doge platform a because >> we would lead towards a even closer towards a CCP national security state with that centralized processing and that probably wouldn't even get to the bottom of where these dollars are going. >> Right. Yeah. Apparently, apparently all, you know, all the places that Elon was looking for waste, fraud, and abuse pales in comparison to what the Pentagon is missing and the trillions of dollars. Like, why didn't he go look for that? >> Because those are funneled into black holes. And there's so one of the things I I really want to understand that I really can't for UFO programs, which, you know, I'm interested in, Katherine Austin Fitz is interested in, is the creative accounting around them. >> You know what I I I think I I can't definitively prove it, but I think there are numerous vehicles in which to fund these programs. Like we talked about earlier, Idiq, indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity contracts, IDC contracts, sole source contracts, cash transactions, skimming off contracts, overcharging, uh, >> all sorting off funds, leftover funds, end of fiscal year. The amount of creative accounting must be a nightmare to to try and track any of it. >> That's why it would be great if we had a UFO whistleblower that actually worked in legacy program accounting. >> That that'd be a couple some people's dream. That'd be Katherine Ait Katherine Austin Fitz's dream. >> Yeah. Yeah, for sure it would be. But like again, it's it's refreshing to see somebody like her looking at it from the looking at it through the lens of accounting. Yeah. You know, >> and it it needs to be done because especially for the subject of like deep underground military bases. Back in the 60s and 70s, the US Army Corps of Engineer, like we talked about, published a ton of studies on deep underground facilities and would often go through cost evaluation and and discuss level costs and kind of come to conclusions that these bases could be constructed. They could be in constructed in pre-existing cavities without uh too much expenditure out of out of the budget. And there's also discussion that some of these tunnels between these underground bases are used are of course cred out via tunnel boring machines, TBMs, but that a lot of these projects to find these dollars, we might have to look at the Bureau of Reclamation that have dug out tunnels all across the United States for waterways for aqueduct aqueducts, etc., and how these might have some clandestine secondary operations to track those monies. Mhm. And like one of the questions with these uh these underground bases and these bunkers that people are building, like if there if there's some sort of like catastrophe, and that's the main idea for people that build their own bunkers is like how how are you going to power it once you run out of fuel? Like like do they have some sort of like crazy special energy? >> Uh they could also self-contain nuclear reactors, but I mean if that ever happened, you know, you and I'd be screwed. I I live in in Denver. There's a massive FEMA continuity of government site under Denver. >> Oh, yeah. >> I'm not going in there. There's Mount Weather like we're not going in there. All all of these sites a lot of them are for continuity of government but then there's deeper layers. There's there's huge stiffs ex existing around and a lot of them are provable. For example, the Monzano storage area at Sandia National Labs is an acknowledged stiff. An area under Los Alamos National Labs also in New Mexico is an acknowledged stiff. And then there are uh the Army Corps of Engineers. There's historical conspiracies of a massive underground facilities below China Lake, right, in California. Uh, Naval Air Weapon Center, China Lake, really creepy place. And places like Yuma Proving Ground in Arizona. And back in the 60s, the US Army Corps of Engineers did a ton of deep basing site studies and and and showed that specifically uh I think it's Emo County where China Lake is and then Yuma County, Arizona are perfect spots where natural cavities exist where massive underground facilities can be built without having to core out any more rock. So some of these places, there are some US Army Corps of Engineers studies that some of these underground locations can be located up to 8,000 feet underground. 8,000. God, the that's crazy. >> Yeah, I would imagine they probably also have I I mean, if I was to bet, I would imagine they they have to have some sort of setup on the moon, like some sort of base on the moon. If if we actually did go to the moon in 69 and 70, you know, during those Apollo missions, I would find it hard to believe that that we haven't set up something there to like at least back up the data of humanity, you know, because if if there is some sort of like crazy catastrophe that wipes out most of civilization, it's going to be like it's going to wipe out our technology and the the data that we have. And you would want to offload that. You would want to keep that safe somewhere for humanity to eventually reset somewhere. >> Oh yeah. And if if you do have a secret space program that uses some types of conventional rocketry where you have to overcome the Earth's escape velocity, it makes far more sense to station some of those assets on the moon where you don't have to consistently overcome that such an escape velocity. So it it makes perfect sense. >> Yeah. And of course the Rand system and other other FFRDCs and corporations of interest were doing studies of of magv systems below the moon surface >> which if if we've done it here which I believe we have I I think it's >> definitely possible on a place like our moon. >> Yeah. Especially if we have stuff like the TR3B for logistics, an ARB to transport some stuff or what you know what Michael Herrera talked about that huge octagon craft that he saw in Indonesia that was able to fit multiple containers carrying people according to him and and Jake as well as massive trucks able to zip together and fly off. So that sounds like a perfect perfectly suitable logistics transportation craft that you could use to um shuttle materials or building materials, construction materials, supplies, logistics to place like the moon if you want to have a offplanet base. >> Yeah, totally, man. Well, bro, thank you for doing this. This is [ __ ] amazing. >> Do you tell people your real name? >> Uh I think Jesse said it once, so it's it's Sam. >> Okay. Okay. Yeah. So go by Sam. >> I didn't know if you're keeping it secret or not. >> Oh, no problem. I just don't like when uh uh Marines try and scare me by saying my full name cuz he did the full I think he I'm trying to remember but he did the full Mr. Samuel like full name. >> Mhm. >> So, but thank you, brother, for having me. This has been an honor and this is the coolest studio I've ever seen, man. >> Oh, thanks, bro. Yeah, we've been working on it for a while, but we're about to move, so it's going to go. >> Oh, nice. >> What um are you working on anything else like coming up people should look forward to or >> Yeah, absolutely. So, uh whenever one project's done, I'm always working on the next. Um, I don't know what's going to be released by now. It may be a big project on sic or it may be another interview with a former uh Navy commander with some really interesting knowledge on like the Wilson Davis notes and stuff. But in between my videos, always expect another one in about four weeks time. As soon as one ends, I'm working another one. >> That's the channel. The videos will always be about crash retrieval, reverse engineering, material exploitation. Uh, I try and uh lay the topics out as as best as possible. If if you want to start on one uh video for for new viewers, maybe the the Navy one cuz that that one that one's really interesting or maybe the Jonathan Wayant or alien reproduction vehicle course and I I don't know the Doug one is [ __ ] phenomenal. >> The uh that one right there reverse engineering at Edwards. That's the story of Ed, the guy I told you about. So that that's always one interesting that Coyam I don't know, man. They're all they're all fun to me. That's why I make them. >> It's a it's a rabbit hole, man. And once you start watching, you can't stop. It pulls you right in. Oh, I know the subject is so difficult to parse through, but hopefully hopefully a couple years from now, we'll we'll have this subject ironed out a little bit. >> Yeah, we'll see. >> And hopefully the UAP DA, the new legislation to be entered into the 2026 National Defense Authorization Act, gets passed because what what that does quickly is that aims to set up a independent review board appointed by the president, confirmed by the Senate of like civilian experts to help roll out a responsible disclosure plan. formerly it was uh uh McConnell and Rand Paul I think that blocked this uh from the Senate and then Senate communicating with the House to get this passed. So, >> and I think there was some involvement of Mike Turner >> uh former rep that that uh >> he's the Ohio guy, right? >> Right. Patterson. >> And then there's even some uh rumors of like the eminent domain discussion being talked about by uh Travis Taylor and J Stratton. So, I I truly hope that if that legislation gets introduced again, which it I believe it will, that that can finally get passed and we can finally start to peer behind the 1954 Atomic Energy Act. >> Well, cool, man. I learned a lot. Thank you again for your time. We'll link all the stuff below. >> And that's all, folks. >> All right. Appreciate it, man. Good night, >> everybody.