Carrie, thank you for doing this. I've been  watching you on the internet. I've never met you. Um, but I'm I'm grateful for your honesty and your  bravery and the precision of what you say. You never um in the face of all this criticism never  got so mad that you revealed ugly sentiments, which I don't think you have. You just stuck right  to the Christian case. So, bless you for that. How did you get involved in the President's Religious  Liberty Commission? What is it and how did you become a member of it? Very good question. So, I  was Miss California in 2009. Donald Trump owned the Miss Universe, MissUSA organization. Uh,  it was very controversial, but I dared to say on stage that I believe marriage is between one  man and one woman. Yes. And I don't know if you remember that. I do remember it. And they punished  you for it. Huge controversy. Um, that was really before anybody was canceled. So, I I always tell  people I was one of the first to be canceled. The crazy thing is the majority of Californians agreed  with you because they vote and they they voted in a referendum um pretty overwhelming Prop 8 which  was then invalidated by a judge cuz democracy is fake. But you were you were saying what most of  your fellow Californians believed 100%. Yeah. And I was just standing on my principles  which is what I'm doing now. So uh Donald Trump loved me. He said Carrie this is going  to be the best thing that ever happened to you. Um, I remember one day he I was in his office and  he's like, "Carrie, you have the it factor." And I'm like, "What is that?" I was 21 years old. I'm  like, "What does that mean?" And he's like, "You just have it." He's like, "You you dared to speak  the truth knowing what it would cost you." And I think he really respected me for that. And so at  21, I became this, you know, conservative darling, I guess you could say, and dared to stand up for  my faith. And I doubled down. You know, they told me, "Go on, uh, Matt Lowour and apologize for what  you said. You must apologize." Did they really tell you that? Oh, yeah. Yeah. The pageant people  said, "Go on and and apologize." And I turned my phone off. I went on Matt Lowour and he's like,  "All right, Carrie, let's do a re redo." How would you answer the question? I said, "I have  no regrets. I would literally You're getting a lecture on sexual ethics from Matt Lowour." Yeah.  Okay. The irony of that. Yeah. Yeah. So, I said, "I'd rather be biblically correct than politically  correct." And from there it was like I mean I was on every news station every day for the four  months. It was non-stop. It was to the point of like harassment. Like my 90-year-old grandmother  was being harassed. I mean it it was insane. Um but I I stood firm and I did not waver. And your  position just to restate all these years later was I believe marriage is between a man and a woman.  That was my answer. And I I said no offense to anyone out there. This is the way I was raised.  This is what I believe. marriage between one man and one woman and I got second place and I got  dragged through the mud. It was horrible. And the president loved me and he said, "Carrie, this is  what do you want to do?" He's like, "Do you want to be on Dancing with the Stars? Do you want to  be on Fox News?" I did like a little try out on um the morning show at Fox with Roger Als in  New York. I didn't want to do that. I didn't want to wake up at 3:00 a.m. No, you don't. And  I said, "You know what, Mr. President?" I said, "All I want to do is get married, be a  mom." I had met Kyle and I just said, "I just want to go on with my life, but I do want  to write a book because nobody can take my story from me." And so he signed off on it. Thank God  he did because it was it was amazing that I was able to share my story. Um, and I just kept in  touch with him all these years. And so, you know, I would defend him when they were calling him a  sexist, saying he was going backstage and looking at the girls and MissUSA and the, you know,  changing rooms. And I would just constantly be like, "Nope, that's not the guy." Like, "You're  painting him as this sexist, misogynist, racist, you know, and he was being called every name  in the book, you remember?" And I just defended him always cuz I stand on truth. And then fast  forward to this religious liberty commission and I got a call from the White House 2 days after  I was confirmed as a Catholic and they said, "We're calling on behalf of the president and we  want to invite you to be on this religious liberty commission." When was that? It was April 20th, I  want to say, 2025. And I wept. I was like, "Wow, this is incredible." I mean, almost 20 years  later after I took that stand, here I am now defending religious liberty because I ultimately  lost the MissUSA or Miss California title because of my answer. I I will say that they took it away  from me. I remember. Yeah. And the president had my back, which was which was amazing. He said  she just said nothing wrong. She stood on her principles. And I loved that about him. Amen. I  agree. Because that was when it was unpopular to do that. Yes. You know, he risked a lot. I was  standing there with at Trump Tower with him and it was amazing. I'll never forget that. And so  we just stayed friends. I would call him while he's on the golf course and be like, "Hey, they're  asking me to go on the gay pride parade. I don't want to do that." And he's like, "I'll take care  of it. Don't worry." And and so Imagine people are trying to get you to march in the gay pride  parade. Yeah. They're like, "Well, you can make it up to the gays by just going to the gay pride  parade and showing that you're not a homophobe." So, I I'm used to these tricks. I' I've been doing  this 20 years. So, yeah. So, that's how I got on the commission. It's exactly what's happening  now. It's exactly topic has changed sort of, but not not the tactics. So, what did they  tell you the Religious Liberty Commission was? They told me that the Religious Liberty  Commission was 12 of us, 12 commissioners, and our job was to hear from everyday average  Americans who were facing religious persecution like myself right now, ironically. Uh, so we would  have hearings in DC once a month, and Dan Patrick is the chairman of the commission. Uh, we're  equals on this commission. Who's Dan Patrick? He's the Lieutenant Governor of Texas. Uh he's  not above me. I'm not above him. We're equals. Um and it's under the Department of Justice. So Pam  Bondi is um involved actually. Yeah. Okay. Uh so we were told that we were going to be hearing from  people at these hearings. It's from like 8 to 2 in the afternoon. So very long day. And the witnesses  we could recommend witnesses um and then have them come and testify. And I recommended so many great  witnesses throughout these past seven months. I recommended a little boy who was forced to,  you know, read a book about how you can be a transgender and uh he came and met the president  and everybody got to see that. That was special. Um the president really appreciated him and his  parents' stance and standing up for religious freedom. So stuff like that. We heard from a Navy  Seal who lost his pension cuz he didn't want to get the COVID shot. things like that where we were  doing really great work and I thought I thought it was actually protecting religious freedom but I  realize now that's that's not what it was. Uh no, it was softening up Christians for the Iran war  obviously and other things. Um who were the other members of it? The other 11. Yeah. So I actually  when I got the call I actually wept because I I didn't feel qualified. I I thought, you know,  here I am amongst these incredible names, uh, Bishop Baron, Cardinal Dolan, uh, Kelly  Shackleford. He's run a religious liberty, uh, law firm for 35 years. He's been CEO. Um, you  had Ryan Anderson, you had Crazy Paula White. Um, just these incredible names. You have a woman,  Allison Hoe, who I believe her husband might be the next Supreme Court justice. Mhm. Just  in she's argued at the Supreme Court over I think eight times. I mean, here I am, this mom  who I just didn't feel qualified. I didn't make the connection between your own experience of  religious discrimination and this appointment. But clearly that that was the point, right? Then  I realized that no, I am qualified. In fact, I'm probably one of the most qualified because I  don't know how many people on that stage have ever been attacked, have ever been slandered, have ever  been cancelled, have ever lost anything. I mean, look at Dr. Phil. He's on the commission. He  has a huge organization. They have big backing, big money behind them. And here I am, this little  mom that I'm not owned by anybody. They can't take anything from me. And that's why I'm free. And  that's why I said what I said that day. And so what were the meetings like uh prior to the  anti-semitism hearing? They were incredible. I I was crying as I would listen to these these  people who were facing religious persecution. And the end of this the main part of this commission  is the end of the the one-year appointment was we were going to sit down with the president and say,  "Okay, here's our report. here's what we recommend that you, you know, maybe executive orders that  you can put in, maybe legislative things that you can push to protect religious freedom. And  so I took this this position very serious, very serious. Um, it makes me sad. You know, I was a  champion for mothers who didn't want to vaccinate their kids to go to school. Um, I listen to people  that are suffering in Gaza that simply just were protesting at their college campus. They're using  their first amendment rights. It's it's crazy where Did you have any sense from talking to the  other members between April when you got it and was it Jan January I think when this contramp  happened? Did you have any sense that the other members of the commission were trying to steer  you in a certain direction, disagreed with you, had an agenda that was not stated? I realized in  August, so I got I got appointed in April or May, May 1st, National Day of Prayer, went to the White  House, the president signed the executive order, we're all standing there and uh then we took the  summer break, so we had a couple months off and then our first hearing was going to be I believe  it was uh end of August or early September. Well, end of August, I got a call from the  White House, the PO or I guess it was no, it was it was the designated federal officer who's  in charge of the commission. So, the head of Dan, he's the chairman and then his boss. And she's  like, "Hey, Carrie. Um, I noticed that you've been posting some things online and um there's  been some chatter in the White House that you're an anti-semite. You're an anti-semite. And I I I  literally was like, "What are you talking about?" Who was this person? Her name is Mary Margaret  Bush. And she said, "I don't know who it is, but it's it's probably some low person that is  just trying to cause problems. I would ignore it, but I just wanted to make sure that you're mindful  of what you're posting." And that was the first time where I was like, "Okay, like I am not a  this is not a paid position. I'm a volunteer. They pay for my flight. They pay for my uh hotel,  but that's it. I'm not paid to do this job. I'm volunteering this this job. And so I said, "Wait a  sec." I pushed back and I said, "You're telling me that as a as a religious liberty commissioner  to protect religious liberty, I don't have my religious liberty to post about things that affect  my religion and my religious beliefs." So I said, I pushed back and I said, "What are the things  that I've been posting?" Well, you posted Tucker Carlson's uh or you posted the Green Beret that  you interviewed uh Anthony Aguular. I said, "Yeah, I did. I did post that. That's sad. That's  heartbreaking to shooting people in food lines." Yeah. Which they have. Yeah. I said, "I'm  a pro-life Christian. I have a duty to speak out. And it would be a betrayal of my conscience  not to." So, what's in your toothpaste? If you're using the brand you grew up with, you  probably don't want to know. The ingredients likely include fluoride, something called SLS,  glycerin foaming agents. It's a chemical cocktail. Van Man's toothpaste is different. Their miracle  toothpowder is changing everything. And people are ditching traditional toothpaste filled  with chemicals by the thousands. Van Man's toothpowder uses ingredients with the same mineral  structure as your teeth that remmineralizes them and strengthens your enamel naturally. No  fluoride at all and totally edible. You could put it on toast. Not that you'd want to, but you  could. People who use it report whiteter teeth, less plaque. They wake up without that gross film  on their gums. And here's the amazing part. Vivid dreams are back. You dream clearly when you stop  coating your mouth in fluoride every night. Did you know that? Pretty amazing. Tells you a lot.  So, make the switch. Visit vanman.shop/tucker. Use the code Tucker for 15% off your first order.  vanman.shop/tucker. Use the code Tucker. 15% off. Van man, real ingredients, zero exceptions. So,  this woman from the White House said that posting an interview that I did made you an anti-semite.  She said that there were people complaining about certain things that I was posting. And then this  was the worst. She said, you know, you you posted Pope Leo and what he said. And you wrote in the  caption, you know, that there's suffering in Gaza and there's a genocide. You know, you you really  just you shouldn't use that language. That's when I knew this this is this is a war. We are in  an absolute war. I said, I'm a Catholic. You're telling me that I have to censor my posts of  Pope Leo, the Holy Father. I can't post what he's saying talking about the grave suffering of  the Palestinians in Gaza. And she said, "You also cannot cannot talk about Zionism." So Zionism,  this is her words, is is their right to exist. And so when you're posting about Zionism, Carrie,  you're saying that the Jews don't have a right to exist. Huh? Mary Margaret Bush is Mary Margaret  Bush is her name. She's a young woman. And I said, "Well, this wouldn't jeopardize my position on  the commission, would it?" Like, the president doesn't know about this, right? Cuz imagine me.  I'm like, I just got appointed. I'm super excited. I'm passionate. This is like my dream job to  protect religious freedom. And now I'm being told I don't have my own. And she goes, "Oh, no,  no, no. The president, no, don't worry about this, Carrie. This wouldn't jeopardize." So, I just  kept posting. Well, then I got a call from the PO office at the White House. May I just ask you  to pause for one sec? Did she Did Mary Margaret Bush tell you who had called you an anti-semite?  That's a serious slander. Oh, yeah. Did she name the people saying? She said, "I have no idea who  it is." Oh, it's just people people are saying I think the people was Paula White. Let's just  be honest. It it was Paula White. I think my my personal opinion. Okay. So, now I'm sorry  to keep interrupting this amazing narrative, but um for people who don't follow this, who  is Paula White? Paula White is Trump's pastor. Okay, that's who he picked as his pastor.  And she's a pastor. She's That's her official position. She's a pastor. I don't believe women  can be pastors, but who am I? I'm just some dumb mom in California. So, um, is she's a is she's a  Christian pastor. Paul, she's a Christian Zionist evangelical heretic in my opinion. Okay. Um, but  yeah, she's Trump's uh she runs the White House, the faith office, White House position and she's  on the religious liberty commission with me and very involved in all things BB Netanyahu and  uh so I got a call from How would you rate her authority as a Christian leader? Oh, I I  I don't take her serious at all. I don't think she's a Christian leader. I think she's a a a a  crazy person, honestly. I think she's a heretic. I think um for people who think you're throwing  those terms around lightly or slandering her, I think it'd be worth going online and reading about  her and watching videos of her demanding money from her congregation on film with some other  Christian pastor in a foreign country. Clearly, um she's got an a complicated personal life and  saying things that bear no resemblance at all to Christian doctrine that I think it's fair what  you're saying. I guess is my point. Yeah. So, I got a call from the White House, Mary Sprouls,  another Mary. And I looked her up. It's from presidential personnel office. Yes. PO office.  Yeah. I got a call in August shortly after that phone call with the other Mary. And uh I'll never  forget it. I answer the phone and she's like, "Hi, Carrie. Uh this is Mary Spurs calling  from the White House PO office. I'm calling to ask you for your resignation today." When  was this? This was in August. Yeah, this was in August. A few weeks after. Yes. Very scary.  And I remember I had like a tear just come down, but I wasn't sad. It was like it was like anger.  Had you gone to any meetings of the commission at this point? Our first uh we had a first hearing  just Yeah. briefly like a brief hearing on kind of the history of religious freedom in America.  But our first hearing, the most important hearing coming up, the little boy that had to book was a  few weeks later. Okay. Okay. So, this is before you even like served out your duty. Oh, yeah. No,  it was before the first official hearing. It was and she asked for your resignation. She said, "I  want your written resignation today." And I said, "Who are you? I thought this was a joke.  Who Who is this person?" And she goes, "I am calling on behalf of the White House." I  said, "Why would you ask me for my resignation? I just got on this commission. What did  I do wrong?" Boy, you are tough. Oh, I was I was not going to go down without a  fight cuz I knew I knew. I'm just looking at your husband who's nodding. She's tough. So,  excuse me. No. No. Good for you. Yeah. I said, "I'm not resigning." And I don't know who asked  you to have me resign. Was it the president? Cuz I think the president should ask me to resign if  he wants me to resign. He appointed me and only he can ask for my resignation. So, I'm not resigning.  So, we got off the phone. Wait, but what on what grounds was she demanding your res? She did not  answer any questions. She was just told it was like a puppet. She was like, I got to just send  the message. So, I called her back. So, she said, we're asking for your resignation, but she did not  explain why. No, she said, it's just not working out. Yeah. Literally, now that it's coming back  to me, this was not a Tinder date. It's just not working out. It's just not working out. And I'm  going, this is serious. This is very serious. So then I hung up and then I wanted to make sure  it was a legit person. So I called right back and I said, "Hi Mary." I said, "This is Carrie. I I'm  just curious. Please, I know you I know you don't want to give me information. I know you're just a  messenger." Cuz I didn't want to be mean to her, of course. Um but I said, "Who is telling you  to to have me resign? Who is who have you talked to?" And I'll never forget it. She didn't want  to say it, but she finally said it. He goes, "I've talked to Paula White and Dan Patrick and  Britney Baldwin, who Britney Baldwin used to work for Ted Cruz. So, it's all making sense now what's  going on." So, this is this is a this is a a witch hunt. They they they're trying to actively remove  me. And they know that the only way they that I could be removed is if I resign or if I die or  if the president removes me. So, in my mind, I'm thinking, does the president know about this  or is this just the Dan and Paula trying to out me on their own? I think they thought, oh, if we ask  her to resign, she'll resign. But I didn't resign. I said, no, there's no reason to resign. You You  should resign. Actually, why are you asking me to resign? So, she told me Dan, Patrick, Paula.  So, immediately, imagine how boiling I was. So, I tried to get in touch with Paula White. No  response. I tried to get in touch with Dan. No response. How did you call them or text them  or The weirdest part about this commission, I honestly think it's so fake and gay because we  didn't even have each other's like phone numbers, emails. Like I had to literally ask like,  "Hey, can I get Paula White's email?" So, I actually called her daughter-in-law. Her name's  Rachel. She's a pastor young woman. And I said, "Hey, Rachel." I said, "I just got this disturbing  call. I need to talk to Paula immediately." And she's like, "Okay, let me try to get a hold  of her." Paula never called me back. What? No, I waited for like a week and a half. It was  Isn't she required to in the New Testament if you have a conflict with a fellow person? Is  it Matthew 18? You're good. But I mean, that's a requirement from Jesus. You've got a problem.  Go directly to that person. Exactly. Yeah. So, I did and she did not want to call me back. And  then her daughter-in-law, I got her on the phone and her daughter-in-law said, "Yeah, I talked  to my mom and she said, "Don't worry about it. There's a lot of snakes in DC. There's a lot  of snakes in the White House." And I would just ignore it. And my mom, my mother-in-law loves  you, Carrie. Don't worry about it. I think it's just one of the snakes in the White House. Paula  White would not speak to you directly. No. No. So then finally, after I was on pins and needles  for a week and a half wondering what's going on, am I on this commission? I emailed everybody. I  called Bishop Baron. I got him on the phone. I said, "Hey, have you been did you like hear that  they tried to remove me?" He goes, "What? Why would they try to remove you?" I said, "I have no  idea other than I've been criticizing Israel and, you know, talking about the genocide in Gaza.  Sorry, I'm a pro-life Christian. I can't sit here while children are being starved and bombed."  And he totally supported me and he's like, "This is insane. You would never be removed from  that." Bishop Baron told me that. Talk to Ben Carson. Have you Ben Carson's on the commission  with me? Hey, Ben. Did you hear about them trying to remove me from this commission? No, absolutely  not. Ignore it. I've never heard of anything about this. Kelly Shackleford, same thing. I said,  "You're a religious liberty attorney for 35 years. Did I do something wrong? Am I not allowed  to have my religious freedom while serving on this religious liberty commission or do I have to be  a Zionist who supports a genocide? Is that the requirements of this commission?" He said the  same thing. I haven't heard a word. I literally talked to almost everyone on the commission.  I talked to Cardinal Dolan in person. I said, "They tried to get me off this commission,  Cardinal." He goes, "What? For what?" I said, "Well, cuz I've been posting about Gaza." He goes,  "I just gave humanitarian relief to Gaza. So, if they're going to kick you off, I guess they're  going to kick me off, too." Literally, his words, Cardinal Dolan, they all supported me. When we  started this company, we promised that we would only partner with other companies that share our  values. We didn't want to advertise products made by people who hate us or for that matter you. So,  with that in mind, it is a pleasure to announce that we're working with Charity Mobile. It is  a prolife phone company. Charity Mobile holds a view on abortion that almost every single major US  company disagrees with. They think it's completely wrong. It is sad and celebrating it is one of  the darkest things this country's ever done. We agree completely. So, when you switch your  cell phone service to this American company, they'll donate a percentage of your monthly  price plan to a pro-life, pro- family charity that you choose. There's no better way to prove  what their real values are than doing that. No one would do that unless they meant it. All their  plans are under 50 bucks, and you can keep your existing number and your existing phone if it's  compatible. Charity Mobile is a pro-life company serving pro-life customers and supporting pro-life  causes, and it's done it for more than 30 years. Visit charitymobile.com/tucker. Use promo code  Tucker to get a free phone with free activation, free shipping, and a free gift with every new line  of service. So, at this point, you believed it was just Paula White, the lieutenant. Why would  the lieutenant governor of Texas be on this commission? I think that he is a snake. I think  him and Paula are together in this and they wanted to get rid of any dissenting voice that goes  against their Zionist. But why was he on the commission? I I didn't even know who he was. I had  no idea who he was, but I guess Trump appointed him as the the chairman of this commission. Um, so  then I got a call after I was on Pins and Needles. I finally got a call and it was Dan and Paula. And  I'll never forget I I literally remember everyone Patrick and Paula. Yes. They called me and they  said, "Hi, Carrie. I know you've been worried this past couple weeks, but Dan started." and he  goes, "I just want to let you know we've been in meetings about your situation." What situation?  Yeah. What situation that I'm posting about, God forbid, I I criticize Israel. Can't do that  while serving in this administration. And he said, "You know, I just want to let you know,  Carrie, your job on this commission, I'll never forget this, Tucker. Your job on  this commission is protect the president and his reputation." He said that to me the first thing  out of his mouth. I couldn't believe it. I go, "What? I thought my job is protect religious  freedom. I thought that's what he appointed me to do." And he goes, "You know, you've been saying  things online, Carrie, and you really need to stay off social media. Do not use social media between  now and the end of your term." And then Paula White chimed in and she said, "Yeah, Carrie, you  know what? You really shouldn't be posting about replacement theology. You You shouldn't be posting  about that." And there's a lot of people that are saying that you're an anti-semite, Carrie, by  your posts. You're criticizing Zionism. You're criticizing Israel. And we have a problem with  that. And then Dan chimed in again and he he got loud. He got real loud and he's like, you  know, Carrie, cuz I I I pushed back and I said, wait a second. I said, what what am I posting that  is so offensive to you that's against the rules of this commission? Cuz I didn't sign anything  saying I wasn't going to use my social media. I speak out about things that I care about. I'm a  religious person. I'm a Christian. And he said, um, he said, "You just you've been saying things  that go against I'll never forget this." He goes, "You've been saying things that are that are not  in alignment with the president and are not in alignment with Paula White and some of the other  members on this commission." And that's when I knew that this commission was a a fraud. It was it  was pretend. It was not about religious freedom. It was about, "You better be a Zionist. You better  push our agenda or you're off." And that was in August. So, we ended the conversation. Dan got  really upset cuz I said, "I I really do want to keep posting. I'm not going to not use my social  media. Can't agree to that, Dan." And he goes, "Well, why don't you just if you if you have  any questions about Israel or Gaza?" Cuz Paula White chimed in was like, "I'm the expert in that.  You're just Paul White's an expert on Gaza. Yeah. Yeah. I'm the expert in that, you know. I just  got back from there and there's no kids starving there. It's all fake, Carrie. It's all It's all  pretend. Yeah. And so she said, "If you want She's a Christian minister saying that." Yeah. Yeah. Do  you think that she at any point in the course of a day feels like, "Oof, I'm going to have to answer  for this at some point." No, I think she's just to deny the death of children in the name of Jesus is  a pretty heavy thing to do. It's pretty sick. It's pretty dark. and she said,"I want you, if you have  any questions about anything, if you want to post anything, you need to run it by me first." So now  Paula White, an equal of mine on this commission, is now telling me that I have to get everything  approved by her in order to post about my religious beliefs. Is that insane? Yeah, it's  making my heartbeat fast listening to this. Yes. Um, so that's the backtory. Well, it's completely  evil. And I'll just say I know Paula White sort of. I know Dan Patrick very well. He's a lot  more liberal than I am. He's he's quite liberal, but I always liked him. You know, he's not stupid  um at all. And I'm shocked by this. I was shocked by it. It's It's so disgraceful. Me, too. I cried,  actually. I cried. I cried to my husband. I cried to my kids. I I I couldn't believe this. I  couldn't believe that this was happening in the United States of America that that we care  more about protecting a foreign nation than we do our own people. Did either one of them So Dan  is a self-described Christian. Paula White is some kind of Christian minister, I guess. Um I want to  be clear, it doesn't look like Christianity to me, but I'm trying not to judge. But did either  one of them explain why a requirement of the Christian faith is supporting the Netanyahu  government? Do they explain the theology there? because I I don't I don't understand it. Yeah.  No, they never explained it. They just said, "You can't have your theology. You You can't  believe what you want. You have to submit to ours." But their theology is that Christians  are required as a matter of faith to support the government of Israel. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Do  you have any idea? Those who bless Israel will be blessed. It's exactly what Ted told you. Yeah.  I mean, he had no idea where in the Bible it was. Of course, that's not that line is not actually in  the Bible. doesn't say that. Um but whatever I the leap between that whatever that means it does mean  something and the moral the religious require to support the government of Israel. I mean those are  just like completely two different things. I did no they don't think they are. Did Paula White  or Dan Patrick explain where you were wrong on doctrine? No. No. They just said, "I cannot hold  firm to replacement theology." Which they don't know. Catholics, it's fulfillment theology. We  believe that we are the the fulfillment. You know, it's not replace. They like to dig us and say,  "Oh, you believe in replacement theology." No, no, no. We're the fulfillment. Christ is the  fulfillment of Israel. Well, that's what we are in the New Testament. Exactly. Um I mean, it says  it like on every page. Uh, so but they're accusing you of believing in something called replacement  theology. For people who don't follow this, and I'm kind of one of them, I don't fully understand  what that means. What do they mean by that? They believe that um so replacement theology, their  claim is that the church has replaced Israel. So for 2,000 years, that's what all of the early  church fathers have taught, that we are the new Israel. We're the spiritual semmites. Um, they  would literally be rolling in their graves if they if they thought that we were being told that  1948 Israel is some biblical prophecy fulfillment. I mean, that alone is insane that they think  that this political state of Israel that was created in 48 mostly by atheists is some biblical  prophecy being fulfilled. And I mean you're you're aware of Derby and Scoffield and so these these  this is the fruit of that of that those is there any other place in America I mean in the world  rather where you have a big group of Christians who believe that 1948 Israel is a fulfillment  of prophecy? No. In fact, do you know, Tucker, that I asked my priest who I had several I had  about six priests guiding me before this hearing, spiritually advising me before this hearing cuz  I wanted to make sure I need to make sure that I know what I'm saying and that it's actually  accurate with what the church teaches. And I'll never forget he's from Spain. God bless  him. He's so so sweet. And I said, "Father, do you know what Zionism is?" He looked at me like  I was an alien and he's like, "What's Zionism? I I I couldn't believe it. I said, "You realize  in America that these people like Paula White, Dan Patrick, Ted Cruz, most of our politicians  in government who have power, who are in the White House praying over the president, they're  Zionists. They believe that 1948 Israel is a biblical prophecy fulfillment." He looked at me  like I was crazy. He said, "Nobody's ever taught that." I said, "I know." And now they're forcing  it on me, a Catholic, on this commission. Yeah. It's really scary. Well, it's Yeah. And especially  since we just, you know, wound up in a war thanks to this. I mean, it's hard not to see this as all  preparation for for this war, which is resetting the world. Um, and they had to get rid of the  the only denter of that of Zionism. They had to get rid of her on this commission before the war.  It was within weeks that did occur to me watching this. Why is it so important to crush this woman?  Like, okay, she's got views you disagree with. It's a religious liberty commission. You've  got Are there Jews on it, too? I assume, one rabbi. So, he's got different views. You  would think from He's Jewish. You're Christian. That's okay. Yeah. It's okay to disagree. But  it's not okay to question the behavior of the secular nation state of Israel. So that tells you  it's not really about religious liberty, right? It's about Yeah. Comfort that carries you from  morning to night is next level. Everyone wants it. That's why we recommend Cozy Earth. You've  heard us talk about their pajamas and sheets, and for good reason. They're amazing. But Cozy  Earth does not stop there. Their socks are every bit as impressive. Soft, breathable cushion  to support every step from sun up to sun down. When the day winds down, ladies and gentlemen,  that same comfort shows up at night with Cozy Earth's Comforter. Soft, light, naturally  temperature regulating. That means you stay cool, calm, and comfortable all night. No heaviness.  You don't overheat. You just rest deeply. And that's what sets Cozy Earth apart. Every piece  is crafted with attention to detail, and it's completely risk-f free. You get a 100 night sleep  trial and a 10-year warranty. Discover how care in every detail transforms simple routines into  actual comfort. Head to cozyearth.com and use the code Tucker for up to 20% off. That's code Tucker  for up to 20% off. And if you get a post purchase survey, take the time to mention you heard about  Cozy Earth on this show. So, okay, the upshot of that conversation was what? They call you and  tell you you've got to run your social media post by this priestess. Yeah. And you say no.  Then what happens? So I I kind of played along with it just to see where it would go. So I didn't  stop posting, but I would run things by her. Like that that kid in Florida who was being detained  in Israel. Yeah. I sent her an email and I said, "Hey Paula," I said, "There's a kid in, you know,  Israel that's detained." I said, "So citizen, US citizen." I said, "We need to we need to do  something about this." I said, "I know you have connections with BB. Maybe you can call BB up and  see if you can get him released." This is this is what I am supposed to do on this commission. This  is a US citizen that is being detained, a child in Israel, and nobody's doing anything about it. No  response. Then I sent her another email saying, "Hey Paula, um there's a bunch of teacher the  Christian schools in in Israel are being shut down because these Palestinian teachers are being  told they can't come and and teach. So these these Christian schools are going to be closed. Can  you can you can you help? Can you do something about it?" No response. So this arrogant woman  who had the audacity to ask me to get things run by her in order to post online doesn't even have  the respect to respond. She does not care about religious freedom at all. And that's when that's  when I really knew that I was up against a big big giant. Um, so I just kept posting and I I just  kept posting more more and more every day because I wasn't going to allow them to do this to me.  No, they messed with the wrong person. Apparently, they did. Yeah. Oh, I love it so much. I can't  stand it. I wish more men were like this. I know. Sorry to say that. It makes me so sad. Um  anyway, yeah, it's like it's 90% of the people I know in my world who were like, "Oh, you told  me to violate my principles. I'm doubling down on my principles." They're like 90% women and I  don't know what and I respect and love them all. Truly rever them, but like half the population's  male or the men. I don't I don't get it. I talk to my wife about this all the time. Like,  what is that? They're afraid. It's Well, nobody wants to be called an anti- Nobody wants  to be called a racist. Nobody wants to go through what you're going through. through what I'm going  through. No, I agree. You know, they put you in this box and they shut the door and they say,  "Shut up, you anti-semite. You're not allowed in society. We're going to we're going to shame  you. We're going to we're going to cancel you. We're going to destroy you." That's what they do.  Yeah. And of course, it raises the chances you're going to get shot to death by a lot, which is  one of the reasons they do it, right? So, we had this moment of agreement after Charlie Kirk was  killed that, you know, calling people Nazis can get them killed. And so I immediately immediately  called Mark Levin and Ben Shapiro and I was like, "Wow, you know, we should not fight." They both  agreed. Um, and the next thing you know, because they do understand it makes it more likely you'll  be killed. Oh, yeah. They're totally proviolence, obviously. Yeah. And uh, so yeah, the stakes are  super high. Very high. I have small children. I take this very serious. You should take it  seriously. So then what happened? So then I just doubled down. I kept posting. I wasn't getting any  responses from Paula. I sent a followup with the with the head of the commission saying, "Hey, um,  are other commissioners being uh told they can't post on social media or am I the only one given  that guidance?" Yeah. And she sent me an email back saying, "Well, you must have prudence when  you post." Which I agree with. Um, but none of the other commissioners, Tucker, were told what I was  told. They were all posting freely. Dr. Phil was posting. Eric Mataxis, who has his own show, he's  posting. Eric Mataxis, he's on the commission. Actually, yeah, actually. Crazy. Crazy. Wow.  Since since my removal, he has attacked me like you cannot imagine. Very disappointing. Sad. Sad  guy. Yeah. Sad. very troubled guy. So leading up to this hearing, imagine all that backstory.  So people only saw that hearing in February, but there was a whole backstory and I kept  my mouth shut. I wanted to come out and and tell the world what they did to me. And I  actually was going to do it on stage that day, but my priest advised me not to. Um I don't know  if I should have or shouldn't have, but I kind of wanted to call Paula White and Dan Dan Patrick  out to their face in front of the world. So this all leads up to the hearing last month? Yes. The  anti-semitism hearing. And so did you have contact with anybody else on the commission that day  before the hearing? Uh no. So the way it works is before the hearing once we request our witnesses  um we get a whole 40page, you know, rundown of everything they're going to say, who they are,  what they're going to speak about kind of so we can prepare to ask them questions and kind of go  back and forth, take notes and all that. And so I I realized I I hadn't gotten the the the paper  yet. I hadn't gotten the who was speaking. And I had requested four Jewish Americans who are  facing true anti-semitism here in America. And they were all four rejected. Why? Because they're  not Zionists. You had to be a certain kind of Jew in order to be accepted. They were rejected. They  were rejected by whom? By the commission. Whoever whoever calls the shots, I have no idea. It's so  unorganized. I honestly don't even know how this commission works, unfortunately. It's embarrassing  to say that to admit it, but I don't know who approves these. Um I recommended Norm Finkelstein,  um who he's written books about. I mean, he is so knowledgeable on this. Son of Holocaust  survivors. Yeah. Who better who better to speak on this than Norm? He was rejected. Who else? Um  Miko Palad. He's an Israeli um citizen um raised there in Israel and now he runs a Palestinian  organization does tremendous work. Um and then this guy David Spelvic in New York. He's out  of New York. And then I requested a rabbi, a Jewish rabbi who's been fighting against Zionism  for over 40 years. What they call a Torah Jew, I assume. a believer in the Torah. Not the He  says he's an orthodox. That's how he Yeah. So, yeah. All There are a lot of those. I know a bunch  of them. Oh, yeah. They're all anti- um Zionists. Yeah. Yeah. So, anyway, they were all rejected. I  requested two Palestinian Christian organizations to speak just to have a fair and balanced hearing.  I wanted it to be fair and balanced. Um they were rejected, too. Yeah. Unfortunately. So, I'm  on the plane heading to DC before the hearing. I still haven't gotten the rundown of who's accept  who who are who am I going to be hearing from. So, I send an email. Hey, um wondering where the  rundown is. I need to prepare. I'm on the plane. I need to prepare for this hearing tomorrow.  Uh okay. Yeah, we'll send it over soon. Never sent it. Never got it from them. I had to I had to  email Kelly Shackleford and say, "Hey, Kelly, did you receive any preparations for this hearing?"  "Oh, yeah. Yeah, they sent it a couple weeks ago." So they purposely did not send me the rundown. I  I believe I believe they wanted to leave me out of it. So I wasn't prepared. But I was prepared.  So you had no idea who was going to appear at the hearing. No idea. No idea. And the only way I  knew Norm wasn't accepted and Mo and David and the rabbis. They told me we weren't accepted.  And it broke my heart because there is true anti-semitism happening. Yeah, that's for sure.  So most home security systems are built like the cable internet. They're tied to one address. And  if you move or if the job moves, you got to start over. But that is not how construction sites,  ranches, large properties do their security. They need cameras that are portable, not tied to one  location. Defend security cameras are the perfect solution for them and for you. With Defend, you  own the camera. You're not renting it, and you're not locked to building a Wi-Fi network. Okay?  When the job moves, the camera moves with it. No power lines or infrastructure required of any  kind. These run on cellular, like your smartphone. They're perfect for watching job site equipment  overnight, livestock at your ranch, long driveways and outuildings on your property, or whatever else  you want to watch from afar. You mount it where you need it, you open the Defend app, and you're  set. Clear footage, night vision, alerts straight to your phone. And Defend never sells your data to  anybody. Not tech companies, not the government, not China. Plan start at about five bucks  a month. No contract. Cancel anytime. Visit defendellcam.com today and enter the code tucker  for 20% off your purchase. That's defendellcam.com code tucker for 20% off. Wow, this is really dark.  It is. So, how did you feel flying to Washington? Scared. I was scared for my life. You know,  most of the commissioners stay at the Museum of the Bible cuz that's where the hearing is. I had  requested that I stay there due to my safety. They rejected that. I stayed at a random hotel across  the way. Um, they wouldn't let they wouldn't let you stay there. No. I I requested I said, "Hey,  I don't feel safe. You know, I'm traveling alone. Um, no. No. I said for my safety, I'd like to  stay at the museum. That way, I just go down the elevator and I'm there at the hearing." No. Uh, so  I had a Muslim woman who has become a dear friend, like a sister. She's on the advisory board to  this commission. She's one of the only Muslim representatives. So, there's 30 advisory board  members and then there's the 12 commissioners. So, I said, "Hey, Samira." I said, "Would you mind  meeting me at my hotel and walking with me over? Like, I don't really feel safe walking alone."  Sure. Yeah. So, she met me in my hotel lobby and I got a text at 7:30 in the morning. The hearing  was supposed to start at 8:00. We were supposed to arrive at 7:45 and it was from Dan Patrick and he  said, "Meet me in this room for a meeting with me and Paula." I was like, "Oh, you guys want to play  dirty? Last last hour. You want to play dirty?" Okay. So, I didn't respond. I'm not going to I'm  not going to engage in that. I'm I'm here for the Religious Liberty Commission. And I knew this  hearing was very important. So, I did not respond. So, as soon as I get to the Museum of the Bible,  go in the VIP entrance, back door, Samira's with me, Britney Baldwin comes up and she remember she  was one of the ones that the White House mentioned that they spoke to about my resignation. So, I'm  already on her. She was a former Ted Cruz staff. Yes. Yes. And so, she came up to me. He goes, "Oh,  Carrie, um, Dan Patrick wants to meet you in uh, the room with Paula." And I said, "I don't  feel comfortable meeting with him alone. I'm sorry. Unless Samira is welcome, I'll come  with her, but I'm not coming alone. She got very nervous and was like, "Oh, um, okay. Um, I'll let  him know." And I said, "Okay, let him know." So, she made Samira go and I went to the back with  all the commissioners. And so, I'm sitting back at that point. I'm like at a 10. Like, I have  probably have smoke coming out of my ears. I'm at a 10 just hearing this. Oh, it it Tucker, this has  been going on far too long. Like these people are relentless and they thought that they could bully  me. A mom in California, but they didn't know what they were up against because I was not going to  back down. So I walk in the back. Dan Patrick is in there with with Ben Carson and I believe Paula  White was already in there. And I walk right past, go to the back, start, you know, preparing cuz  thank god Kelly sent me the the list. Um and I'm just to myself and Eric Metaxis comes up and  he goes, "What's wrong with you?" And I go, "Really? Do you want to know what's wrong with  me?" I said, "Were you told that you can't post on social media while you serve on this commission?  Or was it just me?" I I know you're a Zionist, so you're probably safe, but I'm not a Zionist,  so I was told I can't post about my position on Israel. I can't post criticism of Israel. And  he looks at me like I was crazy. And he's like, "What? They told you you can't post?" I said,  "Yeah, they told me I can't post." I said, "That's what's going on, Eric. That's what's going  on." And now they're trying to do an intervention meeting right before the hearing with Dan and  Paula and Ben. I said, "But I'm not going." And he goes, "Well, yeah. Yeah. I mean, this is this  is crazy." I said, "I I know you're a Zionist, and that's fine. You're entitled to your beliefs.  I'm entitled to mine, but you can't force me to to believe what you believe. This is a religious  liberty commission. We should all be diverse. We shouldn't all be the same." Right, Eric? Yeah.  Right. So then Britney comes back and she goes, "Okay, Dan said Samira can come." So I'm going to  bring Samira up. I said,"Great. I'd like a witness there." So she was bringing Samira up and I looked  at Eric and I go, "Hey." I go, "Do you mind coming with me?" I said, "You remind me a lot of my dad."  And my dad passed away a couple years ago. I said, "I would really appreciate if you would come with  me so I don't have to come alone." And he goes, "Well, do I have to?" And I go, "Yeah, I'd like  you to man up and come with me." So he came with me. So it's me, Eric, and Samir. We walk in. and  Ben Carson, Dan Patrick, Paula White, and Britney are in there. And right away, it was like heated.  And Dan looks at me and he goes, "How do you think this religious liberty commission has been going,  Carrie?" I said, "It's been going great. I've really enjoyed being on this commission." And he  goes, "Well, I just want to know, what are you going to say today?" Yeah. Yeah. And I go, "What  am I going to say today? What are you gonna say today, Dan? Are we gonna talk about a foreign  country? Because whatever you're gonna say, I'm gonna say. So, if you're gonna talk about  Israel, I'm going to talk about Gaza. Okay? I'm literally talking to these politicians like  they're 5-year-olds, like they're my kids. I'm like, "You guys can't be this dumb." Like, I know  you think I'm dumb, but I'm not. I'm smarter than I look. I guess you guys thought I was dumb. You  thought I was just gonna be on this commission and play along to get along. Beauty queen. We can  boss her around. We can boss the dumb blonde around. Throw her around. Tell her what to do.  Nobody else. Yeah. So, it got very heated. So, what did he say when you said that? He goes,  "Well, I mean, you posted yesterday at the airplane. They're tracking every move I make and  they're seeing everything I post, which is good. I I I did that on Why do they care? He's got one  commissioner who's not on the on the program. Like, why is that a problem? They're obsessed with  me. I don't know. So, he goes and Britney Baldwin is in the in the corner and she goes, "Yeah, I  can pull it up. Here it is. You posted that you are so proud to serve on this religious liberty  commission and something about you're not going to be bullied by the Zionist Supremacists and  you posted a free Palestine hashtag." I literally started laughing. I go, "You guys are ridiculous.  I said, "This is a hearing on anti-semitism." And I said, "Oh, by the way, did you did you accept  any of my my witnesses that I recommended, Dan, Britney, Ben, Paula, did you did you accept them?"  No. Why not? Why not? They're Jewish Americans that are facing anti-semitism. Oh, you don't want  them because they're not Zionists? Cuz they don't believe what you believe about Israel. They've  been fighting against Zionism for 40 years. You don't want people like that? Oh, I got I got mad,  but I kept my cool. They didn't know what to say. And they go, "Well, you had reposted something  saying that we weren't accepting." I said, "Yeah, you weren't accepting any of my witnesses.  You accepted none of them." And thank God, Kelly Shackleford gave me the witness list, so  I knew who was speaking today. I said, "You guys didn't even send me the list of the speakers.  You guys did that on purpose, didn't you? I called them all out by name. And then I  look over at Eric and I go, "Eric, by the way, while we're here, I said, "Were you told that  you can't post on social media or was it just me, Paula? Did you have to get your post uh run  through Paula in order to post and use your social media private your private social media  page or did you only tell me Paula?" I said, "The audacity that it takes." I said, "Thank  God I know my rights. You don't control me." And I said, "And Paula, wait till the public finds  out about this. They're not going to be happy with you. You tried to censor me while serving on a  religious liberty commission. You tried to force me to believe what you believe to you forced  me to adopt your religion and I won't do it. And that's why you're angry." And then Dan got  really weird and he's like, "Well, you've been posting about Charlie Kirk." It was so weird. Oh,  they didn't like it when you posted about Charlie Kirk. They said, "You've been questioning,  you know, who assassinated him." I go, "Oh, wow. God forbid I question anything. I have to be  a robot." Right, Dan? I have to just No one's been convicted, by the way. Right. That's what I said.  I said, "This is an ongoing investigation. I have every right." And moreover, I don't think this  kind of behavior puts people's concerns to rest. It was very odd. It was very odd. Ruthlessness,  cruelty, single-minded devotion to like some weird culty cause. Like, that doesn't make me feel  better at all. Shut up and obey. Yeah. Um Oh, they But they didn't like that. Huh? No. Cuz I  don't I don't obey them. They don't They don't like that. Oh, I'm trying not to get uh Okay.  So, um Wow. So, how was this resolved? Yeah. So, the meeting was supposed to start at I think it  was supposed to start at 8:30 or 9:00. It ended up being late. Like, the hearing started late because  it was this heated and Ben Carson's sitting there half asleep. I'm like, "Come on, Ben. Like, what  are you what are you doing? stand up and and speak up for me. You know, I'm being literally attacked  by all these people. Thank God Samira was with me. And she's so softspoken and sweet. And she stood  up and she's like, you know, there are suff there is suffering going on in Gaza. You guys realize  that, right? I'm one of the only Muslims on this commission. Like, can you not just accept that?  Like, and then Eric was super rude to her. He's like, who are you and why are you here? It was so  disrespectful. Felt so bad for her. So is there is Eric Mataxis's position that there's no suffering  in Gaza or that it's immoral to talk about it? Well, it's of course justified because we're we're  trained that no Muslim is worth defending, right? How is that a Christian perspective? Yeah, it's  not it's not a Christian perspective. And I feel I was the only one living out my Christian faith  saying, "Wait a second. There's suffering in Gaza. There's a genocide happening. There's a holocaust  happening. Why am I not allowed to post about it? Oh, because it goes against the president and your  job is to protect the president. And Dan did say that again in the in the intervention hearing. I  I remember he said, you know, you're you're just saying things that go against the president and  to serve on this commission is a privilege. It's a privilege and you're abusing that privilege  ultimately is what he said. As I've said, I know everybody almost everybody uh in the room  and I mean I like everybody just as a default. Uh so it's so distressing to hear this. It's  so distressing to hear this. Shocking to me. Yeah. Changes how I view a lot of these people.  Many of them are owned, unfortunately. Well, that's obvious. Um and there's also clearly some  there's a supernatural quality to this. I mean, you can't pay most people enough to defend the  murder of children. So I do think there's a way in which they're under a spell. I know it's so  sad, you know, and and I will say of Eric Mataxis, who wrote a very long book celebrating Martin  Luther, not a Zionist. Yeah. Martin Luther, the author of On the Jews and their lies. And so  it's a little weird. I I don't know. Speaking of anti-semitism. Yeah. I mean, what? Yeah. Uh but  anyway, whatever. I don't want to get in the weeds. Okay. So the point of this was to get you  within boundaries before the hearing opened, but that didn't work. No. So then what happened in the  hearing? So imagine I'm now like I mean the anger that I had I can't even describe because this has  been building for months now. And so it was it was at an all-time high. And so when we left the  meeting, went on stage, I'm like shaking. I'm like shaking. I could cry. I could scream. Like I'm  just like and I just I just prayed and I'm like, "Okay, Lord. Like I I need to just stay calm. I  have to get through this hearing. This is a 5-hour hearing and I got to get through it and I need to  I need to be poised. I need to be respectful. I can't let my anger get to me and I have to remain  a Christian during this hearing. I cannot give them a reason to say you're not a Christian." And  so it just started. Thank you. Thank you for doing that. Thank you. Thank you. Again, as I said at  the outset, people get, this has happened to me like a thousand times. You just get so mad. Oh,  yeah. That you say something cruel, you overstate what you believe, you get personal, you're not  a good representative of the faith at all. You become a terrible representative because you get  angry. And it's been a constant struggle for me my whole life. And I usually fail. That's why  again I was just amazed by your testimony because it was so controlled. You kept control which is  essential. Man, you succeeded. So then okay, what happened? You go into the room and what happened?  Yeah. So I go into the room and then you know they bring out the witnesses, the first witnesses and  you know it goes one after the other after the other and then it opens up to the commissioners  to ask questions. And so right away I'm thinking, okay, so this guy said, you know, I was I faced,  you know, anti-semitism on a college campus. Okay, I'm I'm genuinely sorry that you experienced  that. And I I I voiced that. I said, "Can we say that what happened to you is wrong, but then  also say that the students who are peacefully protesting on these college campuses have every  right to do that because they're protesting the killing of over 70,000 innocent civilians in  Gaza." Can we not say the the two things are wrong? Can we not say yes what you experienced  as a Jewish person not being able to you know access your classroom or whatever his situation  was I forget what it was something like that he ended up suing I think um and winning so you know  good for him so whatever he experienced was true anti-semitism I guess but then also can you say  that what's going on in Gaza is wrong and he was like no no no no there's no genocide in Gaza the  genocide was on October 7th. And I'm thinking, these people are so lost. How can you not say that  killing 70,000 innocent civilians is wrong? Just just say it's wrong. Because you don't believe in  universal principles. You don't believe that every person was created by God. Yeah. And has inherent  worth. Yeah. Some people are valuable and others are not. I mean, that's where that comes from  is that Yeah. They're superior. Yeah. Yeah. So I just reject that as a Christian. Period. I do  too. Period. I don't think uh Christian life is more valuable than a Jewish life or a Muslim life  or a Hindu life. I just I just don't think that. Yeah. Um so it started there. So you said that and  he and this witness. Yeah. Do you remember who it was? Yeah. Shabos Kessenbomb. He was one of them.  I don't remember the other names, but he he was the one that said, "Oh, no. There's no genocide  at Gaza." The genocide was on October 7th. That's when I knew this hearing was was going  to get intense because this hearing was on anti-semitism. And then I realized, well, we have  to define the terms. What is anti-semitism? So I quoted IH definition. I said, you know, if by  saying the Jews killed Jesus, that is according to IH definition of anti-semitism. So, one  of the pastors who was testifying, I said, "Does it concern you? Does it concern you as a  pastor that certain parts of the Bible are going to be considered?" The Christian parts. Yeah.  Yeah. And he goes, "Well, the Jews did kill Jesus." And I said, "Do you realize you're making  an anti-Semitic statement right now, Mr. Pastor? This is the the cognitive dissonance that these  people have. They don't even know what the I mean an IHA is a pretty broad definition across most  states. So it's it's pretty serious. Um and so I was starting to think, okay, so is it is equating  criticism of Israel being a Jew hater? So I said, is anti-Zionism anti-semitism? Cuz I'm  not a Zionist. That has nothing to do with someone's right to exist as a human being. Of  course, everybody has a right to exist by God, but anti-Zionism is anti-se. And I pressed him  and I said yes or no. Yes or no on the record. And he said yes. And I was shocked. I was shocked.  I was so disappointed that all the commissioners with big titles, big degrees, they didn't chime  in and say, "Wait a second. anti-apolitical ideology doesn't make you a Jew hater. That's  what I'm disappointed in. Well, the definition is inherently an attack on Christianity. Yeah.  That I mean, by definition Mhm. If you write a definition that would ban the New Testament, then  it's an anti-Christian document. But I guess it's been adopted by various states. Yeah, that's the  scary part. That's the scary in this state right now in Florida right now. That's what's scary.  I never thought being in California I was more free than people that live in Florida. But this is  where it's going. It's very dangerous. And I was the only Christian that was willing, the youngest  person in that room. Oh, I'm just a dumb blonde pageant girl. Who am I? What do I know? No, it's  it's common sense. Wait a second. You're saying that if I don't believe that 1948 Israel, and I  said this, people can verify. I don't believe as a Catholic that 1948, the modern state of Israel  has any biblical fulfillment prophecy at all, meaning at all. I don't believe that. And I have  every right not to believe that. I don't believe that. Why are you forcing me to believe that? Shut  up, you anti-semite. that that's what I got back. You're you're a hateful bigot if you don't believe  that. I was disobedient to them. And that's all I was doing was asking questions. And the logical  conclusion of what they were saying is yes, anti-sionism is anti-semitism. And I quoted the  rabbi who didn't get to come that was denied. I quoted him and he's been speaking out about  Zionism for 40 years. He said, "So, are you calling me a Jewish rabbi and anti-semite now? Is  that where we're going with this?" So, a Jewish rabbi is an anti-semite now, according to their  definition. This is at a this is at a religious liberty commission hearing from the president, and  nobody chimed in and said, "Wait a second. I have a problem with that. That's dangerous. Let's not  let's not say that." So, a Jewish rabbi is being called an anti-semite. And then I said, "I'm a  Catholic. I don't believe 1948 political state of Israel has any biblical prophecy fulfillment  meaning at all." So, does that make me an anti-semite? Are all Catholics anti-semmites  according to you? And essentially it was yes. The the tape is almost unbelievable. Um I'm so  glad that you forced this and I'm so glad that you revealed these people for who they really are.  This isn't a minor doctrinal point. This is like the very center of the question of religious  liberty. Yes. If you're not allowed to believe that, then you don't have religious liberty. Then  the first amendment isn't real. And it it also this is an attack on on traditional Christianity.  So it has to be defended by Christian leaders. I think the right to believe what you say you  believe, which is not hateful, of course, in the slightest. No, it is inconvenient if you  want to use American troops to fight Israel's wars. What kind of response did you get from the  other commissioners at this after? During? A lot of them just stayed silent. They were too afraid,  I think. Um, did a single one of the other 11 rise to defend your right to say what you were saying?  Oh, of course not. No. They have all corporations to protect and businesses protect and, you know,  big donors to please. So, why would they? I was literally the only free person on that stage,  the mom in California. How did it end? Um, it ended with there was a guy in the audience that  kept heckling and I eventually looked over at Dan. I said, "He needs to be removed. like this is,  you know, heckling you. Yeah, he kept heckling me. That's, you know, yelling things at me, booing me.  There was a lot of um I I noticed there was a lot of Jewish rabbis in the audience. I don't know.  There wasn't a lot of people in the audience. Normally, it's filled cuz anybody can go, right?  Um but there was a lot of booze every time I would say, "I'm a Catholic. Boo." And it was it was very  hostile and it was I felt like it was it was my voice wasn't welcome there obviously. And then Dan  had the audacity to interrupt me when I said, "So, so are you claiming that all Catholics that are  not Zionist are anti-semites? Is that is that what you're saying?" And he's like, "Well, I'm going  to interrupt. I'm going to interrupt right now, Carrie. Why? Why?" I said, "This this discussion  is very important. This is very important." And what did he say? He let us continue.  And we were just going back and forth, back and forth with these witnesses. And  I was very respectful. Very respectful. I didn't raise my voice. I didn't get angry. I  laughed a few times. Told C uh Sabos Kenbomb that we should get coffee or you know, we need to  be having these discussions. We need more speech, not less. They didn't want my voice. So after  the hearing was over, there was a uh my priest was there. He came and and watched and he was very  proud of me. Um, there was another Orthodox priest there and he said, "I'm so proud of you. I  I can't believe you you did this." I said, "It had to be done. It had to be done." What were  the other commissioners like after the hearing? I didn't speak to one of them and I haven't  spoken to any of them since. Really? Yeah. So, this immediately goes up on the internet. Um,  what's the next communication you have from the White House or the commission? So, I got a text  the next day and it was from Dan Patrick. He tried calling me, but I I didn't answer. I thought  I would just get it in writing. And he said, um, I tried calling you. You know, your voicemail  box is full. I'm letting you know effective immediately that you have been removed from the  Religious Liberty Commission. Did he explain why? I could I I honestly I I couldn't believe it. I  was like, back in 2009, I stood up for my faith and now I'm doing the same thing. This is what  got me on this commission. Why would I be removed? What is going on? This is the United States of  America. Haven't we made progress? No. Don't we have religious freedom in this country? You can't  express it honestly and respectfully and civily. Like, what is going on? I I literally just cried  when I got it. I'm like, this is so sad for my children, for for my grandchildren. You can see  where it's going, too. Yeah. Yeah. And so he said at the very end of the text, it was a short text,  "This is my decision." the audacity, the audacity that he has to claim he has authority to make  this this firing. This is my decision. No, Dan, you're an equal to mine. You have no authority. I  don't think Dan's making any of his own decisions in general. Yeah. Yeah. None of those people are.  No, of course not. It's my decision. And I will say Bishop Baron and Cardinal Dolan were not there  that day. They were not at the hearing. They were not at the hearing that day. I I would have loved  for them to be there. That would have been great. So, you as I recall, because I was watching all  this from afar, uh said, "Nope, can't remove me." Yeah. Because you didn't appoint me. Nope.  I I did a little investigating online and I I I researched, you know, this how this um commission  was established and the executive order and I realized, wait a second, the only person that has  the the authority to remove me is the president himself. Did you talk to Trump at any point? No.  I tried to get a phone call with him. I tried to contact, you know, some of his family members  that I'm close with. I mean, I've been a friend of his for almost 20 years. I've been to both  inaugurations. I mean, used to have his personal cell phone. I'd call him. I mean, we're we're  buddies. This he was like a second father to me. Um, nobody would respond back. So, Dan sent that  text. I sent a text back and I said, "You have no authority to remove me, Dan." And then that was  it. Uh I noticed that a number of members of the commission began attacking you as an anti-semite.  Mhm. Uh who did that and what did they say? Uh Eric Mataxis did that. Um I think he called me  I don't remember the names that he called me. Horrible names. But he called you names. Oh yeah.  Yeah. which was so sad to me because I'm like, you were with me in that hearing. You heard  that I had to vet everything through this. Like, you know what they're doing to me is wrong. Yeah.  And you don't have the courage to stand up for my religious freedom. Just do your job, Eric. And  then to call you a bigot, an anti-semite. Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's what they do, though, cuz once  they say that, I know, but everyone knows Eric Metaxis. I mean, that's like behavior. Um, and  I know that Eric has a lot of personal problems, and I assume that's what this is about, but it's  still uh it's just one of the most shocking things I've ever seen. It's so sad. And he never called  you and said, "Hey, Carrie, I'm going to call you an anti-semit. Let's talk about the views that you  have that I believe are anti-semitic. Let's talk this through." No. No. And Dan Patrick didn't do  that either. No. Nope. They didn't want to have a dialogue. That is the most disgraceful behavior  I can imagine. Yeah, it really is. It really is because out of all the people that Trump could  have appointed for this position, he appointed me. And I I at first I felt unqualified, but now  I feel I'm one of the most qualified because I am protecting religious freedom, even fates that  I don't hold firm to. I'm protecting the Jewish rabbi. I'm protecting the Muslim woman on the  commission, her religious freedom, and my own, of course. And the Jewish Zionists, by the way.  Yeah. And everybody's every universal principle. It applies to every human being. It's not and  the reintroduction of identity politics by this administration is the s the single saddest thing.  Mhm. I think everyone voted be against it. I think every person who voted for Trump was like, "No,  well, not every person, but most people are like, identity politics blows up the country. It  destroys any cohesion. You start thinking about everything in terms of my group and things fall  apart." And the left has pushed that for 50 years. And now all of a sudden, you've got Paula White  and Dan Patrick and Eric Mataxis of all people pushing identity politics in a way that'll totally  wreck the country. Come on now. I know. And that degrades the Christian message and into something  unrecognizable and evil. That's what it is. Oh, I know. So, did any member of the commission reach  out to you, any of the other 11, to say, "Wow, you know, you're not a Zionist, therefore you're an  anti-semite. This is horrible. I'm sorry we're on your side." Not one. Are you serious? Not one. No.  In fact, I reached out to a few of them who are friends of mine who I felt I could trust. Kelly  Shackleford. I reached out to um Cardinal Dolan, Bishop Baron. I reached out to Bishop Cordelone in  San Francisco who's on the advisory board. And I said, "Hey, I feel like I'm a sheep surrounded by  wolves and I need a shepherd. Can can you help?" And a lot of them, I think, Tucker, if I'm being  honest, are too scared. Did any I know two of the three. I know Baron, who whom I respect, who's  very smart. Mhm. And I know Dolan, who's just a politician. Um, but very charming. I'll say Dolan  is very charming. Who doesn't like Dolan? Everyone likes Dolan. Uh, but so I know two of the three.  And they didn't speak up in your defense or in the defense of religious liberty? No. No. Well, Bishop  Baron, uh, we were texting a little bit yesterday and I, you know, just I said, I'm I'm going on  Tucker. I know you're friends with Tucker. I said, um, I would love to know like, do you support  the commission removing me from my religious freedom or like where do you stand, you know,  and he wrote me back and he was very nice and, you know, he he agreed with my stance that we as  Catholics don't have to believe in some, you know, prophecy fulfillment being fulfilled with 1948  Israel. Like that's literally what I said. So I think he I I know he agrees with me. I mean  it's it's most Catholics agree with me. But to to include a political statement in the catechism,  which is basically what they're trying to do. I have to believe Yeah. in the modern secular state  of Israel or I can't be a Christian. Like that's a foundational thing. People have been martyed  over less than that. Like no, this is my faith. I'm not going to betray it. And all of a sudden,  you're being told that to be a Christian, you have to be a Zionist. You have to be on board with a  political program. Oh, yeah. And I must support a genocide. That's a requirement, too. And I cannot  speak out about it if I see it or hear about it. I just got this from our producer. Uh, so I just  want to interrupt your amazing story, which I find so upsetting. It's my heart is pounding.  Um, this is a note I just got. As we speak, meaning right now as we're doing this taping,  there's an anti-semitism symposium happening in DC. Ted Cruz, Tom Cotton, uh, and the rest to  the usuals are speaking. Dan Patrick was just on stage attacking Carrie. You he said she was  guilty of two things on the day of the religious liberties hearing. First, he said any talk of Gaza  is a political matter and has nothing to do with religion. He says she was off base mentioning  the war. Two, he said it was unacceptable that she went against Seth Dylan when she denied his  claim that Candace is anti-Semitic. I want to go through these in just a second. Last line, Dan  Patrick bragged that he fired Carrie and he got a round of applause. Let me just say this is like  a description of the end stage of something. This is the end of Christian Zionism. This kind  of behavior. We'll look back on this. Like every one of these moral panics reaches its, you  know, full full fruition at a certain point where peak crazy. I guess that's the phrase. And it's  like they're arresting people for complimenting, you know, a woman's dress. Like that was the kind  of peak crazy of me too. Black Lives Matter were like kissing black people's feet or something.  It's like too nuts, right? Yeah. That's what this is for Christian Zionism. This is so bonkers  that I think it's over. That's just my guess. Okay. Shocking. So, let me just Any talk of Gaza  is a political matter. Let me throw that to you. What's your response to that? Any talk of Gaza is  a political matter. So, why was this hearing I I I actually tallied how many times they talked about  Israel October 7th? It I had to stop counting. So, we were we were talking about a foreign  country and I look over at Dana and I'm like, we're talking about a foreign country.  So, what is this hearing about? Like, what is the purpose of this hearing? I thought it  was a hearing on true anti-semitism in in America, but it was hijacked by Dan Patrick and Paula  White and whoever denied my four Jewish Americans that weren't welcome to speak cuz they're not  Zionists. It was hijacked by those people. So, what we're getting at is if you criticize Israel,  you're done for. They want to destroy you. And if you dare to speak out about Gaza, destroy you.  Oh, yeah. They want to kill you. They want to kill you. Got that. Yeah. I've had I've had  some things. I'll just say, "Has Dan Patrick rushed to your defense? Is Eric Metaxis rushed?"  Oh, no, no, no, no, no. He's taking pride in his removal of Carrie. So, they're conflating. I mean,  I would be delighted to remove politics entirely from religion. I believe strongly in separation  of church and state because I don't want my faith to be corrupted by political leaders. I don't  want my religion to be political. Jesus didn't spend any time talking about politics. They wanted  him to come and liberate Jerusalem as a political leader. He refused and rode in on a donkey and  then allowed himself to be tortured to death. So like I'm with him. Let's take the politics out.  But they're the ones who conflate Christian faith with a political agenda of BB Netanyahu. Yeah.  Yeah. Who who BB is basically an atheist, I think, right? I mean, I don't think he's a religious  person at all. Well, he doesn't keep to Mosaic law. We know that. Um, there may be, you know, who  knows? Like, I Which I thought your interview with Mike Huckabe was amazing, by the way. That's  just It was It was very sad though. Was very sad. It was Yeah, I think he felt that way too.  He's been attacking me ever since. Yeah. Um, okay. So then to the second point, Dan Patrick  said it was unacceptable that you went against Seth Dylan when she denied his claim that Candace  is anti-semitic. Who is Seth Dylan? What is this? Why are they obsessed? Actually, your name was  mentioned at the hearing. I don't know if you know that. I didn't know. But um Seth Dylan is  the Babylon B guy. So he was speaking on behalf of anti-semitism. He's a Christian. But and I I  I guess I I I don't even know what Christianity means anymore. If Christianity is defending  a genocide in Gaza, that's scary. Yeah. It's not my religion. And so these people, they call  themselves Christians. I don't believe they are. But Seth Dylan was on stage. They can't defend  the murder of innocents. Period. I don't care who they are. I don't care what country. I don't care  if they're Palestinians or Jews. Me, too. I don't think any faithful Christian would defend shooting  up a a rave in southern Israel. That's disgusting. As a Christian, October 7th, parts of it were  disgusting. Gaza is disgusting. I mean, like, it's a principle that doesn't change over time.  You can't kill innocents. And like, if you think you can kill innocents, we're worshiping different  gods. Thank you. That's exactly right. We are. I I don't know what Christianity they're a part of.  I I honestly don't. You're getting me so worked up. I was just dear husband. I've done so many  interviews in my life, but this one is because I feel like this is foundational. It is. It is.  Um it's a grave injustice. So Seth Dylan of the Babylon be just for I of course know Seth Dylan,  but I just want to make sure people know who we're talking about. He runs a comedy site or something.  Uh but he has become he's one of the people who tried to bully Charlie Kirk into kicking me off  stage. Mhm. Um he's a political enforcer. Uh and you had an exchange with him. Can you describe it?  Yeah. I asked him to his face. I said, you know, Charlie was being called, since we're having a  hearing on anti-semitism, Charlie Kirk was being called an anti-semite. I know. And I asked him to  his face, Seth. Dylan, I said, would you condemn that he was being called an anti-semit? I mean, he  Charlie wasn't an anti-semite. He was not. And he got a little uncom. And neither am I. And neither  are you. These are slanders. And yeah, Charlie was called an anti-semite a lot. And I talked to him  about it a lot. I know a lot about this topic. I never talk about it, but I know a lot about it  cuz I was at the center of it cuz the debate was, should he cancel me? Yes. In my speech um this  uh December and he wouldn't. And one of his last texts we've ever seen was about this exact  question. So, and Seth Dylan was one of the thugs trying to force Charlie. Um, you know that  for a fact, of course. Oh my gosh. Yeah. And so, we're trying to force Charlie to cancel me  and and other things. It's not about I just happened to be the guy that they were very very  focused on. But so, Seth Dylan is asked by you, would you condemn the attacks on Charlie Kirk  as an anti-semite? Yeah. Yeah. And he said, "Yeah, Charlie wasn't an anti-semit." I  said, "I agree. Thank you for saying that publicly." And then I asked him about the the  Hamptons. I said, "We'll just go there. I mean, we're already we're already going there, so let's  just go there." So, what happened at the Hamptons? And that was a meeting uh that Charlie had with,  among many others, Seth Dylan. I think Bill Aman was there. I think he paid for it. I I could be  wrong here. I'm I'm no expert, but I remember very well cuz Charlie came right to my house after  that. So, we talked about it. Wow. And uh so what did he say? He said that Charlie was making  statements saying that you can't I'm paraphrasing, but that you know you can't criticize Israel.  You you you will be destroyed if you do. By whom? Have any of these people ever read the prophets  in what we call the Old Testament, the Jewish prophets? Talk about tough on Israel. Holy  smokes. I read some of that stuff and I'm like, give Israel a break. Isaiah, Jeremiah, pull back  a little bit. You're pretty tough on Israel. Do they ever notice that? I mean, what is going on?  Yeah. Sorry. Excuse me. No. Um, okay. So, uh, and then he mentioned, and then, uh, he called,  that's what it was. So, he called Candace an anti-semite. They're obsessed, Tucker. They're  obsessed with the label. You're an anti-semite. As soon as they attach that to you, you're done.  They They shove you in the box. So, when Moses goes up a second time to Mount Si and says to God,  "Please kill me. These people are too annoying. I can't deal with it." Is that anti-semitism? Like,  what are they what are you even talking about? Yeah. Yeah. They're obsessed with it. And so they  brought up I think either I brought up you Oh, yeah. I'm not sure who brought up you, but I  remember saying you're obsessed with calling Candace and Tucker anti-semites. And it really  has to stop. It really has to stop, Seth. Yeah. What did he say? He got very frustrated. He got  very uncomfortable. He was skirmish. He was very, very frustrated. He's not a man at peace. Very  uncomfortable. Yeah. And then um after that was over, we actually went backstage and I had a  probably like a 10-minute while everybody else was on stage still. I went to the bathroom  and then I talked to him and we had a pretty good exchange. I said, "Are you Jewish?" And he  goes, "No, I'm a Christian." I said, "Oh my gosh, I thought you were I thought you were Jewish."  He goes, "No." I said, "Okay." And I said, "Well, thank you for that dialogue out there. I think  it's very important." You know, I said Charlie was being called an anti-semite and I wanted to  know about the Hampton's meeting. I was told that, you know, they were bullying him. And you  certainly were bullying him. Yeah. And I I said, "Thank you for clarifying that." Um, but since  then, he keeps saying that he wasn't one of the ones that was, you know, bullying Charlie or  calling him an anti-semite or I I asked him, I said, "Seth, who was morally blackmailing  Charlie? Who was it? Just say the name or the names of the people that were doing that." Cuz  Charlie was very upset on Megan Kelly. He said, "They're morally blackmailing me. They're calling  me an anti-semite, attacking my character. Who are these people? I think we have a right to know.  Who are these thugs?" I talked to him about it many times. And uh he was very upset about it.  And I've really tried not to use the memory of, you know, a dead friend to make a political point.  So, a lot of other people have not restrained themselves. And they're constantly talking about  my best friend Charlie and he thought this, he thought that. But I know a lot about this topic  of course cuz I was at the center of it cuz it was my speech that they were mad about. So I he was  protecting your speech. He certainly was at great risk to himself and great risk. He lost millions  of dollars as he said because he refused to cancel me. So of course I know all that and I haven't  gone on and on about it because I don't like calling attention to myself and I think there's  something ugly about talking about someone who can't speak up for himself once he's passed. I  just don't like it cuz in my culture that's not acceptable. I know. But it's just a lie. It's  they're lying and I know that for a fact cuz he sat in my living room and told me about it. So  like stop lying. I can't deal with it. And he was making me too mad. So now Dan Patrick is saying  that because you wouldn't denounce Candace as an anti-semite, you went too far. So that's now in  the Nyasine creed. No. Is it what did the council of Nika add this part kind of retroactively where  you have to denounce a podcaster or you can't be a Christian or serve on a religious commission?  Like what is going on? This is where we're at and you know this well they want to call you an  anti-semite and then once they put that on you and shove you in that box. Oh I know. They want  everybody else to come to the town square and they want to watch you get publicly lynched and  then they want everybody around to denounce you and if they don't repatory to you being arrested  because if it's against the law to have certain views and they claim that you have those views  you're in violation of the law. Yeah. So, I mean, let's be real. This is like and in Europe  and in Canada and Australia and New Zealand, lots of people go to jail for having views that  Seth Dylan doesn't like. Lots of people go to jail a lot. So, it's not like this hasn't happened.  It's the law in Europe. Yeah. It's the law in Australia. It's the law in New Zealand. It's  the law in Canada. We're in America. Yeah. Well, this is insane. I'm I'm just saying lots of people  go to prison over this. But they're obsessed with getting everyone else. You've experienced this.  Denounce Tucker. Distance yourself. Call him an anti-semite. Agree with us or else. I'm so  grateful to be old because I I just don't care. But I do care about the country a lot and  I see where this is going. So they want you to denounce Candace Owens. Mhm. Yeah. Just like they  want Megan Kelly to denounce Candace Owens. Oh, I know. But they don't own me. Megan Kelly, who's  like the most moderate person who's ever lived. Yeah. Megan Kelly who really likes Israel and all  or her friends are Jewish and like Megan Kelly is there's like no world in which Megan Kelly  is an anti-semite. I don't even entertain the idea. I don't even I don't even say I'm not an  anti-semite. Like I'm so sick of that. I've been through this before with the whole gay marriage  thing. You're a bigot. You're a homophobe. Call me whatever you want. I'm just a Christian. Okay.  And if being a Christian now is an anti-semite, that's what I have a problem with. Well, that's  the whole point. That's the whole point. That's the whole point. Being a a sincere Christian, a  New Testament believing Christian makes you an anti-semite. Therefore, we can't have Christianity  because that's the real enemy. Of course. So, um, okay, you come out and you say after Dan Patrick  fires you, fires you, "Hey, Dan Patrick, you can't fire me because you didn't appoint me. This is  a presidential appointment and the president hasn't weighed in." So, where are we now on that  question? Good question. So, I hadn't been on X in years. So, I got on X after this all happened.  Did that improve your life a lot, Carrie? Yes, that's been uh interesting. Um, so I've been  posting obviously def how sad. I have to defend myself against this insanity. Um, so the other  day, it was recently, it was about a week ago, I went on and I was looking for Mary, the the  the designated federal officer from the I wanted to look at an old email that I had sent her.  So, I typed in my mail in my mail, Mary. Well, all of a sudden, a Mary Sproul popped up, an  email from Mary Sproul, and I thought, well, that name sounds familiar. That's the woman back  in August who tried to get me to resign. I go, "What is she emailing me about?" She sent it on  February 12th. The hearing was on the 9th, so just a few days after. I think I sent the Dan Patrick,  you don't have the authority to remove me on the 11th. So, she sent it the next day, but I hadn't  gotten it. It must have gone to like spam or some junk mail. So, I never got it. I would have never  seen it had I not looked for Mary, the designated federal officer, Mary, Mary Margaret. So, it comes  up and it says, "On behalf of the President of the United States, I'm emailing you to let you know  that you have been removed from the Religious Liberty Commission effective immediately.  Thank you for your service." Mary Sproul, it's really dark. Yeah. Have you talked to  Trump? No, I reached out to And was there any explanation? No explanation. And so I wrote her  back and I said, "Oh, Mary's pro. You're the same Mary that tried to get me to step down, resign  in in August." I left out a very important part, Tucker. This is good. At the first hearing, the  president was there. Trump was there at the first hearing. Remember Mary called me to get me resign  and then I didn't? Well, I saw the president and we got to have spend some time with him before the  hearing. So, we were shaking his hand and he looks at me in the eyes and he goes, "Hey, Carrie." He  goes, "I want you to know something." He goes, "I took care of it." And he goes, "You know what  I'm talking about, right?" He said that. He said that. And I said, "Yes, Mr. President, I know what  you're talking about. Thank you so much." And he goes, "I, you know, I know the real you. I know  the real you." And basically, he told him to leave me alone. I thought that was incredible. I mean,  he was doing the right thing. How can you kick a religious person off a religious commission?  It's ridiculous. This was in August. This was in August. So, he had my back. So, I thought,  "Oh, I'm I'm good. I'm good. This He doesn't support them trying to kick me off." So, when  I got this email a week ago from Mary Sproul, I said, "You tried to remove me in August and the  president vetoed your attempt to remove me. Um, so I don't really take you serious." But maybe  maybe she is a legitimate person spokesperson for the president. But I would think that  the president would actually send a letter removing me if this was actually his decision. And  I was told from someone very high up in the White House that they spoke to him on the phone  and he was wrestling with this. He's like, "What do I do? Dan's saying this and I really  like Carrie." And so I don't know. I honestly don't know. Have you heard from the commission  since then? No. Have there been more hearings? The hearing is coming up uh next Monday. And  you've not been invited? No. And it makes me sad because that's the hearing on religious freedom  and healthcare. All the mothers that don't want to vaccinate their kids. Has any to this day, so  we're in the second week of March as we're taping this. Has any member of the commission spoken up  in your defense? No. Not one. Not one. What about Baron? Bishop Baron and Cardinal Dolan. I tried  to get them to make a public statement about it, but I don't think they want to be involved. Why? I  don't think they want to be called an anti-semite because they're speaking out for someone who was  called an anti-semite. That's where we're at. But the principle at stake here, and I and I like I  respect Baron for sure. I do too. Um he's very smart. Like actually very smart. But the principle  at stake is a doctrinal principle, it would seem to me. And so your core position is that being  a Zionist, signing on to the Zionist project is not a prerequisite for being a Christian. It's  not part of the Nyian creed actually. And you were fired for saying this. That's your real  crime. And I would think that any theologian or Christian leader, really any Christian,  would want to just pipe up and say, you know, maybe I love BB, maybe I love what he's done in  Gaza. Yeah. But like as a point of fact, you don't need to sign on to a political program in order to  be a Christian. Yeah. And to serve on a religious liberty commission. That's like basic. But no one  will say that. No. No. And uh Bishop Cordelion, I I love him. And um I respect all of them.  Cardinal Dolan, Bishop Baron. Um but no, they they don't want to make a public statement about this.  I I believe that's really revealing and sad to see that. It is sad. It is sad. But, you know, I I can  handle it. I guess I'm, you know, 38-year-old mom, but you can't allow non-Christians to determine  what Christian doctrine is. Right. Exactly. which is what happened during Vatican 2 in point. I  say that as a non-atholic I shouldn't even get involved but that that's literally what happened.  Non-Christians like oh you're not allowed to believe that. So they changed Christian doctrine  and I I I just think that is well it's dangerous. It's very dangerous. Well, yeah. You're supposed  to be you're supposed to be trying to emulate Jesus who paid with his life for disagreeing  with temporal authorities and you're supposed to be representing Jesus's word on earth. So like  yeah, too. So why not just come out and say she has every right to stand up for her religious  beliefs and she shouldn't be removed. Just say that she shouldn't be removed for her religious  convictions. Shouldn't every commissioner believe that if they're actually doing their job? Why  am I the only one doing my actual job, which is to protect religious freedom for all religions?  It's it's very disappointing. And I think a lot of these commissioners are are on this to have  access cuz let's be honest, it's it's you feel cool being invited places, the fancy invites. Oh,  I'm going to the White House. But I've said over and over again, I would rather die. I would rather  die than deny my faith. And I'm standing up for my faith by doing this because I will not submit to  a country that is committing genocide in Gaza. Full stop. That's the that that is the fact. and  they want me to deny my eyes and deny what I've seen and what I know in my heart as a Christian. I  cannot I cannot do that. I would rather die. Well, that's one of the most disappointing stories I've  ever heard and it hits me especially hard again cuz I know most of the people involved um and like  a bunch of them. Uh so that's really really sad. Tell us about the reaction to this hearing outside  of the religious liberty commission. Like how have other people responded to this? Is anyone on  your side? Amazing. Okay. It's been amazing. So, Catholics for Catholics. Uh do you know John Yep,  the president of Catholics for he actually helped Trump get the Catholic vote in um 2024. They've  done amazing for the Catholic um you know for politics in general. And um so they came out  right away and it was beautiful Tucker and they said we are inviting Carrie to Washington DC  and we're giving her the Catholic Champion Award. One of the one of the attacks on you and I think  I I saw it from people on the commission is you're not really a Catholic because you just converted  to Catholicism. So, like, how how dare you speak for Catholics? Yeah. Seemed pretty low thing  to say about someone. Very very very low. And I'm not misremembering that. No, that's exactly  right. They're questioning how long I've been a Catholic. Um, but what's crazy, Tucker, is that  I left I I used to be a Zionist. I used to be a dispensational Christian for my entire life.  Really? Yeah. Yeah. I went to the evangelical Paul White type of churches my entire life. Oh wow. And  I started studying about dispensationalism and I was thinking, wait a second, how can they just  interpret scripture however they want? Twist it, manipulate it and say those who bless Israel  will be blessed. BB, those who bless BB will be blessed. And if you don't bless BB, you're  going to be cursed according to Lindsey Graham. I started thinking this is insane. So I started  studying the early church fathers and I started studying you know what they taught and it led me  to the Catholic church literally like learning about dispensationalism led me to the early church  fathers and then I became Catholic and so I'm not an idiot. I know I know what the Catholic Church  teaches. We are the new Israel. That's what the church teaches. We are the fulfillment of the  old Israel. I mean look at Jesus fulfilled it all on the cross. There is he he got when he said  it is finished. The old was completely done. There is the new covenant now. Those who are in Christ  that is the new people of God. It is very clear. This isn't even debatable. I don't even know why  we're having this debate. Which is why Bishop Baron and Cardinal Dolan should be like, "Yeah,  it's what we believe. We are the new Israel. The land means nothing anymore. Yes, it's the Holy  Land, but that's not some biblical What are they going to What's scary, Tucker, is these people  like Paula White and Ted Cruz and Dan Patrick, they believe that there will be the Dome of the  Rock will be torn down and they will rebuild that third temple. They're saying it now. Look at Pete  Hexith. There will be a rebuilding of this temple. I know it is heretical and it is anti-Christian. I  I know that because they're going to bring in the animal sacrifices again. And the most anti-Semitic  thing that they believe is that twothirds of the Jews are going to be slaughtered. That's what  these people believe. They're just manipulating them and using them. They don't really care.  Oh, everything you've said is true. I mean, Jesus describes himself as the temple. Yes. So,  he is the temple. Well, he says that he is the lamb that was slain, the final sacrifice.  So, yeah. I I'm a little confu. Okay. So, I understand that there are people who believe  in the theology that you just described right there. I think it's wrong. I don't think it makes  internal sense. I don't think it's Christian, but I think there are a lot of really decent  people who believe it. I know some really decent people for sure that I agree with on a lot of  other issues, but they sincerely believe it. The Catholic Church does not. The Catholic Church  is doctrine. It's not something you have to guess about. You can look it up online. It's been  pretty consistent for a couple thousand years. So, like, why in the world would Catholic leaders who  don't believe this, why wouldn't they just say, "We don't believe this as Catholics?" Because  again, you can check it online if you want. I I'm totally confused. How are they controlled? I think  that they don't want to face what you've faced and what Candace has faced and what Megan has faced  and what I've faced and Marjorie Taylor. It's shut up, you hateful bigot, and we're going to  destroy you. They don't want that really because we're promised that by Jesus in the New Testament.  Take up your cross 100. I was interviewing this amazingly Anglican bishop in Jordan last month and  uh I'm I'm Anglican. So, it's just amazing to find out like a truly Christian Anglican. Oh, it's  wonderful. It was the best thing I did all all year. But um so I interviewed this man and we're  talking off camera and I said I you know how often do you spit on or spit at in Jerusalem? like every  day. Um, Orthodox Jews spit on me or spit at me or urinate on my church or whatever. And I'm like,  I don't how can you deal with that? I if someone spit on me, I don't know what I would do because  I'm not a great Christian and I'm having all these fantasies about what I would do if someone spit on  me. Like I' I would not respond well. And he said, "Oh, no. I feel blessed. Jesus was spit  on in Jerusalem." And I thought, "Wow, that's the Christianity I believe in right  there. That that is right. That is except the persecution that you're promised. You are promised  persecution. Yeah. It's not ambiguous. You're not promised lots of money. Sorry. Sorry, Paula White.  I know you're promised persecution by the world that hates you because the world hates Jesus. I  was so inspired by that made me tearary hearing someone say cuz he meant it. This was off camera  having a cup of coffee. And so like considering that is the faith. Yeah. I don't really get  Christian leaders who are like, "Oh, I don't want to deal with the blowback." What? Jesus himself is  promising you like what happened to him, which is being tortured to death. I know. And I don't want  to be criticized on Twitter. Yeah. Look at the disciples. I think they to the extent we know, I  think they were all all but one maybe. Okay. Yeah. So, anyway, so sad. It doesn't make any sense  to me. And murdered very viciously. Oh my gosh. horrifically. Um, and so we now have leaders that  don't want to even suffer any discomfort at all, Tucker. They don't want to be named, cuz that  would hurt them too much. It would hurt their feelings. So, they're going to they're going  to hide behind a 38-year-old mom and whisper, "Keep going. I'm praying for you." Oh. Do  you have people said that? Oh, yeah. I mean, I I I my priest I've had several priests that  I've spoken to. Um, I've asked, you know, can you make a public statement? Oh, I don't make public  statements. I get people to heaven. Okay. Now, okay, that that's okay. So, hide behind the mom  and I'll I'll take the bullets. Yeah, I'll take the bullets while the shepherds are running  for the hillside. Must be nice. It's not nice. It's But no judgment on them. No judgment. Well,  cowardice is its own punishment, you know. I think your wife's never going to respect you ever again.  You can't respect yourself. Think your wife's attracted to you and you're a coward? I don't  think so. I know. But I will say to answer your question, I've had incredible men, Catholic men,  outspoken men stand up for me and several priests. I will say there has been priests. Um I have one  that's coming to the event uh next week in DC, the gala. And I'm sorry I got emotional, but I'm  like, if it wasn't I mean, could you imagine going through all this and then they come out and  they say, "Not only are we going to honor you, but and invite you to this, but we're going to  give you this award. You're going to get the Catholic champion award. You're a champion,  Carrie." I'm thinking, "Oh my gosh, thank you. Thank you for this." And since then, they've  had tremendous blowback. People pulling out. Oh, I can't believe you'd have that anti-semite.  I mean, this is where we're at because I asked Really? They had people pull out? Oh, yeah. Yeah.  They've had people, you know, attack them. Oh, I can't believe you would have Carrie and  Well, Candace will be there, too. You know, you can't have Carrie and Candace. That's like two  anti-semites in one room. We can only have one, I guess. I don't know. Um, so yeah, it's very  unfortunate. It's it's the public lynching and then making everyone around watching say, "Yeah,  they're an anti-semite and I'm going to distance myself from them because I don't want to be  labeled an anti-semite." This will all be over soon. We've reached peak crazy. I felt like that  hearing uh the response to you was that, you know, that's as bad as it's it's going to get without  push back. I think you really woke people up. Well, they're desperate though, which is scary.  Oh, I know. Because they will try to do everything to destroy you. I've heard that. Yeah, you know  it. Carrie, thank you for doing this. I appreciate that. Was that's an that was an amazing story.  Thank you, Tucker. Appreciate you having me.