The Joe Rogan experience. I struggled with depression so much throughout my life. Even as a kid, I didn't know I was depressed or dealing with anxiety or whatever, but did you find different methods that helped you relieve it? Yeah. Well, so yeah, ultimately I, at 37, I talk about it in the book, but at 37, when I moved out to Austin, I had a whole meltdown. And thank God was surrounded by some friends and family that helped kind of pick me up and get me to this program. It's up in the operate out of Southern California and Connecticut. And I chose to go to Connecticut for three weeks of this like super intensive life-changing, life-saving therapy. And it was through the psychological kitchen sink at it. It was three weeks every day, at least three or four appointments that were one of either a psychiatrist, psychotherapist, dialectic behavioral therapist, art therapist, meditation therapist, life coach, nutritionist, gym four days a week, yoga twice a week, pilates twice a week. And that helped me tremendously. And I learned a lot of modalities and things from all of that. But that wasn't until five years ago. But the rest of my life, I'd been coping by fucking boozing and drugging and sexing. You know what I mean? I didn't realize how much self-medicating I was doing for so long. And I wish that there would have been some way for anyone to be able to be like, let me just just going to like see what your levels are. Because I didn't even know. I didn't know that what I was constantly feeling all the time. Well, anxiety, I was constantly feeling all the time. Depression would hit me in these moments where basically I'd have massive dopamine crashes. I think I've come to find out. I just I would finish a job or I'd get out of a relationship or I wouldn't be working for a while and all of a sudden it's like I'm worthless. I'm worthless. I'm worthless. I'm always kept me buoyed. If I'm at work, just dopamine all day long, particularly on a movie set or whatever. It's all this a little bunch of little puzzles. You're just solving little problems all day long. Don't mean dopamine, dopamine, being on a Broadway stage. You got a thousand people. I mean, you know, you're just on the rush of a live audience. Fuck, you're feeding off of that energy. You know, and you're playing jazz with this crowd. I mean, it's incredible so much dopamine and I would get off, you know, doing a Broadway show. I'd be flying after the show and then I would go to the bar with some of my castmates and I would be drinking whiskey ginger's like till three in the morning because I didn't even have to be at work the next day until 6 p.m. or whatever. And it was all just a ton of self-medicating because I didn't love myself and I didn't know that I didn't love myself. Wow. So you just thought you were partying? Yeah. Basically. Yeah. People think you have a moment where it just comes crashing down. Is it a moment? Is it a series of moments? No, I was like, you know, I had this big dream still do of moving out here by in a much land building a movie studio slash arts commune slash resorts. That's kind of like a new United artist. Someone sounds like a cult. What do you think I came to Texas, bro? And so, you know, head full of steam and dreams and all that and I was so convinced like this is what I'm supposed to do with the rest of my life. I want to make a better Hollywood, all these things. Right. And I came out, but I'd like my work life wasn't great at the moment. Like the jobs I was doing I wasn't stoked with. I was again feeling like a failure. I just broken up with this girl, wonderful girl who was from Austin who probably would have moved here with me. But I self sabotage it all. I'm like, no, I don't think this is going to work. And I came out here. I had no real support structure and my friends and family had a beautiful community in Los Angeles, but I was like, I got to go. I got to I feel compelled. I got to go do this. I got to go buy this land. And I'm really grateful that I did. I didn't do it in the healthiest of ways. And so I ended up out here and I was alone and I was deeply, deeply feeling like, oh, I've blown up my life. I don't feel support. I didn't feel like I felt like a lot of my friends and family were watching me go in this kind of almost manic state of like I got a fucking, you know, like just if I don't do it now, I'm not going to do it. And I know I had to get out of California. Like California has been broken for so long. And I love California. I'm from California, but it's just so busted in so many ways. So I came out, had nobody had no real support structure. Work wasn't great. Love life wasn't great. All these things were just like falling down on me. And so massive just spiral into darkness. Damn. Yeah. It was gnarly. I mean, I mean, I was definitely considering killing myself and it wasn't the first time that I'd ideated on certain thoughts like that. If if ultimately committing suicide is like a 10 run ladder, I was at run nine a couple of times a couple of times in my life. Yeah. It was gnarly. But I didn't realize that the reason why you get there is because your hormones are all completely out of whack. My dopamine, my serotonin, my norepinephrine, all these things that are to keep you know, and me going and drugging and boozing doesn't help balance those things either. But you don't know that. You're just chasing like I got to be happy. I don't know how else to get through all this stuff, you know. So all of that just came, oh, I could smoking when I moved here too. All these everything. It was so intense. But anyway, but it, you know, this place changed my life. It saved my life. But I will also mention though that it gave me a lot of understanding of my own psychology and just psychology in general, I suppose. But I learning all these things about how to like love yourself more. That's great. You can learn all that knowledge. But if you still don't believe that you are worthy of being loved, you won't apply any of it. You don't care about any of it. You can see the value in yourself to want to put that work in, you know. And so thank God there was this woman, her name is Beth in the book. She was, we had these like companions basically, like house moms because if somebody's not in a very good place, you can't depend on them to like get up and like make themselves breakfast and get to your appointments and all that kind of jazz. It was a very nice place that really took care of you. It was built for like CEOs that were having massive burnout and all that jazz. Like lots of depression and things of that nature. But anyway, we had these companions and they would rotate through lovely women, all of them. But there was one Beth who was a mom of three kids just like me and my sister's middle boy between two girls and her son also struggled with mental health. And she turned out to be this angel man like this total God loved me through that woman in the most intense, amazing ways. And she doesn't take credit like she did it. She knows she was just a vessel. She was just a tool that God got to show me a mother's love like really kind of for the first, not the first time. I know my mom loved me and tried to do her best, particularly now I've done all the therapy. I know that my mom did her best, but it still left me with so many holes, particularly with that maternal, you know, trauma. And so this woman ended up at least like just lighting the, the pilot light, you know, just getting me started so that I could didn't, you know, take that journey on and go, go about it more on my own.