Over the past three years, hundreds, maybe thousands of Western journalists have covered the war in Ukraine from Ukraine and effectively been attached to the Ukrainian government and its military and its many propaganda outlets, taking their talking points from Ukrainian government officials, interviewing President Zelensky, always in the most falling possible way, and effectively carrying water for both the Ukrainian government and NATO and above all for the Biden administration. On the other side, in this war that the United States has effectively paid for, there is one Western journalist, one American embedded with Russian troops. His name is Patrick Lancaster. He's from St. Louis, Missouri. He's the U.S. Navy veteran. And for the past 11 years, he's been reporting from the region. For the past three years, he's been reporting from the front lines. He's been interviewed by precisely no other mainstream Western media organizations. And so it raises the question, how can you understand a war your expected to take sides in and then pay for if you're not hearing the other side? So with that in mind, here's Patrick Lancaster. Patrick Lancaster, thank you so much for joining us. So you're one of the only maybe the only American reporter embedded with Russian troops in this war. How long have you been there? Hey, Tucker. It's really an honor to be on here with you to show a little bit to the world about what the mainstream media doesn't months. A lot of the people around the world to see. So it's really great. And I appreciate the invitation. I have been covering this conflict, this war, for a lot longer than many people understand that it's going on. As you know, this didn't start three years ago, it started in 2014, some say even before. But for all the intensive purposes, we could say 2014 when the war started following the events in Crimea where Crimea joins are rejoined Russia because there was a referendum. That's where I first started reporting on the situation between Russia and Ukraine. I went to Crimea for the referendum where the Crimean people voted to break away from Ukraine and join Russia, rejoin Russia because before 1956, Crimea was part of Russia. So I mean, if you think about this, the people that were born before that year were born in Russia. So there's people living that were born in Russia that were literally so happy to be joining Russia again, going home and some people on the streets told me when I was there. And I've been there almost every year reporting since then as well. But that's what really triggered my interest and intensity in reporting on the situation between Ukraine and Russia because when I came from Europe to Crimea and saw the huge difference of what was being reported in the Western Mean Street media about the real situation in Crimea. We're hearing in the West how Russia forces were going to be making people vote to break away from Ukraine and join Russia. And I saw just a total opposite. People just crying out of happiness to have the chance to rejoin Russia. And those are the real fast. And anyone that has been to Crimea knows that. And anyone that says something besides that is just not telling the truth and trying to hide the truth. And unfortunately, after the events in Crimea where they joined the northern regions of Donetsk and Lugansk ended becoming part of what you can say a civil war where they as well had a referendum to break away from Ukraine. And that preceded the eight year war, eight year civil war, where after the votes, the republics that they called themselves, then yet some people, then yet some Lugansk people's republics started to make their own governments make their own militaries. And they were attacked after this referendum by Ukraine. And I spent eight years covering the situation in the Donetsk and Lugansk areas just documenting my part of the puzzle or the pie that wasn't being shown in the western mainstream media because what I was showing then and now what a western mainstream media doesn't, it's not convenience for them to show doesn't fit their narrative. So I documented what they weren't the indiscriminate shelling of residential areas by Ukraine. The targeting of civilian areas by Ukraine. I mean, my wife is from done yet her childhood home was destroyed by Ukrainian shelling as well as the majority of her childhood neighborhood. So I mean, these are the facts of the things that happened in the Donetsk and Lugansk territories long before 2022 when Russia came into this war. From 2014 to 2022 is when this civil war took place and of course, Ukraine and the West claimed Russia had invaded all the way back in 2014. That was the narrative then. But eventually that kind of slowly went away when they realized that this eight year war wasn't really, there was no regular Russian troops taking a part in that. This was a civil war that was lightly supported by the West. Ukraine supported by the West. We may ask a question to clarify something. So you said that your, your wife's childhood home was destroyed by shelling from the Ukrainian government. Why were they shelling your wife's house? Like what was she, was her family part of the fighting? Why would they do that? Well, they pretty much leveled most of her childhood home or childhood neighborhood where her mother's home was. This neighborhood is just one of the many around Donetsk and the suburbs of Donetsk and specifically around the Donetsk airport. The Donetsk airport was like a symbol of the war back in 2014, 2015 where there was literally so much fighting. There were two terminals. One terminal had the Ukrainian forces in it. One had the anti- Ukraine government forces or rebels or pro Russian forces, whatever you would have called them, the locals that took off arms to fight to try to break away from Ukraine. And they were fighting. And basically Ukraine leveled, not completely level, but damaged if not destroyed, the majority of the homes all around this area around the airport just with indiscriminate shelling and all the areas, the neighborhoods and just destroying or seriously damaging almost every home and it just so happened. My wife's childhood home was one of those. If they got her family and her made it out, okay, they were living there when the war started. And they made it out, okay, but the house was destroyed. This is just one example of many homes and families that lost everything in the war. I don't remember hearing in the United States at the time that there was a war in Ukraine. I mean, my sense as this was basically ignored completely and that Ukraine at that time was effectively under the control of the Obama administration. That was my sense. Yeah, a lot of people didn't really understand what was really happening on the ground. But basically, I mean, it goes back to the Maidan revolution or whatever you want to call it. It's all in the eye of the beholder, the locals in the eastern part of Ukraine at that point looked at the Maidan revolution as an illegal coup supported by the West where ended up with their democratically elected president, Ayatakovich, removed from office without them having anything to say and which effectively made their Ukraine dead and not in existence anymore after a puppet government was put in by the United States and the West. So the people of the Dunneesk and Lugansk areas just they said, okay, well, that's not our Ukraine Ukraine's gone. Some of them were patriots for Ukraine before they just said, okay, we don't have anything to do with that. We're going to have a boat. We're going to vote ourselves what to do with the right of self determination and Ukraine and the West did not want to respect the right of determination. And Ukraine basically in the words of the locals punished them for them trying to break away from Ukraine. And every local family knew someone or had a member of their family injured or killed in the attacks by Ukrainian forces on the civilian areas of these regions, specifically the cities of Dunneesk and Lugansk. Amazing data hawks are collecting your information anytime you visit a website every time you go online every time you create an account you make an online purchase your data is out there and you have no control over who sees it or what they do with it. So it's only a matter of time until somebody tries to exploit these facts that you have no privacy at all. Use your information to steal your identity and maybe bankrupt you. It happens all the time has happened to friends of ours, kids. And that's why we use identity guard. Identity guard helps by giving you control. It monitors your most sensitive information for any signs of suspicious activity. Someone's trying to steal your identity. You know right away. Often before real damage can be done before you're on the hook for the money. So if in fact your identity is stolen, the expert team will do work directly with banks, credit card bureaus, other institutions to fix the problem for you. So it's not the disaster you fear it is. While they handle the cleanup, you're backed by up to five million dollars in identity theft insurance, which is a huge relief. Imagine waking up and finding out that someone in a foreign country is using your name and social security number to steal money from you. It happens all the time. So the team there is available 24 seven for you ever need help. There are no bots, they're no call centers offshore. It's based in the United States. They know exactly what you need. Somebody becomes a victim of identity theft about every six seconds constantly. So don't let the next one be you. Visit identity guard dot com slash talker for 30 days free plus a special discount if you want more. Sign up before this happens to you identity guard dot com slash talker. So you've been there rotating in and out or living there ever since all these years. How did things change three years ago when the war began? Well, it was quite an interesting time as you can imagine. Just days, a couple of days before the it all started with Russia to Russia officially it came in Russia officially recognized the Lugansk and Donyitzk republics as separate from Ukraine. And the people had celebrations on the streets out of just celebrating the fact that Russia recognized them and they knew that that meant that Russia was going to be helping these republics. And then days later Russia came across the border and the war between Ukraine and Russia started and you know when we're all there the war between Russia and the West has started, Western weapons at least. And as many people around the world thought it was going to go a lot quicker than it has. I myself did a reports in the center of Donyitz where I assumed and thought that Russia was going to be pushing Ukraine back within days from the city of Donyitz. Because you have to imagine the front line of Donyitzk was just on the outskirts of the city. We're talking from the center of the city to the edge just about to the front line just about five miles with often just straight shelling hitting the center of the city. And as we know it didn't end in three days like General Miley has said it would. And there's been a lot of intense battles around these areas. And in fact right now I believe there is eight regions between what is internationally recognized as Ukraine or Russia recognizes as Russia. But overall there's eight regions that have active fighting. Some are Russian some are pre war Russian after war Russia. Whatever you want to call it. We've got the Zapparogia region, her son region, Donyitzk region and Lugan's region which all four of those had referendives in 2022 September where they the Russian backed referendums unrecognized by the West where they voted to join Russia. And then shortly after Russia took them in officially. And then in addition to those four regions you've got two regions of Russia, the Belgrade region of Russia and the curse region of Russia where Ukraine came across the terror, the border and invaded and occurred on pre 2022 Russia. And in actually in the area of curse they controlled last August about 1,500 square kilometers. Since then it's been really reduced by Russian forces but in addition to those six territories we've also got the Sumi region of Ukraine which there's some villages and some territory that Russia controls. And there's active very intense fighting going on there. Now that's borders the curse region. So basically Russia went past the territory that was controlled by Ukraine and the curse region of Russia and territory in the Sumi region. Now also in the Harkov region of Ukraine, Russia controls some territory as well and again intense fighting going on there. So we've got eight regions with intense fighting and the war keeps changing. So much has changed of course in the last 11 years as far as how the fighting has changed and how it's going on now. And even since 2022 when Russia first came in and now the situation is the air war, the drone war. I mean it's like the war of the future now compared to what it used to be 11 years ago. I mean the most dangerous part of my job is actually getting to the frontline to film what's happening on the frontline because in the vehicles getting there is just there's always drones around and these are kamikaze drones that are the main threat. Of course there's reconnaissance drones as well but these kamikaze they will just hitch their hunting vehicles around and going back and forth on the frontline and they'll just hit the vehicle and explode. And now they've even gone a step forward where jamming our electronic warfare doesn't affect them because they use fiber optic cables to control these drones where this little bitty cable goes from behind the drone to the remote control. They're cable drones and they could go up to 30 kilometers and actually this right here is some of the fiber optic cable that is used to control these drones. And those are the most deadly on the frontline because you can't do anything about it. You can't even detect them with the drone detector. So what is that what is that like? Have you seen the kamikaze drones hit and explode? I guess just over three weeks ago I was in the the kursk region of Russia trying to actually get back from the frontline. And I was with a team from the Russian forces Akimat brigade and they were evacuating civilians from the frontline. We actually got to the point of as they called it the point of zero, which the edge of the village where we were, what are the Ukrainian forces. And as we got there there were several overhead and they engaged one on the ground and it came down. That's intense you could say. So they loaded the civilians in this truck. So in the cab of the truck were these four elderly civilians and the soldier that was driving and then myself and another journalist, the colleague of mine were in the back of the truck with two soldiers and we were trying to evacuate this village. And as we got out of just just outside the village, I happened to be filming one of the soldiers as they were scanning the skies and the other soldier actually pointed up and said a drone and a few other curse words and I looked up and there was a drone, a kamikaze drone right away. I knew what it was and I knew the danger we were in and the soldiers started firing on it, engaging it, trying to knock it down as it was trying to attack us and kill us. And they signaled to the driver the driver just Ford it. It was just driving as fast as possible and I'm filming them shooting at the drone and drones trying to hit us. I thought that we were going to be you know worst, a best case scenario injured because I mean it got so close to us as we were just driving just got right up on us and then after about five minutes of it chasing us well what felt like five minutes might have been a few minutes less. It was knocked down and how do you not down a drone? How do you knock down a suicide drone over you? They were engaging it with a shotgun and machine guns and that's it was coming at us and it was in the video it's a little bit unclear if their bullets actually hit or hit a wire that was going over the road but for about five minutes three minutes something like that they were firing at it with a shotgun and a machine gun. Now the shotgun is the most the new weapon of choice on the front line because it's got the buckshot and it spreads and these the idea is there's more room to hit just like you're shooting at a bird that's actually what they call these drones, birds. So they go hunting with this shotgun for these drones and luckily thank God God was with us at that day and it did not hit its targets. So we made it to report another day. Mother's Day is almost here and you're under a lot of pressure to find something great for the mothers in your life. So instead of getting something you hope will check the box and wait to see if the mom you're giving it to actually likes it give her something she will genuinely love cozy earth. Cozy earth makes the softest most breathable bedding and pajamas the women you know have ever experienced crafted from temperature regulating bamboo fabric bamboo fabric it sounds weird but it's awesome try it when you give it people will be a little bit confused and then they will fall in love. This is something she will use every single day unlike other presidents who don't have to worry about this being thrown into the closet an embarrassing silence when you hand it over everybody loves cozy earth. It's got a hundred night sleep trial a 10 year warranty so it's risk free get it today. So skip the flowers give comfort that lasts cozy earth got a cozy earth dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker to get up to 40% off sheets pajamas towels everything they make and if you get a post purchase survey make sure to say that you heard about cozy earth from us on this show. So one of the the the most confusing questions in in the west is the most obvious question which is who's winning and even now we're told that Ukraine you know has a shot to win Lindsey Graham has been saying this even recently if only US taxpayers would send Zelensky's government more money. What's what's your perspective as someone who's covering the war from the front lines? Well I think the idea of Ukraine winning the war is just this dream and narrative that's been put out by the west to make it acceptable for so much money to be putting put in to Ukraine to extend this war to bring Russia and forces down in the country of Russia just to make them use their resources more including losing more people. I mean if the United States and the west would not have been supplying the weapons and the funding to Ukraine for the last three years the war would have ended three years ago if not two and a half years ago and hundreds of thousands of lives who would have been saved. The the funding and the supports of the west for Ukraine is directly responsible for hundreds of thousands of these deaths of soldiers on both sides and civilians for that matter. How many have died? The other question that we can ever get a straight answer to or any answer to is how many have died on both sides? Do you have any guess? You know it's hard for me to say you know my kind of thing in my report is reporting on what I see keeping my opinions out of it. So what I could tell you is of what I've seen. One of the hottest areas that I was been before, Kursk and Bograd where I am now was the Marryupel Frontline where I followed the Russian Frontline day by day in the heets of the battle of Marryupel and just that month I personally saw you know between a thousand and two thousand bodies and it was soldiers, civilians. I mean the whole city was just covered in bodies. In a matter of a 30-minute period one time I counted 87 bodies just lighting the streets. And I mean it was really a horrible situation and you know just seeing so many war crimes involved. So many testimonies from locals about Ukrainian forces basically literally these are not my words these are the words of the locals that all everything I say can be seen on my YouTube channel. These locals say that Ukrainian forces literally use them as human shields would set up their tanks in between the apartment buildings and fire at Russian forces and in other cases they would directly fire on the civilian buildings. Ukraine forces directly firing on civilian buildings. This is what the locals told me on camera and it can be seen not just one off a constant daily event. And unfortunately there was many instances of Ukrainian forces using schools as a base. One of my first days in Marryupel found a school, school number 25 of Marryupel. I'll never forget it. Went into the base but in found that Ukrainian force was reusing this basement as a position military position. And many burned out rooms and weapons, uniforms, flags, Ukrainian flags. And unfortunately we found a dead civilian woman who was she was naked and she had a bag overhead and was clearly raped and tortured. And it was clearly a civilian from the area that Ukrainian forces had kidnapped and tortured and raped. And they carved, it was actually a little unclear whether it was burned or carved a swastika on her stomach. And really in the first time that it stood out to be the psychological effect of some of these instances when you see it. In my mind I still remember seeing a bandage over her head kind of like something like she was injured and it was bandaged. But if you look at the video you see it was a plastic bag that was used to execute her. Now that's just one of the many examples of executions that I've seen by Ukrainian forces. The most recent were in the Curs region. Just this last January where I was with Russian regular army forces and they had just days before gotten to this village and basically kicked Ukrainian forces out and the village was destroyed. And there was a shelter of basement basically that we went down into and found a group of civilians there was two elderly women and one elderly man that had been killed by clearly by Ukrainian forces because as we walked down the steps the smell was so bad we had to put gas masks on. And at the bottom of the steps we couldn't really say how many people because it was clear that some sort of explosive, I assume a grenade was thrown down in the shelter where these people were hiding and the people near the door actually with a dog that were there were just turned into you know soup basically. So it wasn't really clear how with a dog that were there. We're just turned into, you know, soup basically. So it wasn't really clear how many were there. But then as we went farther back into the shelter, found, as I said, a two-elegally women that were killed by the explosion and an elderly man. And then back in August, as I said, when Ukraine first came in to a course, I was also there and met a man who explained how he was trying to evacuate his family from the Suzha region, which is basically the stronghold of Ukrainian forces, once they came into the curse region of Russia. And he explained how his, he was evacuated his wife, pregnant wife, their one-year-old son and his wife's mother. And they had two vehicles. And this is basically, they were surprised that war broke out in their village because they weren't part of the war zone before August. And so he's decided he was going to drive in the front car and have his family in the back with his wife driving behind. Just in case something's happened, it would hit him first, and they might make it away. And they were, he said they were driving came across around a turn and came face to face with a Ukraine or pro-Ukrain soldier. He said just two meters away from him. He said there was no way that the soldier did not see that they were civilians. There was no question there were civilians and the soldier opened fire. The bullet went through the bill of his cap and a few into his vehicle. And they kept on driving as they were being fired at and got some distance between and went around another corner. And these are his words, that mine. And he saw that his wife's vehicle was slowing down and he waited for to speed up. And then when her car hit the back of his car, he knew something was wrong. And he went back to check on his family and the other car. And his wife pregnant wife was huddled over their one-year-old son with bullet holes that are side of her stomach. And he picked her up, took her to the nearest hospital they could find. And they weren't able to save her. He tried to do CPR and his words massage her heart back to life. And their one-year-old son was injured. But thank God he lived. And then unfortunately, he wasn't able to recover her body for many months afterwards. But now things have changed quite considerably in the curse region. As I said, it started in August with Ukraine just surprising many coming across. It took 1500 square kilometers. And then right when they did that, Russia started taking some back. And I was with them. I went with the assault groups to the Ukrainian lines as the assault groups took territory back. And they started going and going and going and taking these villages back and almost slowed down as far as the recovery of the territory by Russian forces until last month when an operation of Russian forces literally went into these gas pipes. And they tuddled underneath Ukrainian lines and reported 600 Russian forces, soldiers came up behind Ukrainian lines. And that operation with an assault from the other side basically collapsed Ukrainian lines. And now there's just a very small amount of Ukrainian forces left in the curse region. And just yesterday there were a report from the Russian Ministry of Defense that some territory had been taken back by Russian forces. Now unfortunately this is leaving tens of thousands of people homeless that homes were destroyed in this incursion or invasion by Russian forces or Ukrainian forces into this region of Russia. And basically the standard thing for the Russia government to do is give certificates for new homes to the victims. They've actually gotten pretty good at it because there's so many regions of people that have been had their homes lost by Ukrainian shelling. But one thing that I noticed it's pretty interesting about what they're doing in the curse region in on top of the certificate. It's because they compared to what the United States does when someone loses their house say to a national disaster. The governor of a curse Alexander Hinch thing started an initiative to request from Moscow a special stipend or payment of a monthly payment of 65,000 rubles for every member of a family whose home was lost monthly. So the I mean that's 65,000 that's about $750. So if it's a family of four and that's about $3,000 a month. You know of course that's not going to you know replace everything in their lives that they've lost but it's a lot more than I think what was the United States giving to some of the national disaster. I think 700 amongst some payments something like that. So it's interesting to see the comparison. So think about how you'll feel when you achieve your biggest goals of all, whether it's starting a business, paying off your mortgage and your kids to college, I'm the money to pay for it, you'll be pretty proud when you've met these essential life goals and you should be proud all the sorrow we do that. But what do you do next? So getting to the goals is one thing but protecting them is an entirely different thing and maybe a bigger thing. And this is where life insurance from policy genius comes in. Now policy genius makes finding and buying life insurance really easy. You probably want life insurance but it's expensive and how do you even get it? Policy genius makes it simple and it means that your family has the safety net it needs to cover expenses and to face the future. Nearly half of Americans look back in which they've gotten life insurance earlier. It can change everything if you have it because you don't know what the future holds honestly. So with policy genius you can find policy starting at just $292 per year for a million of coverage and some options are 100% online and that means no unnecessary medical exams for you which is a win. You can pair quotes from top and sure side by side you talk to license agents, you secure your families tomorrow with peace of mind today and it makes it super easy on policy genius. And it's all transparent, you know exactly what you're getting. So you head to policy genius.com slash Tucker. You click the link in the description to get your free quote. That's policy genius.com slash Tucker. So let me ask you, let me ask you from our perspective over here, the Ukrainian government is not just at war with Russia but also with Christianity. The Ukrainian government has banned the largest Christian denomination in Ukraine and has embraced transgenderism and and other explicitly anti-Christian forms of expression. Are you aware of that? Are the Russians aware of that? Is there a religious component? Just because their hostility to Christianity so obvious, I wonder if you notice it. Well, um, I always ask the soldiers on the front line who are document fighting, you know what they're doing there? Why are they fighting? What are they fighting for? And often an answer that they give is they're fighting Satan because they they view the religious atmosphere so different as you point out in Ukraine than the traditional Russian society. Um, you know, so it's quite a religious, very important to the Russian soldier. And of course, I think it's quite a bit more than, you know, the traditional you say, there's no atheists on the front line, but this goes a lot deeper into their cultural heritage. Are you seeing any North Korean soldiers? No, I have not. It's not a lack of trying. I tried to investigate the reports of these North Korean soldiers and I was not able to locate any of them. Of course, there's rumors all of the world of this, but I was not able to locate any of them. How many American correspondents are embedded with Russian units that you know of? One me. So no one from NBC or CNN or Fox or PBS or New York Times Washington, you're not aware of any American correspondence covering the other side in this war. No, no, so does it feel to you that American reporters have basically taken the side of the Biden administration, which told us that Russia is our enemy and are uncritically repeating US government talking points? Um, yeah, I mean, of course, the Western media has their narrative. And, you know, unfortunately, they try to hide the facts that most of what I report, they tried to hide and not report on it. And, you know, I tell all my viewers don't just watch my reports because I don't have all the answers, but I'm showing you what the mainstream meat doesn't want you to see. I'm just giving you my piece of the puzzle, something that you're not going to see anywhere else unfortunately. But, you know, people need to get as many perspectives as possible and educate themselves. That just be led like sheep by the mainstream media. I'm very glad there's people like you as well that, you know, could give someone a little bit something to think about other than just the narrative that is trying to be forced down the throat. Yeah, I mean, if you're the only American correspondent embedded with Russian units, then I would think you would be in high demand. I'm embarrassed it's taken me over three years to talk to you. That's my fault. But I mean, I assume you're getting calls every week from American news organizations trying to understand what's happening. Unfortunately, no, they don't seem too interested in discussing things with me or seeing the information that I'm putting out. And in fact, in 2014, 15 and 16, I was, I would say is a freelance journalist, videographer as well. Until, you know, I felt like my work was being betrayed. And because I was giving this material. And then once I saw that the material was being lied about, I mean, one instance, I was in the Lugance region in Perivomise when Ukraine forces launched a rocket attack on this soup kitchen. And we happened to be there and I filled in the aftermath and the women saying how Paris shinko was killing them and their families just really horrible. Just that just targeting civilians by Ukrainian forces with huge rockets. And I sold that material as a freelance journalist to Western outlets. And they turned it around and said that it was Lugance rebels that fired on the soup kitchen, just totally about the situation. So after that, I decided I'm not going to do that anymore. Regardless, if I get paid for it or not, I'm going to be showing exactly what I see. And that's what I've been doing since then. It's just on my YouTube channel showing my reports. I'm only supported by my viewers. Of course, I'll do collaborations with other channels and things. If you know, they're interested, but I make it a point not to get paid by anyone but the donations from my viewers. So the only people that I report to that I need to show what's really happening is my viewers. I don't have any editor or boss that says, oh, we need to show this or show this. No, I show in my reports on YouTube my substack blog. Exactly what's happening exactly what I see with no narrative, just the facts that the Western mainstream media isn't showing. There's so much darkness in the world that can feel overwhelming. Wars, political fighting, violence, hatred, the love between people growing cold. And you have to ask yourself, where does this all come from? Well, one place it comes from is the refusal of a society to care about people, including babies. As you've been listening to this untold numbers of unborn babies need help, there are thousands of pregnant women who are trying to decide should I keep this child or not choosing between life and abortion, a child's future hangs in the balance. Preborn is ready to help. Preborn has a clinic network on standby to help women make that choice to make the right choice to choose life to affirm the value of people which in the end are all that matters. It helps these mothers choose not just for the babies, but for themselves. Once introduced to the child growing inside them, women are twice as likely to choose life. Once they know this is not just some massive tissue, but a person they choose life voluntarily. Last year alone, preborn rescued over 67,000 babies that are aiming to save another 80,000 this year in 2025. You can support them. $28 a month can make the difference between life and death and $140 sponsors five ultrasounds. You can donate securely. Please dial pound 250, say the keyword baby that's pound 250 baby or visit preborn.com slash tucker. Preborn.com slash tucker we're honored to partner with preborn. So since you've been there all these years and have a you know, a tactile sense of what's happening. Give us a couple examples of stories Americans may have seen or read in our media here that you know firsthand or wrong. Well, we can off the top of my head, the missile attack, Tochka, who attacked by Ukrainian forces on the center of Dunyets, in 2022 when a Ukraine launched a cluster bomb attack on the center of Dunyets, can cluster bombs came down to actually hit just about 200 yards from my apartment with my family and kids and wife were and my dad was actually in the city with us as well. And we had to throw the we thought we were getting hit. We threw the bulletproof vests on the kids and threw one of the others under the bed and I mean it was it was not good. And in the western stream media, they said that it was a Russian attack, which is just idiotic. Why would Russia attack Dunyetsk that hasn't been under Ukrainian control for the last eight years before that. I mean, just total grabbing of false information to try to portray a narrative that just is not true. And actually that was my the last day that my family was in Dunyetsk with me. I had to evacuate them as I stayed to show what was happening on the front line. My wife didn't want to leave because as I said, my wife's from Dunyetsk, but I said after that, just so close to us, I had to evacuate them. And after that, I just, you know, kind of went so low and saw it went back to my family when I could. And that's what I do. Even that day. Where where are you from in the United States? I'm from St. Louis, Missouri. Have you been back to the US during the last over the last three years? In the last three years? No, I have not. Um, how is YouTube treating you? Well, I haven't been monetized on YouTube basically at all. I started my YouTube channel in 2014 and there's no monetization whatsoever. Why? I'm what grounds were you demonetized? You know, it's been literally over a decade ago, but I believe just the fact of war and since, um, you know, they're just not interested on putting commercials on my material. I guess because it doesn't fit the Western mainstream narrative, but, uh, you know, it's great that I'm still able to use the platform to show the world some of the things that's happening, but unfortunately it's not monetized. So I'm only supported by, as I said, my viewers through the donations, but you know what I do? It's not really because of the money. Yeah, of course, I've got to support my family, but you know, as I said, after I saw how different what was being shown in the West, what was happening, and I just had to do something about it. And you know, if you would ask me, but before 12 years ago, would I be a war correspondent? You know, going to the front lines with, you know, showing the reality of what's happening and I'd be the only one doing it. It just would be amazing to me. I mean, given the atrocities, you've seen some incredibly ugly things. You described a few of them, um, but it's been so long. I wonder what effect that has on you as a person to see things like that. Well, I mean, uh, I would say before this war, I was, I had mixed thoughts about what post-traumatic stress really was and how serious it was, but I could tell you now, there's no doubt that's it's definitely a thing. Um, you know, I would say quite different. This is of course everything I've seen here is quite different than when I was in the US military. I used to be in the, uh, uh, uh, in the US Navy from 2001 until 2006 and I was on a, the US is Kitty Hawk that was involved with the operation. I rack you freedom and, uh, you know, never saw anything like that. They're like I see here of course, but, um, you know, you know, I always find it, uh, uh, interesting how the US calls, it calls all of their operations operations. But when Russia says that it's not a war, it's a special military operation. The Western media makes this big thing about it. How, oh, it's a legal to call to war and Russia and all that, which is total bull. Uh, the war is a war operation. I rack you freedom was a war and Russia's special military operation was a war and then eight years before it was a civil war. A war is a war regardless which one, uh, uh, uh, call it. And I'm in Russian now calling it a war. Nothing's going to happen for it because of it. Um, so that's just another false that the Western media pushed of, uh, you know, trying to say no freedom of speech in Russian, all that total false. So, um, did, did you know Gonzalo Lira who was maybe the only other American who was looking critically at what the Ukrainian government is doing. He was murdered by the Ukrainian government as you know, did you ever run across him? And are you worried that if you fell into Ukrainian hands, they would murder you too? Um, well, we talked over online a couple of times, uh, you know, he was definitely ballsy. Yeah. I mean, to, for him to go against the Ukrainian government while he was there and unfortunately didn't work so well for him. Um, and of course, if, if I were as an example, ever, if I ever ended up in Ukrainian forces, it would not be, in Ukrainian forces hands, it would not be a very nice time. Uh, you know, I've been on the, the Ukrainian kill list or whatever you want to enemies of the state list, uh, which I believe you are as well, meritorates, uh, believe, uh, uh, we're both on there. I've been on that list since, uh, 2016, the, the list that's, uh, non-governmental, uh, list that they, uh, puts names of people that are an enemy of Ukraine and they write because of my work that I'm an assistant to terrorism. And they've posted photos of my children, my wife. Uh, they in the past that even posted her, personal telephone number. Uh, she had to change your number because of it. So, yeah, it would not be a good thing if I ended up in the hands of Russian or Ukrainian forces. The Ukrainian, um, war effort has been led by the United States. Do you have any, which is a fact most Americans, I think even now don't understand. Um, do you have any idea how many Americans have been killed fighting for Ukraine? Um, well, we know it happens. Uh, I would say there's probably a lot more that have been killed for Ukraine than is public knowledge. Yes. Um, I mean, who's, you can imagine that there is probably some internal operations on the front line that involved, uh, Western special forces and not all of them made it out. Um, I've talked to, uh, soldiers on the front, Russia's soldiers on the front line about, uh, foreign mercenaries or foreign soldiers. And they said they encounter them all the time. Um, from European countries from US, uh, and more. And it also, as I've actually made a video, uh, last month about it's, it seems Russia's not really playing around anymore when it comes to, uh, foreign fighters or what they'd consider all the foreign fighters. They can consider foreign mercenaries. And Vladimir Putin says that these foreign mercenaries do not get the projection of the jiva convention and are, uh, the, the, the, there's a possibility of execution. Uh, so it really seems like now that, uh, there's only two outcomes for these, uh, foreigners that come over here to fight if they come into Russian hands. It's jail or death. And I say jail because in the beginning of March, there was a British soldier, uh, who was taken a prisoner by Russian forces who was, uh, he believed he was taking a prisoner in November of last year in the curse region. And he went through his trial and that was convicted, uh, and received a 19 year sentence. So it seems Russia's going pretty strong on the foreigners here. How long do you think this war will go on? It's a very difficult question. Um, I've, back in 2022, I tried to make, as I said, the predictions like, uh, many people around the world did and everyone was wrong. I mean, I, of course, the most important thing is people stopped dying and it would be great if today there was a, a cease fire, uh, declared and everyone stopped dying and everything went back into a piece and all that. But I don't think it's going to be happening anytime soon. Unfortunately, um, because Russia has made it clear that Russian law considers the four regions. Zaprozia, her son, uh, then yet to Lou guns part of Russia, Western law and of course Crimea, but even now Trump says he's going to say Crimea is Russia. So that's not even a worse discussing anymore. Um, but, uh, Ukraine law and Western law says that these four regions are parts of Ukraine. Russia cannot stop until they control what is legally by Russian law considered part of Russia. Regardless what side of this conflict, you favor, looking at Russian law, Russian law cannot stop the war until they control part of all of what Russian law considers part of Russian. I've been saying this for years. It was one thing before September of 2022 when Russia could have stopped and, uh, had a quick, a piece, a deal. But after September of 2022, these four regions were legally as far as Russian law considers part of Russia and Russia cannot stop until it controls this. And so, in this key, Ukraine and the Western as it's made it clear that Ukrainian forces are not just going to stand up and leave these regions. Now, if we look at Lou guns, there's 99, uh, percent of the area of Lou guns that's controlled by Russia. But if you go south to the Danyevsky region, it's, uh, there's less controlled by Russia. It with several important, uh, key places like chromatores can slough beyonds, which actually both the water supply, uh, to a Danyevsky. Um, and then of course in her son, you've got the city of her son in Zaparaji, the city of Zaparaji, which are cut geographically by a river is basically the front line now. Um, and I mentioned the water supply for done yet. Basically after Russia took control of, uh, Mary Yupil in 2022, the first thing Ukraine did was cut the water, uh, from the chromatores area going into Danyevsky and down to Mary, Mary Yupil. The reason they didn't cut the water to Danyevsky in the previous eight years, like they did with Crimea, because that was the the first thing they did with Crimea when Russia, uh, took Crimea and they cut the water supply from Ukraine literally damned the canal that was feeding water. with Crimea because that was the first thing they did with Crimea when Russia took Crimea and they cut the water supply from Ukraine literally dam the canal that was feeding water to the people of Ukraine of Crimea and the water supply was going underneath then Yez get into Marryupil and Marryupil had to be fed by water when he controlled Marryupil. But once Russia fully took control, when Ukraine shut off the water to Danyevsk and Marryupil and for a long time in Danyevsk you're only getting two hours every three days of water. I mean just horrible, uh, living conditions because Ukraine made the decision to shut off the water to these people. The people that they said they wanted, they were trying to stop from leaving the country for eight years and Russia made a huge, um, projects to bring water from the rust off region into the Danyevsk region and it's still ongoing and now there's a couple hours a day of water in Danyevsk. That's horrifying. Have you, uh, seen any reports of the Ukrainian military selling NATO arms outside of Ukraine? Um, you know, there, there has been some reports of Western supply weapons showing up in the cartel hands, uh, Mexico and other, uh, places. But what I can tell you, I have seen with my own eyes is Russia forces using these weapons back against Ukraine, weapons that Ukraine got from NATO countries and Russia captured them and turned them back against, uh, Ukraine and reverse in, is in a process of reverse engineering. I just did a report where I went with a, the soldier group to a undisclosed location where they had uh, about 20 military vehicles, NATO military vehicles that were on their way to be getting a reverse engineered and basically any type of secret information they could get out of them. Um, and that report will be coming out soon, but, um, I would say Russia is getting a lot out of these, uh, NATO weapons. Let, let last question. Thank you, Patrick, for taking all this time. Um, do you think the US population Americans would have supported this war, which they've paid for for over three years as long as they did. If they'd had factual unbiased news coverage of what was actually happening there? No, uh, definitely not. And, uh, one reason is to go back to one of your previous questions about what's not being reported in the West that, uh, I could bring to light. Well, let's talk about the people of these areas, specifically the Donyads can move on scarias for the last 11 years, just wanting to break away from Ukraine in the right of self determination. I've made it say this in the media that these people were not being held down by these rebels or whatever you want to call them. These people were doing their best to leave Ukraine and Ukraine was punishing them for that. This is, they voted to break away, uh, uh, from Ukraine. So it's, I mean, definitely if the Western people would really understand what's really been happening here over the last 11 years, not just the last three years, but the overall situation, there's no way they would have wanted their tax money to be supporting this and killing hundreds of thousands of people. I believe that. Patrick Collink has to thank you for doing this interview. I hope you're safe. Um, I appreciate and hope you'll come back. Thank you very much, Miss Carlson. I appreciate you having me on the, uh, definitely I'm looking forward to the next time and hopefully one day we meet in person. Godspeed. Thanks. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.